Annexes
Annex 1: Overview of the food safety in Vietnam

Annex 2: Round-table discussion on food safety risk management in Vietnam and abstracts presented

Annex 3: People met during the technical missions

Annex 4: Matrix of laws, decrees, circulars and decisions related to food safety

Annex 5a: Food safety governing system in Vietnam

Annex 5b: Decentralization of MARD food safety responsibilities through province and district levels

Annex 6: Further details on organizational structure of food safety management under MARD

Annex 6b Additional material on surveillance and monitoring

Annex 7: Further details on inspection for domestic versus import/export market, inspection frequencies and
violations

Annex 8: Fresh fruits, vegetables and meat inspection model

Annex 9: Classification of laboratory testing parameters under MOH in terms of food and technique used

Annex 10: Overview of samples analysed by year at NIFC in Ha Noi (2014-15) and IPH in Ho Chi Minh City (2011-15)

Annex 11: Laboratory organization beyond MOH

Annex 12: Provision of academic training in Vietnam related to food safety

Annex 13: Procedure of audit of VietGAP certification

Annex 14: Food safety biological hazards in the food chain

Annex 15: Food safety hazards included, key messages and limitations of WHO FERG burden of disease estimates
from a global perspective

Annex 16: Burden of disease estimates (partly foodborne) other than those of WHO FERG

Annex 17: Pork and vegetable value chains in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City




                                                          1
   Annex 1: Overview of Food safety in Vietnam

Key questions
This section draws on the information in the body of the report, and the wider literature to
summarize evidence on key questions around food safety in Vietnam of interest to decision makers.
We present the evidence for each question, discuss its quality where appropriate, make
comparisons to other countries, and suggest opportunities and risks. The key questions are:
   1. How is food safety perceived in Vietnam?
   2. Is food in Vietnam safe?
   3. What are the most important food safety issues?
   4. What are the health impacts of unsafe food?
   5. What are the priority food hazards in terms of health impacts?
   6. What are the economic impacts of unsafe food?
   7. How is food safety governed? What are capacities for governance?
   8. What are the major food safety issues for trade?
   9. What have been the responses to unsafe food and how successful have they been?
   10. What are the key recommendations for improving food safety?

Background: Agri-food system in Vietnam
    Small-scale farmers produce most (80%) food consumed in Vietnam, but intensification is
      increasing especially in the poultry and pork sectors.
    Most food (90%) is sold in traditional, informal markets but purchases in supermarkets are
      increasing.
    Consumers have a strong preference for fresh animal source food (ASF) and produce (fresh
      fruit and vegetables) and most do not store purchased food for long periods. An estimated
      90% of housewives go to the market every day.
    Consumption of ASF, fresh produce, and processed food are increasing rapidly.
    Important processed foods include noodles, fish sauce, and snacks.
    There is a large ready-to-eat food industry, dominated by street stalls and kiosks.
    Pork and fish are the most consumed animal source food followed by poultry and beef and
      rice is by far the most consumed staple.
    Seafood is the most important food export followed by rice, cashew, fruit and vegetables
      and pepper. Food exports are greater than food imports.
    Wheat, palm oil, and powdered milk are major food imports; large amounts of soybeans,
      soymeal, and corn are also imported for animal feed.

1. How is food safety perceived in Vietnam?
1.1 Current situation
A relatively large literature suggests a high level of concern over food safety in Vietnam among
consumers and government.
     Consumers: Most recently, a nationally representative survey funded by USAID, found that
        food safety was of the two most pressing issues for people in Vietnam, higher than
        education, health care or governance (USAID 2015). A large survey in 2010 found
        respondents were pessimistic about the food safety situation in Vietnam: 43% of
        interviewees felt that food safety had worsened in the previous 10 years, while only 22%

                                                1
       felt otherwise (Jabbar 2010). City dwellers, high-income earners, and young people were
       much more frequently concerned about food safety than rural dwellers and low-income
       earners (Jabbar 2010).

      Government: Government concern has been shown by the major overhaul of legislation
       resulting in the food safety act of 2010. Subsequent years saw additional circulars and
       issuances aimed at food safety (see chapter on structure).
      Private sector: there is little information on how the formal or informal private sector view
       food safety. However in China and India, surveys have found food safety is a major concern
       of the food industry and this is likely the case also in Vietnam (Anon 2012).

2. Is food in Vietnam safe?
1.1 Current situation
There is evidence that food contamination in Vietnam is widespread, as presented by numerous
scientific studies. Food contamination hazards appear at all stages of the value chain. Specifically,
ILRI’s studies show high level of contamination with Salmonella, E-Coli and other contaminants.
The findings in Vietnam are consistent with most surveys of food in Asia and Africa, but they also go
on to find that a large proportion of food, often the majority, fails to meet basic food safety
standards. However, there are difficulties in aggregating food safety information from various
sources, and as such, difficulties in assessing the overall level of risks and hazards. The following
three levels have been reviewed as part of the study:

      Private sector: The formal and export-oriented private sector generally has adequate food
       safety systems in place (including recognized HACCP and GMP). The informal sector,
       millions of small-scale livestock and vegetable producers, that dominate the private sector
       food production, is for the most part outside of the official surveillance system (except for
       export-oriented farms). Such small-scale producers use traditional methods for production
       and post-harvest, and traditional small-scale slaughterhouses, where food safety hazards
       are perceived to be the highest. Also, the majority of food is sold through open/wet markets,
       many of which lack adequate infrastructure to ensure hygiene and safety of the food.
       Supermarkets have been driving the introduction of higher hygiene conditions for food
       retail, nevertheless, one survey found pork sold in supermarkets had worse compliance
       with standards than food sold in wet markets (Fahrion AS 2013). (Quality of evidence: very
       poor. There is little information on food safety performance from the private sector).

      Public sector: In recent years, the government released the results of thousands of
       laboratory tests of food samples (see chapter 5 for full details). These found 23% of
       vegetables exceeded the maximum levels for pesticides; 15% of meat samples exceeded the
       MRL for microbial contamination; 2% of meat and 8% of fish sampled exceeded the MRL for
       antibiotic residues (chapter 5). (Quality of evidence: weak to moderate. The food tested
       represents a very small amount of food consumed and there is little information on the
       accuracy of the results or how representative the surveys were.)

      Research surveys: ILRI has conducted literature reviews, covering tens of thousands of food
       samples. These find around 10-40% of food is contaminated with microbes or parasites,
       which cause foodborne diseases. Pesticides, heavy metals and antibiotic residues are also
       commonly present. For example: pig tapeworm was found in 7% of pork (9 studies);
       salmonella in 30% of food (67 studies); antibiotic residues in around 30% of pork (3
       studies) (Grace D 2012). Another review covering 95 papers also found high levels of

                                                  2
       salmonella and campylobacter in meat (Carrique-Mas JJ 2013). Listeria and Streptococcus
       suis were present at lower levels but can cause more serious disease. Fish-borne fluke is
       common wherever raw fish are consumed and around 1 million people were estimated to
       be infected during the last national estimation (Kino H 1998). Surveys of vegetables also
       show high level of contamination with fecal bacteria (100%), pathogenic bacteria (20-40%)
       and parasites (26-100%) (Uga 2009, Chau). A survey in northern Vietnam found that even a
       relatively small consumption of fish and vegetables, would result in exceeding the
       recommended daily intake for a number of pesticides (Pham MH 2011). There has been less
       research on the safety of cereals, but there are localized problems with heavy metals and
       mycotoxins (Lucas et al., 1971; Martinez et al., 2013). (Quality of evidence: good. Most
       information comes from peer-reviewed journals and surveys reported in the literature are
       probably the most reliable way of assessing the safety of food in domestic markets.)

Together, these sources of information point to risks of foodborne illnesses as there is evidence for
high levels of contamination of food in domestic markets in Vietnam, often above allowable
maximum levels.

1.2 Comparative analysis
Levels of parasites, microbes, pesticides and antibiotic residues appear to be much higher than in
developed countries but similar to low and middle-income countries (LMIC). The Economist
intelligence unit includes a food safety indicator in its annual Global Food Security Index, but it is
limited to three indicators, which are only weakly associated with food safety performance.
Nonetheless, this provides a qualitative assessment of food safety in Vietnam relative to other
countries (Figure 1.1) in relation to legislative framework and institutions. Vietnam ranked 69 out
of 109 countries and was in the second worst category. Moreover, the same study found food safety
in Vietnam has shown a small decline over the last 4 years.

Figure 0.1 Qualitative assessment of food safety of 109 countries in 2015




Source: The EIU Global Food Security Index

Studies on food alerts show that Vietnam is among the top ten exporting countries in terms of
number of alerts generated by exported food. However, once we take into account the volume of
food exported, the inspection capacities of importing countries, and the type of food imported, then



                                                  3
Vietnam’s performance is better than several major exporters (for example, India and China) but
not as good as other, mainly high income, countries (for example, Iceland) (chapter 5).

1.3 Opportunities and risks
Only in recent years has FBD become a major concern in LMIC and there is not good information on
the trends of FBD or success of control methods (Grace 2015). In high-income countries, food is
much safer than in LMIC countries. However, while there have been some successes in reducing
FBD, there is little evidence for major decreases in FBD in Europe or America (Grace 2015).
Development literature suggests food safety can be improved in Vietnam but there are few good
examples of interventions or approaches that can significantly improve food safety in mass
domestic markets in LMIC (Grace 2015).

Vietnam is a major exporter of agricultural produce with potential to increase still further. Two of
the most important food exports (seafood and fruits) are both high risk for food safety issues and
oriented towards high value markets, which are increasingly demanding of food safety. Improving
the safety of exported products will be needed to maintain access to these markets.

3. What are the most important food safety issues in Vietnam?
1.1 Current situation
Food safety issues may arise because food contains substances injurious to human health or
because food is perceived to be unsafe or unacceptable. Hazards are substances that can cause
harm to human health and are often divided into three categories: biological, chemical and physical.
Hazards may or may not translate into food safety risks and result in foodborne diseases. Though
the existence of hazards already points out to the need to address them in the food safety system in
order to reduce the risk of foodborne diseases. There is very often confusion between what
constitutes food safety hazard, and what constitutes risk of foodborne disease. To illustrate this, a
basic example can be provided. Food that is adulterated or abnormal can also be perceived as
unsafe by the consumers and regulators, even if the health risk is low or unknown (for example, the
well-known Horsemeat scandal in Europe).

Experience in other countries suggests that food safety hazards can cause significant economic
burden, they can have major political implications by way of undermining social stability and can
destroy entire industries. Food safety problems act as repeated constraints which impede value
chain development; and the lack (or even the perceived lack) of food safety in the domestic market
can make it more difficult and costly to promote exports. Human health data and linkage with
foodborne illnesses is scarce, but Vietnam is not unique as many other countries also do not have
reliable data. When data are available, they indicate moderate burdens on public health, e.g.
perhaps 29th in importance in Vietnam.
Recent WHO study and experiences from other countries, including the data from the research,
show that the majority of hazards and risks come from microbial contaminants as opposed to
chemical contaminants. However, the public in Vietnam (as well as in other countries of East Asia)
are primarily concerned with chemical contaminants. This is because risk perception is not well
aligned to actual risk: in particular, risks that are novel, acute, featured in the media, un-natural,
unfamiliar, outside ones control and perceived as serving the interests of business are
systematically over-estimated, whereas risks that are familiar, chronic, and within ones control are
systematically under-estimate (Slovic 1987 ). For example, the public exhibits high concern over
food irradiation, treatment of meat with chlorine, hormones and genetically modified organisms
which experts and scientists may consider relatively harmless, whereas the public often exhibits
low concern over over-consumption and foodborne bacteria which experts consider very

                                                  4
dangerous ((HLPE). Forthcoming). One study in Vietnam, found consumers expressed most concern
about chemical hazards in pork (Jabbar et al., 2010).

From an economic perspective, cost of illness, domestic food scares and export rejections are all of
concern in Vietnam (see chapter 5). However, while domestic food scares and export rejections
have high visibility, the cost of endemic (non-outbreak) foodborne diseases is largely invisible.

1.2 Comparative analysis
The food safety issues faced by Vietnam are similar to those of other LMIC. Because of domestic
consumption, problems associated with pork, poultry, seafood, and fresh vegetables are especially
important. As for many countries in south east Asia, there is relatively high use of pesticides and
veterinary drugs which increases the risk of food residues (Figure 1.2). While many countries have
dramatically reduced pesticide use in the last 20 years, there has been little progress in Vietnam
(FAOSTAT, 2016). The high levels of pollution in the Mekong are challenges to fisheries.




Figure 0.2 Pesticide use on arable land and permanent crops (tones per 1000 Ha) in 2010




Source: FAOSTAT,




1.2 Opportunities and risks
Understanding the health and economic impacts of food safety issues, and their amenability to
interventions, is important to ensure that scarce resources are being used on food safety issues
where most benefit can be obtained for least cost. It is also important to take into account the
different priorities of public health, consumers, and markets.

4. What are the health impacts of unsafe food in Vietnam?
1.1 Current situation
Despite seemingly alarming results from the research findings, demonstrating at times high share
of contaminated food in the food supply chain, as outlined above, there is little or no scientific
evidence to demonstrate the burden of foodborne illnesses. Public data of foodborne illnesses is
very limited. Food poisoning events receive the most media and subsequently government



                                                  5
attention because of their visibility. There are from-time-to-time media reports about outbreaks of
one or another food poisoning events that affected significant number of people.
Possible estimates for health impacts may come from different sources:

 The World Health Organization (WHO) recently released the first global assessment of
  foodborne disease (Havelaar, Kirk et al. 2015). Data are not available at country level, but
  experts may agree that the prevalence of FBD is likely to be similar in Vietnam to other
  countries in the region. This implies that FBD may be responsible for around 7% of the
  infectious disease burden. Using the WHO ranking system of important diseases, FBD would
  perhaps rank number 29th in Vietnam. This is less important than stroke, road injury or
  tuberculosis but more important than measles, leukemia or hypertensive heart disease. As such,
  FBD may and should be considered a significant public health problem in Vietnam, but on the
  other hand, not among the very top priorities.

 Outbreak data: During the last two years (2014 – 2015), there were almost 370 outbreaks of
  food poisoning in Vietnam involving over 10,000 incidences resulting in the deaths of 66
  persons. Most were caused by pathogens (41%), followed by biological toxins (28%), and
  chemicals (4%); in the remainder (26%) the cause was unknown (Chapter 5). Where a single
  food source was implicated, this was most commonly seafood followed by mushrooms followed
  by meat. However, studies from many countries (including USA, China and Malaysia) suggest
  only a small proportion of FBD is ever recorded as outbreaks. (For example, in less than 0.1% of
  cases being captured by the national surveillance system annually (Gurpreet 2011 ). This makes
  it difficult to extrapolate from the causes of reported outbreaks to the causes of the 99.9% of
  foodborne diseases that goes unreported.

1.2 Comparative analysis
FBD in Vietnam is similar to other LMIC: worse than Thailand but better than India. There is no
national level data on FBD in Vietnam but the proportion of deaths from diarrhea is a proxy for the
intensity of FBD (Figure 1.3).

Figure 0.3 Proportion of children under five years deaths due to diarrhea in 2016




Source: UNICEF, 2016

1.3 Opportunities and risks


                                                 6
Reducing the health impacts of FBD could significantly contribute to improved health in Vietnam.

5. What are the priority hazards in Vietnam in terms of health impacts?
1.3 Current situation
The priority hazards in Vietnam are likely similar to the priorities in the region. Our current best
estimates come from the WHO first global mapping of foodborne disease (Havelaar, Kirk et al.
2015). The most important hazards by category (and in order of decreasing importance) are listed
below and shown in Figure 1.4.
     Bacteria: Salmonella, Escherichia coli, Campylobacter
     Viruses: norovirus, hepatitis A
     Helminths: fluke, nematodes, cestodes
     Protozoa: Toxoplasma, Cryptosporidium, Entamoeba
     Chemicals/toxins: aflatoxin, dioxin

Figure 0.4 Likely priority foodborne hazards for Vietnam



                                                                   Bacteria
                                                                   Viruses
                                                                   Helminths
                                                                   Protozoa
                                                                   Chemicals/toxins




Source: Based on Havelaar et al., 2015

1.4 Comparative analysis
According to the WHO foodborne disease report (Havelaar, Kirk et al. 2015) the region in which
Vietnam lies has, compared to global figures, much lower levels of norovirus and much higher rates
of Shigella, non-typhoidal Salmonella and enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli. In addition, some
hazards may be relatively higher in Vietnam because of the food system. These include:
     Streptococcus suis in pork because of the importance pig industry, the presence of this
        zoonotic disease, and the consumption of traditional dishes with uncooked blood (Huong et
        al., 2014)
     Heavy metals in fish because of high levels of pollution in the Mekong and fish culture in
        wastewater fed ponds (Marcussen, Holm et al. 2007)
     Dioxins because of historical use of Agent Orange in some hot spots (Schecter A 2003 )
     Growth promoters and antibiotic residues because of lack of control of agricultural inputs
        (Tran Thi, Dang-Xuan et al. Submitted)
     Fish borne parasites because of the high consumption of fish, not always well cooked (Dung
        et al., 2007). Fish-borne fluke is highly endemic in Vietnam.
     Fascioliasis (cattle fluke) mainly from eating uncooked vegetables contaminated with
        parasite eggs from cattle feces. This disease is highly endemic in Vietnam (Bui TD 2015 ).

1.3 Opportunities and risks
Foodborne disease typically follows the Pareto ratio: that is a small number of hazards cause the
greater part of the burden (this is also known as “the law of the vital many and the trivial few”).

                                                  7
Currently food safety assessment, management and communication is not well targeted towards
high burden hazards. By incorporating risk targeting in food safety management, foodborne disease
burdens could be more efficiently reduced.

6. What are the economic impacts of unsafe food?
1.1 Current situation
There is currently little information on the economic impacts of FBD in Vietnam. However, the
major impacts are likely to be from cost of illness, loss of products through confiscations, fines and
economic losses associated with food scares.

      Cost of illness: A cost of illness study in Hue, a coastal city with a population of around
       300,000 estimated the costs of typhoidal fever (ranked 11 in burden for the region) at $71
       per case (Poulos C 2011 ). Extrapolating to Vietnam, this would imply a cost of USD 2.4
       million (2005 dollars). Another recent cost of illness assessment of acute gastroenteritis
       caused by Salmonella (ranked 2 in burden for the region) was USD 107 a case (Hoang VM
       2015). Based on various extrapolations, the study assessed the cost of hospitalization from
       foodborne diarrhea in Vietnam at around USD 6 million. (Hospitalization represents only a
       portion of the overall costs of FBD).

      Cost of confiscations and fines. As concern has grown over FBD in Vietnam, government has
       responded with increased inspection and enforcement. For Ha Noi, newspapers report fines
       of around $210,000 were collected in 2014 and food worth around $47,000 was destroyed
       (http://www.saigon-gpdaily.com.vn/Health/2015/2/112616/ )

      Cost of export rejections: There are several hundred rejections of exports each year but we
       could not find information on the value of the food rejected (chapter 5)

      Economic losses associated with food scares. Many consumers in Vietnam respond to food
       scares by reducing purchase of the affected food. In the case of avian influenza this caused
       income losses of about 5- 10 percent for poultry farmers (Epprecht 2008) and 40% for
       traders and market sellers (Hall 2006), which aggregated at national level represent
       millions to tens of millions USD in losses. Another study by ILRI found that, when pig
       diseases were reported by the media in Vietnam, the majority of consumers stopped eating
       pork, shifted to chicken or went to outlets that were perceived to be safer: in Ha Noi, 35% of
       consumers stopped eating pork (ILRI. 2010).

1.2 Comparative analysis
Most economic assessments of foodborne disease have been conducted in developed countries.
While estimates vary, depending on costs included as well as differing country contexts, they can be
very large. For example, USA over $15 billion annually (Hoffmann 2015); Australia is estimated at
about $487 million to $1.9 billion per year (Abelson P 2006). Better control of foodborne disease
could bring benefits worth tens of millions US$.

7. How is food safety governed? What is food safety capacity?
1.1 Current situation
The Food safety Law 2010 is a modern legal framework for management of food safety that aligns
well with international standards. Three ministries have mandates for food safety, with overall


                                                   8
authority ceded to the Ministry of Health. Food safety is decentralized to local governments.
National level food laboratories have technical capacities ranging from fair to good.

Inspection and enforcement is also carried out by three ministries. A residue and contaminant-
monitoring program is carried out for fish and planned for pork. Each ministry has its own network
of laboratories and its own inspection system. Responsibilities are divided between ministries, and
the Ministry of Health (MoH) has overall responsibility. The Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT)
is in charge of monitoring and inspecting all products for sale in markets and supermarkets (except
the wholesale markets) and has about 7,000 market inspectors. The Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development (MARD), employs 197 people in the crop food safety management system (see
chapter 5). There is no independent consumer protection organization. There are seven agricultural
universities which cover food safety as well as undergraduate training in food technology at other
universities

 1.2 Comparative analysis
Global comparative food safety ranking systems are rare, and the few that exist mainly cover OECD
countries. Vietnam has relatively fewer food inspectors compared to Japan and Bangkok (Hung
Nguyen-Viet et al 2015). Considering core food safety system performance criteria, we estimate
there are deficiencies in risk assessment (pesticide use; foodborne illness rates); risk management
(food recalls; traceability; labeling; response capacity); and, risk communication (trust).

Several LMICs have reorganized and expanded food safety governance in the last decade, notably
India and China. However, there is little evidence of success, mainly because of lack of monitoring
the effects of legislation.

1.3 Opportunities and risks
 Efforts in surveillance by different agencies are fragmented, weakly coordinated and poorly
    integrated; a comprehensive national surveillance system has still to be developed.
 There is insufficient collection, storage and analysis of data about food safety and food-borne
    diseases (i.e., the consolidation of data from active and passive surveillance, inspections, and
    from laboratory conformance testing etc.); food safety testing data collected by laboratories is
    generally not analyzed and not available to central authorities; ICT systems are insufficient for
    data storage, analysis, network communication etc., both within individual institutes and among
    agencies responsible for food safety.
 There are backlogs in the adoption of standards and technical regulations, and delays in
    harmonization with international standards.
 There is very limited capacity - and no programs - to apply risk analysis throughout the food
    safety management system.

8. What are the major food safety issues for trade?
1.3 Current situation
There are important food safety issues around both export and import. The major food exports
from Vietnam are seafood, rice, cashew, fruit and vegetable and pepper: coffee is an important
export used for beverages. Among these, seafood and fruit and vegetables have many times more
food safety problems than other exports. The major problems are biological hazards, chemicals,
veterinary drug residues, and heavy metals. However, although quantitates exported are increasing,
food safety notifications are not, suggesting that safety of exported food may be improving.




                                                  9
Quantities of legally imported foods are relatively small and much of these imports are from
countries with relative high standards in export safety. There are some concerns about dumping
unsafe foods, especially by China. Large quantities of poultry are traded illegally from China and
this is likely to continue as long as the incentives for trade are high. There is also concern over the
safety of agro-chemicals and feeds imported legally and illegally but there is little information on
the health risks of this.
An analysis of European food safety notifications between 2006 and 2010 found that Vietnam
ranked eighth in number of food alerts (the top five were China, Turkey, USA, India and Iran in that
order); however, adjusting for the value of food exported, Vietnam was not in the top ten (chapter
5).

Vietnam consistently produces large volumes but low value products. It is also facing increasing
challenges to sustain and improve competitiveness in an integrated global economy, and food
safety is a major concern in some of its most important trading partners. New trade agreements
bring both opportunities and threats and Vietnam will have to improve the safety of exported food
and its reputation to benefit: this will entail improving safety in domestic as well as export markets.


9. What have been the responses to unsafe food and how successful have they been?

There are three major lines of defense against foodborne disease: improving the hygienic quality of
raw foodstuffs; food processing to reduce hazards (e.g. pasteurization and irradiation); and
changing behavior of food handlers. In response to growing concern over unsafe food in domestic
markets there have been several approaches to improve food safety, with varying success.

       Legislation and regulation: Changes in legislation have resulted in a more modern food
safety system. However, there is little evidence that this has resulted in improvements to domestic
food safety. This is partly because there is not a comprehensive, systematic, probabilistic system for
sampling marketed foods.

        Upgrading and certifying food chains: This has been tried for the poultry value chain during
the avian influenza outbreak but was not very successful: 72% of consumers never purchased
certified birds and while nearly 40% of respondents regularly buy chickens that have government
certification stamps, they do not see these as a credible certification (Ifft J 2009 ). Lack of trust in
certification, inconvenience and lack of interest were key reasons for why household did not
purchase safety-branded chicken. Likewise experiences in the vegetable chain are challenged by a)
lack of trust in vegetable certification; b) the premium associated with branded vegetables reduces
demands. After more than 10 years of major efforts and investments by state authorities and
market actors, the safe vegetable production and distribution system has not yet been able to take a
significant share of the vegetable market and gain widespread consumer trust (Hoi PV 2009).

       Good Agricultural Practice (GAP) has been implemented in the vegetable, shrimp and pork
sector. Training material has been translated and group formed. However, the costs have been high
and the uptake low. From 2012 to 2014, the number of businesses and farmers obtaining VietGAP
in farming, livestock, and aquaculture was 1,199, 13, and 13 respectively (Nabeshima K 2015,).
There is also little evidence that food is safer or farmers are able to capture a premium; while in



                                                  10
Thailand safety and profits were shown not to improve after participation in GAP (Schreinemachers
2012).

       Modernizing retail: Public policy in SEA tends to place supermarket development at the core
of strategies aiming to ensure access to safe food. Supermarkets are considered instrumental for
realizing food safety improvements by implementing private food safety management systems and
maintaining food hygiene standards. Experiences are little evaluated but appear to be mixed in
Vietnam. Upgrading traditional markets has been less successful but embedding supermarkets in
new developments more (Wertheim-Heck SCO 2015).

       Public information: There have been several campaigns to improve food safety and hygiene
in the homes. However, there is little evidence on impact, and there is also a logic for ensuring
contaminated food does not enter households, rather than relying on the cook to decontaminated
food within households.

       Export: As Vietnam’s food exports rapidly grew from the 1990s on, as the result of uptake of
general modern processing. For each of the major export commodities there are several hundred
large and medium companies who export products. These follow GMP, HACCP, ISO and other
standard processes. The continued expansion of exports (with some setbacks) shows that this
approach is broadly successful but there is concern over ability to meet ever increasing demands
for quality, safety and other attributes.

A recent review by ILRI on LMIC experiences in improving domestic food safety drew the following
recommendations (Grace 2015):
 Foodborne disease is preventable and prevention starts on the farm
 Caution in assuming that shifts to large scale, formal sector food production and retail will
    necessarily reduce foodborne disease
 Caution in assuming provision of infrastructure will necessarily reduce FBD
 Caution in attempting to use consumer demand for food safety as a lever to reduce FBD
 Caution in using inspection and punishment as a way of reducing FBD
 Training extension agents and farmers in GAP is likely to be useful but only if there are
    incentives for changing behavior
 Training of informal sector traders likely to be useful
 Enabling policy is necessary for improvements in domestic food safety (that is any
    interventions must be supported by government)
 Technologies have potential for increasing food safety

Given the widespread failure to develop effective, sustainable, and scalable models of improving
food safety in domestic markets, these are strategic directions (“direction of travel”) rather than
firm recommendations for actions that will deliver solutions. It will be important to institute an
experimental and learning approach to changes in the food system, with frequent assessments of
progress and consequent adjustments.




                                                 11
    Annex 2: Roundtable Discussion on Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam and
    Abstracts Presented




Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam:

CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES




    ROUND TABLE DISCUSSION
    Hanoi, 7-8 January 2016
    PART
    TABLE1.
          OFOBJECTIVE
              CONTENTSAND MEETING AGENDA

    Date:          7th and 8th of January 2016


    PART 1. OBJECTIVE AND MEETING AGENDA                                                                           4


    1.1. Meeting objective                                                                                         4

    1.2. Meeting agenda                                                                                            4



    PART 2. ABSTRACT OF PRESENTATIONS                                                                              6


    2.1. Session 1 - Food safety: Contamination situation and health impact                                        6


    2.2. Session 2 - Food safety: Value chain, economic impact                                                     13



    2.3. Session 3 - Technical and institutional solutions for food safety                                         16


    2.4. Session 4 - Food safety risk management: Looking forwards                                                 22


    PART 3. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE MISSION AND LIST OF PARTICIPANTS                                                  23


    3.1. Technical Assistance Mission                                                                              23

    3.2 List of Participants                                                                                       25


Location: Ho Chi Minh room, WB, 63 Ly Thai To, Hanoi
Objective: The objective of the 2 day round table is to provide the technical assistance mission of the World
            Bank with i) an overall picture of food safety situation in Vietnam, ii) stock-taking of food safety
            risks for selected key food value chains, and iii) brainstorming priorities and potential solutions
            to address key food safety risks.
Agenda
            Time                                     Activities                              Person in charge


     Day 1 (7th Jan): Discussion on primary production: biological hazards, residues, banned substances, toxins,
     AMR, risks assessment.


        08:30 – 09:00      Registration                                                 Do Thi Tam/Lam Thi Binh


        09:00 – 09:10      Opening and objective of the round table, Introduction of    Vo Thanh Son (WB)
                           participants




2       Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
        Priorities
                Session 1: Food safety: Contamination situation and health impact.
                Chairperson: Nguyen Viet Hung (ILRI)


09:10 – 09:40   Pork sector:                                                      Dang Xuan Sinh & Tran Thi
                -         Microbial contamination and health risk assessment      Tuyet Hanh (HSPH)
                in pork value chain in Hung Yen and Nghe An provinces
                -         Antibiotic residues, growth promoters and heavy
                metals in pork at wet markets in Vietnam, 2015


09:40 – 10:00   Prevalence of Salmonella in chicken meat production chain         Pham Thi Ngoc/Truong Qui
                                                                                  Duong (NIVR)


10:00 – 10:20   Vegetables and fruits: Food safety situation in Vietnam           Ngo Thi Hanh (FAVRI)


10:20 – 10:40   Hazard identification in food safety and effective control as     Nguyen Van Thuan
                an important solution for distribution of safe food products to   (NAFIQAD)
                consumers

10:40 – 11:00   Coffee break


11:00 – 11:20   Overview on the regulations and occurrence of mycotoxins in       Tran Cao Son (NIFC)
                food and feed in Vietnam


11:20 – 11:40   PCBs and dioxin in foods in vietnam: Estimated daily intakes      Nguyen Hung Minh (MONRE)
                                                                                  Tran Thi Tuyet Hanh (HSPH)


11:40-12:00     Antibiotic use in food producing animals, residues and            Chu Van Tuat (NCVH1)
                antibiotic resistance


12:00 – 12:20   Addressing antibiotic and antimicrobial use in Livestock          Scott Newman (FAO)
                Production: Initial steps and planning for the future


12:20 – 12:45   Discussion of session 1 and wrap-up                               Dao Lan Huong (WB)


12:45 – 14:00   Lunch


                Session 2: Food safety: value chain, economic impact. Chairperson:
                Stephane Forman (WB)


14:00 – 14:30   Challenges to safe food production for the domestic market in     Vien Kim Cuong (Canada
                Vietnam’s agricultural value chains                               Embassy)


14:30 – 15:30   Impacts of Free Trade Agreements on livestock and SPS             Dang Kim Khoi (IPSARD)
                issues in Vietnam




15:00– 15:30    Institutional assessment for strengthening food safety in MARD    Shashi Sareen (FAO)


15:30 – 15:45   Coffee break


15:45 – 16:05   View on the food safety in the Southern, Vietnam                  Nguyen Do Phuc (IHPH HCM)


16:05 – 17:00   Discussion of session 2 and Close day 1                           Pham Hoang Van (IFC)




                                      Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities       3
    Day 2 (8th Jan): Discussion on quality control, standard and certification, enforcement, branding, wholesale and
    retail, food safety law.


                         Session 3: Technical and institutional solutions for food safety.
                         Chairperson: Scott Newman (FAO)

      08:30 – 08:50                                                                        Ton That Son Phong
                         Strengthening competitiveness for livestock households:
                                                                                           (LIFSAP)
                         Results and Intervention direction from LIFSAP project

      08:50 – 09:10                                                                        Pham Thi Sen, NOMAFSI
                         Developing sustainable and inclusive safe vegetable value
                         chains: Moc Chau experience

      09:10 – 09:40                                                                        Nguyen Van Chien (CP)
                         Traceability
                         • Sustainable development in value chain of broiler, layer, and
                                                                                           Do Duy Dang (Xac Thuc So
                           pig production
                                                                                           Technology Jsc.)
                         • Solutions for Managing the Production in Agriculture and
                           Tracing the Original of the Agricultural Products

      09:40 – 10:00                                                                        Huynh Minh Viet (BioSpring)
                         The use of probiotic bacteria as animal feed supplements to
                         reduce antibiotics


      10:00 – 10:20      Coffee break

      10:20– 10:40       Laboratory for food safety system in Vietnam
                                                                                           Chu Van Tuat (NCVH1) &
                                                                                           Tran Cao Son (NIFC)


      10:40 – 11:00      Reviewing the Legislation document of Food Safety                 Lam Quoc Hung (VFA)


      11:00 – 11:20      Food safety management of plant originated foods                  Vuong Truong Giang (PPD)

      11:20 – 11:40      A business perspective on food safety in Vietnam
                                                                                           Marieke van der Pijl (VBF WG
                                                                                           &FAASC)


      11:40 – 12:15      Wrap-up/discussion of session 3                                   Artavazd Hakobyan (WB)


      12:15 – 13:30      Lunch


                         Session 4: Food safety risk management: looking forwards. Chairperson:
                         Vo Thanh Son (WB)
                         Panel discussion (40 mn each), including coffee break

      13:30 – 14:10                                                                        Moderator: Fred Unger (ILRI)
                         Panel 1: Risk-based approach - Discussants: Nguyen Van
                                  Thuan (NAFIQAD) and Nguyen Viet Hung (ILRI)

      14:10 – 14:50                                                                        Shashi Sareen (FAO)
                         Panel 2: Institutional setup of food safety (legal, laws) -
                                  Discussants: Le Van Son (Canada Embassy), Lam
                                  Quoc Hung (VFA)


      14:50 – 15:10      Coffee break




4     Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
      Priorities
PART 2. ABSTRACT OF PRESENTATIONS
 15:10 – 15:50                                                                   Pham Hoang Van (IFC)
                 Panel 3: Formal, informal market - Discussants: Le Viet Nga
                          (MOIT) and Tang Anh Vinh (DAH)

 15:50 – 16:30                                                                   Pham Duc Phuc (HSPH)
                 Panel 4: Prioritization - Discussants: Artavazd Hakobyan (WB)
                          and Pham Xuan Da (NIFC)


 16:30 – 16:45   Wrap-up and Close                                               Vo Thanh Son (WB)




2.1. SESSION 1 - FOOD SAFETY:
CONTAMINATION SITUATION AND HEALTH IMPACT




                                     Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities   5
MICROBIAL CONTAMINATION AND HEALTH RISK ASSESSMENT IN PORK VALUE CHAIN IN HUNG
YEN AND NGHE AN PROVINCES
Sinh Dang-Xuan1, Hung Nguyen-Viet2,3, Fred Unger2, Kohei Makita2,4, Phuc Pham-Duc1, Ngan
TranThi1, Delia Grace2
1 Center for Public Health and Ecosystem Research, Hanoi School of Public Health, Vietnam

2 International Livestock Research Institute (ILRI), Vietnam and Kenya

3 Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Switzerland

4 Rakuno Gakuen University, Japan




In Vietnam, pork accounts for 75% of total meat consumed daily at households. How¬ever, pork may
contain high levels of microbial contamination such as Salmonella and Escherichia coli which might cause
harm to consumers. To determine microbial contamination along the pork value chain, we collected 216
samples from 72 pig farms (floor swab, drinking and waste water), 545 from 49 slaughterhouses (carcass
swab, lymph node, rectal feces, floor swab and washing water) and 514 from 220 pork shops in the informal
markets (pork cuts, ground pork and cutting board swab) in 2 provinces of Vietnam (Hung Yen and Nghe
An). A quantitative microbial risk assessment (QMRA) was also applied to estimate the salmonellosis risk
from boiled pork consumption. Overall prevalences from combined all types of above mentioned samples
at pig farms, slaughterhouses and pork shops for Salmonella were 35%, 30% and 37%, and for E. coli were
91%, 75% and 79%, respectively. Salmonella contamination in the final product (pork at market) was 45%
and an average concentration of 9 MPN/g was recorded. E. coli average load along different points of the
chain was 5.3±1.4 (farm floor swabs), 2.9±0.9 (carcass swabs), 3.1±1.0 (slaughterhouse floor swabs), and
3.3±1.1 (market shop cutting board swabs) logCFU/cm2, whereas pork from market had 3.4±0.9 logCFU/g.
Results from the QMRA of Salmonella show that the annually illness risk of the assessed population in
Hung Yen was on average 27.1% (90%CI: 1.1-64.4%). Other scenarios related to location and consumer
group will be finalized in a next step. Demonstrated high levels of Salmonella in the final product (pork at
market) induces the potential health risks for the consumers. Detected values for E. coli indicates general
poor hygiene along the chain. Appropriate hygiene practices and management are required to achieve
better pork quality and reduce the risk for the consumer.




ANTIBIOTIC RESIDUES, GROWTH PROMOTERS AND HEAVY METALS IN PORK AT WET
MARKETS IN VIETNAM, 2015

Tran Thi Tuyet Hanh1, Pham Duc Phuc2, Dang Xuan Sinh1, Tran Thi Ngan2, Chu Van Tuat3, Nguyen
Viet Hung4,5
1 Environmental Health Department, Hanoi School of Public Health; Hanoi, Vietnam

2 Center for Public Health and Ecosystem Research (CENPHER), Hanoi School of Public Health; Hanoi,


        Vietnam
    3   Center for Veterinary Hygiene and Inspection No.1, Hanoi, Vietnam
    4   The International Livestock Research Institute, Hanoi, Vietnam;
    5   Swiss Tropical and Public Health Institute, Basel, Switzerland


In Vietnam, pork makes up 75% of meat consumed and its production delivers substantial benefits to the
smallholders who supply 84% of the market. In the recent years, consumers have expressed special
concern over food safety issues, especial health risks associated with chemical hazards, including



6         Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
          Priorities
veterinary drugs, heavy metals and growth promoter residues. This study aimed to assess the
concentrations of antibiotic, growth promoters and heavy metal residues in pork collected at wet markets.
From April 2014 to January 2015, a total of 190 fresh pork samples were collected at wet markets in Hung
Yen and Nghe An provinces to produce 18 pooled samples (representing 18 studied communes).
Tetracycline, fluoroquinolones, sulfonamide, chloramphenicol groups and B-agonist were firstly screened
by ELISA and positive samples were quantitatively assessed by liquid chromatography –mass
spectrometry/mass spectrometry (LC-MS/
MS) method. Lead, cadmium and arsenic concentrations were quantitatively determined by AAS method.
While pooled samples for tetracycline and fluoroquinolones (0/18) were negative tested we found positive
test results for sulfamethazine 50%, 9/18) and chloramphenicol (16.7%, 3/18). The average residue levels
were 155.5 (25.6-263.2) µg/kg for sulfamethazine and 0.54 (0.34-0.76) µg/kg for chloramphenicol. Both are
prohibited veterinary drugs in Vietnam. Two feed samples, 2 liver samples and one pork sample were
positive with B-agonist (Salbutamol). Regarding heavy metals, there were 5/18 (27.8) of pooled samples
being positive for lead while for cadmium (0/18) and arsenic (0/18) samples were negative, respectively.
The average amount of lead concentration in pork was 74.1 (70.1-78.7) µg/kg, which was still lower than
the standard level applied for lead in pork (100 µg /kg). There were no significance differences on the
prevalence and concentrations of antibiotic and heavy metal residues between the two studied provinces.
The results highlight the presence of sulfonamide, chloramphenicol and B-agonist (Salbutamol) in some
pork samples available at wet markets. This finding is a component of an ongoing Pig-Risk project, which
is assessing the health risks of chemical hazards in pork and developing incentive-based innovations to
improve management of human and animal health risks in smallholder pig value chains in Vietnam.




PREVALENCE OF SALMONELLA IN CHICKEN MEAT PRODUCTION CHAIN

Pham Thi Ngoc, Truong Quy Duong, et al National Institute of Veterinary Research (NIVR)


Salmonellosis is one of the most prevalent foodborne illnesses. The outbreak of this disease is often
associated with eggs and chicken meat. In this study, the prevalence of Salmonella was surveyed in the
chicken meat production chain. A total of 1,401 samples was collected along the chicken production chain
(parent stocks, hatchery, broiler farms, slaughterhouses, retailed shop) in Hanoi, Vietnam. Overall
Salmonella positive samples were 23.1% (43/186) at parent stocks (water, food, yolk, cloacal swab),
10.3% (28/273) at hatcheries (swab of surface incubator, swab of egg fragment, yolk and died embryo egg),
45.4% (85/187) at broiler farms (water, food, litter, cloacal swab), 43.3% (143/330) at slaughterhouses
(processing water, swab of slaughtering area, cloacal swab, carcass swab) and 36.9% (157/425) at retailed
shops (swab of equipment, rinsed carcass, carcass). Each 50 Salmonella strain at each point of chain was
tested for virulence by infect mice and serovar identification was performed by agglutination test on slice
for O and H antigen according to the version Kauffmann White scheme. All tested strains killed mouse
before 24 hours after infected with 0.2 ml overnight inoculum. 10 difference Salmonella serovars were
identified
S. Typhimurium (10.8%), S. Enteritidis (10.8), S. Albany (21.2), S. Agona (17.2), S. Pollorum galinarum
(2.0), S. Derby (17.2), S. Hadar (6.0), S. Shalkwijk (6.4), S. Sainpaul (5.6), S. Anatum (2.4). Especially, S.
Typhimurium and S. Enteritidis were recovered along all points of the chain. 35.8% (72/201) of carcasses



                                        Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities       7
and 37% (71/192) of rinsed carcasses were Salmonella positive. 7 isolations of S. Typhimurium, and 9
isolations of S. Enteritidis at retailer shops show the relatively high risk for consumers’ health. As human
salmonellosis has been repeatedly correlated to the consumption of poultry products worldwide, continuous
studies are required to effectively minimize Salmonella contamination in poultry production chain.




VEGETABLES AND FRUITS: FOOD SAFETY SITUATION IN VIETNAM

Ngo Thi Hanh and Duong Kim Thoa Fruit and Vegetable Research Institute - Trau Quy, Gia Lam,
Hanoi


With an average production of 15.4 million tons of vegetable and 8.3 million tons of fruits per year,
Vietnamese fruit and vegetable production has met the needs of consumers in terms of types and quantity,
while the production still focuses on quantity rather than quality. Moreover, the integration into WTO and
the ASEAN Community (AC) require Vietnam to improve the quality of fruit and vegetable products and the
food safety standards, especially to follow the principles in good agricultural practice (GAP, GAHP), Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP).

In the end of 2015, according to the statistics of DCP, there have been 1,530 vegetable production bases
under GAP standards with the modest acreage of 12,687 hectares (accounting for 1.44% of the total area
of cultivated vegetables). Therefore, in comparison to the market request, the vegetable and fruit outputs
remain limited, most of which are used for exports or suppliers to restaurants, hotels and supermarkets.
The majority of consumers are still using vegetable and fruit products that do not meet the food safety
standards. The limitations and difficulties in implementing VietGAP in vegetables and fruit production
include dispersed, spontaneous and small-scale manufacturing processes, the lack of capital and the
weakness in cultivation, preservation, processing techniques and management mechanism from input to
output of vegetables and fruits.

In the current Vietnamese vegetable and fruit value chain, the main hazards include (i) pesticide residue,
(ii) nitrate, (iii) heavy metals, and (iv) micro-organisms. These hazards mainly residues on vegetables and
fruits due to the abuse of chemical pesticides, fertilizers or the use of chemicals prohibited in manufacturing,
or due to the production in polluted land and water. The hazard contamination may depend on the
characteristics of each vegetable and fruit as well as on the practice of farming. Findings on using pesticide
in a number of areas producing vegetables (tomato, cabbage, lettuce) show that farmers often mix 2 to 3
pesticides in one spray, select pesticides rotationally and use 10 - 17 pesticides/pest/disease. In addition,
the fertilizers used for these crops are quite various, however, the total amount of fertilizer used for 1
acreage unit of land is higher compared to the process approved by the Ministry of Agriculture: 1,5 - 2 times
(nitrogen and potassium) or 3 times (phosphate).

Through the extensive information on the situation of production and food safety of fruits and vegetable, the
need to assess the current status of food safety in the production of fruits and vegetables will contribute to
identify the cause and limitations, thereby propose solutions for the development in vegetables and fruits
production, for ensuring food safety and public health and the healthy farming environment.




8   Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
    Priorities
HAZARD IDENTIFICATION IN FOOD SAFETY AND EFFECTIVE CONTROL AS AN IMPORTANT
SOLUTION FOR DISTRIBUTION OF SAFE FOOD PRODUCTS TO CONSUMERS

Nguyen Van Thuan National Agro-Forestry-Fisheries Quality Assurance Department (NAFIQAD)


Management of food safety must be taken into account in food production and trade; risk analysis related
to food safety is an important principle of food safety management as clearly stated in the Vietnamese Food
Safety Law. Policies on food safety will also establish the legal framework and perform the mandatory
roadmap on quality management system which includes risk analysis and HACCP.

The forest and fishery products have to be analyzed for food safety risks from foods which have a high food
poisoning rate, and current production and business conditions do not always ensure favorable environment
to make safe products. In recent years, results from food safety monitoring and inspections from the
authorities show that many food safety violations can affect consumers and community health.

Ensuring the safety of agriculture, forestry and fisheries products before shipping to consumer, creating
consumers trust on products, helping producer business thrives on the volume and the types of products,
improving product value and contributing to agricultural production and a sustainable development need
to consider food safety and quality assurance issues.

To solve this problem, the food safety hazards must be correctly identified and effectively controlled along
the entire value chain.     This is seen as   an important solution to ensure food safety, the scientific and
international integration and a resource-saving society today.

For this purpose and with the support of international donors, the agricultural and rural development sector
in Vietnam has been conducted many activities with the message “ensuring food safety together for a
sustainable agriculture”.




OVERVIEW ON THE REGULATIONS AND OCCURRENCE OF MYCOTOXINS IN FOOD AND FEED IN
VIETNAM

Tran Cao Son, National Institute for Food Control (NIFC)


Mycotoxins are secondary metabolites of fungi found in food and feed. Vietnam regulations define the
control and the maximum levels of some major mycotoxins in food and feed including aflatoxin B & G (B1,
B2, G1, G2), aflatoxin M1, ochratoxin A, patulin, zearalenone, deoxynivalenol, and fumonisins. Among
these mycotoxins, aflatoxin B1 is the most serious threat to human health. Due to the tropical climate in
Vietnam, the risks of mycotoxins production in food and feed are reasonably high. Corn and peanut are the
most contaminated commodities. There are three main methods which are usually used for the mycotoxin
determination in Vietnam including ELISA, HPLC-FLD and LC-MS/MS. In this review, several data from
different studies performed in Vietnam about the occurrence of mycotoxins in food and feed were also
mentioned. Although these studies were small in scale, they have rang a warning bell of mycotoxin
contamination in food and feed in Vietnam.




                                         Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities     9
 PCBS AND DIOXIN IN FOODS IN VIETNAM: ESTIMATED DAILY INTAKES

 Nguyen Hung Minh1, Tran Thi Tuyet Hanh2, Nguyen Anh Tuan3
 1Dioxin Laboratory, Center for Environmental Monitoring, Vietnam Environment Administration

 2Faculty of Environmental and Occupational Health, Hanoi School of Public Health

 3Division of Chemical Control and Environmental Incident Remediation, Department of Environmental


 Pollution Control, Vietnam Environment Administration


 PCBs, dioxin and other POPs pollution is an important environmental health challenge in Vietnam.
 Research projects were implemented to estimate the daily intake of PCBs from foods in Vietnam and that
 of dioxin at Bien Hoa and Da Nang dioxin hot spots. Challenges related to risk assessment and risk
 management were explored. 101 pooled food samples in Vietnam were collected and analyzed for PCB
 concentrations and 46 pooled food samples were collected in Bien Hoa and Da Nang for dioxin analysis.
 Results showed that the risk of PCB exposure mainly due to the consumption of meat and eggs of free-
 ranged animals. Estimated daily intake of dioxin exceeded many times the recommended tolerable daily
 intake proposed by WHO (1-4 pg/kg bw/day) if people consumed local high risk foods
 cultured/raised/harvested surrounding the airbases. It is important to develop a National Environmental
 Health Action Plan with effective coordination mechanisms between related ministries in assessing and
 managing environmental health risks related to chemical hazards in general and related to PCBs, dioxin
 and POPs in particular.




 ANTIBIOTIC USE IN FOOD PRODUCING ANIMALS, RESIDUES & ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE

 Nguyen Thu Thuy, Ton That Son Phong, Pham Thi Ngoc, Phung Minh Phong, Hoang Thu Ha, Luu
 Quynh Huong, Nguyen Thi Lan Anh, Phan Thi Hong Phuc, Tran Thi Mai Thao, Vu Dung Minh, Chu
 Van Tuat


 Management of veterinary antibiotic use was not very good. Many regulations on veterinary drugs were
 available but farmers and vet practitioners’ knowledge, attitude and practice (KAP) were very poor. Farmers
 played the most important role in applying antibiotics in food producing animals that were mainly based on
 farmers’ experience, commercial information without any support of laboratory result s and veterinary
 supervision. The failures in applying antibiotic choice, dosage, administration route, treatment duration,
 withdrawal time, antibiotic combination and etc. were as inevitable consequences of residues in animal
 derived food and promotion of bacteria resistance in animal and human. It is time to apply the “One Health”
 approach for control of antibiotic resistant bacteria in human, animals and environment.




10   Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
     Priorities
ADDRESSING ANTIBIOTIC AND ANTIMICROBIAL USE IN LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION: INITIAL
STEPS AND PLANNING FOR THE FUTURE

Scott Newman, To Lien Thu, Vo Ngan Giang Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation,
Hanoi Viet Nam


Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a multi-dimensional threat to human survival, public health, trade and
economy and the over-all sustainable development of the country. Antimicrobial resistance is a growing
human and economic threat in Viet Nam with the increasing and uncontrolled use of antibiotics in the health
system and in veterinary medicine, and for growth promotion and disease prevention in agriculture,
horticulture, livestock and aquaculture.

Limited regulations of antibiotic use in the feed and the livestock sector in Vietnam is a controversial issue,
as the misuse of antimicrobials had led to an increasing concern about the large amount of antibiotics that
are entering the food chain and could promote bacterial resistance and result in less efficient antibiotic
treatments for human and animal diseases. This has also contributed to challenges associated with
international trade.

Therefore, in order to technically support the Government of Viet Nam, the Emergency Centre for
Transboundary Animal Diseases (ECTAD) of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Viet Nam in
collaboration with the Departments of Livestock Production and Animal Health, within the Ministry of
Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) has supported specific national activities including: 1) A pilot
study on current antibiotic use and Salmonella spp resistance from animal & human samples; 2) revising
and signing of the Aide Memoire; 3) A workshop on Management and Use of Antibiotics and Antimicrobials

in the Livestock Sector in Viet Nam; 4) a Viet Nam Legislation Review; and 5) A Knowledge-Attitude-
Practices study on AMR use in livestock production. These efforts are leading to supporting MARD to
develop a Roadmap & Action Plan for antimicrobials and antibiotic use in livestock production. FAO, at
headquarters level, has also recently developed an FAO Action Plan on AMR which will support
standardizing the approach taken by multiple countries, including Viet Nam, in developing effective action
plans and revising legislation in support of healthy livestock production and minimizing risks of antimicrobial
resistance. This presentation will provide highlights from ongoing activities.

2.2. SESSION 2 - FOOD SAFETY:
VALUE CHAIN, ECONOMIC IMPACT
CHALLENGES TO SAFE FOOD PRODUCTION FOR THE DOMESTIC MARKET IN VIETNAM’S
AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAINS

Kim Cuong Vien Value Chain Consultant, Canada Embassy


To bring safe foods to end users, three major groups of activities are to be successfully implemented in a
value chain. These are: production of safe foods, distribution, and marketing. If any component among
these fails, safe foods are not considered to be ended up in the hands of final consumers. The presentation
is an overall look of challenges to safe food production for the domestic market in Vietnam, and reviews
some of current value chain tools that could address the challenges of production and distribution of safe
foods.



                                           Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities     11
 IMPACTS OF FREE TRADE AGREEMENTS ON LIVESTOCK AND SPS ISSUES IN VIETNAM

 Dang Kim Khoi, PhD Director of Centre for Agricultural Policy (CAP), Institute of Policy and Strategy
 for Agricultural and Rural Development (IPSARD)

 The presentation analyses the opportunities and challenges that free trade agreements (FTAs) such as
 WTO, TPP, AEC bring to the Vietnamese livestock sector and summarizes how the country implement
 WTO’s sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) measures to comply with FTAs. Sin ce its WTO integration,
 Vietnam has significantly increased its imports in both animal feed products, raw materials for animal feed
 (corn, soybean) and meat (chicken, beef, pork). The livestock sector is expected to face with more
 challenges when the nation has to open up its domestic market to imported products from other countries
 under TPP and AEC commitments. As the room for reducing Vietnam’s import tariff’s to TPP livestock
 products (US, Canada) is still large, this is likely a key channel that seriously affects the livelihood of
 Vietnamese livestock producers. Besides, foreign direct investment is another influential dimension of ‘new
 generation’ FTAs to Vietnamese livestock sector.

 Since its WTO integration, Vietnam has issued many legal and policy documents to implement SPS
 regulations such as Decision 147/2008/QD-TTg about the National Action Plan promoting SPS
 commitments, the Food Safety Law 2010, and several Decisions of Ministry of Agricultural and Rural
 Development (MARD) related to safe livestock husbandry practices. Nevertheless, the current standard of
 the SPS system that Vietnam applies is still lower than for most of livestock exporting countries and in
 general, the current national SPS system is unable to help to protect the livestock sector. TPP is expected
 to provide a better SPS framework for its member regarding equivalence and assessment of risk and
 determination of the appropriate level of Sanitary or Phytosanitary Protection. To take advantage of new
 SPS regulations, Vietnam has to improve its research capacity to provide the scientific evidence once the
 nation decides to apply SPS measures.


 INSTITUTIONAL ASSESSMENT FOR STRENGTHENING FOOD SAFETY IN MARD

 Shashi Sareen Senior Food Safety and Nutrition Office, FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific
 Bangkok, Thailand


 Under the Food Safety Law 2010 the responsibility for food safety in Vietnam has been assigned to three
 ministries namely MOH, MARD and MOIT, with each ministry being assigned specific products to be
 handled across the entire chain. Based on a request from the Minister of MARD for FAO’s support to
 restructure and strengthen the management and coordination of Food Safety within MARD, FAO had
 carried out an independent assessment of the food safety management scenario by meeting and discussing
 with different ministries, departments and stakeholders and had brought out recommendations for
 restructuring and strengthening the structure within MARD and also raised some important issues that
 required addressing for better food safety outcomes at National level.
 This presentation highlights the observations and recommendations under three basic areas namely
 legislative and regulatory framework, institutional arrangements in terms of structure; and implementation



12   Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
     Priorities
aspects (systems and procedures) which may be useful not only to MARD but also to other ministries/
departments for improving food safety outcomes in Vietnam.




VIEW ON THE FOOD SAFETY IN SOUTHERN, VIETNAM

Nguyen Do Phuc The Southern Regional Testing Center for Food Safety- Institute of Public Health
in Ho Chi Minh City, Viet Nam


The Institute of Public Health in Ho Chi Minh City is located under the Ministry of Health (MOH). Based on
a request from the MOH and the Viet Nam Food Administration (VFA), the Institute of Public Health in Ho
Chi Minh City has responsibilities for testing food safety for domestic and imported food, provide guidance
on techniques about food safety for 21 preventive health centers at provincial level in the South of Viet
Nam, including scientific studies, training and international cooperation, implementation a monitoring
program to detect hazards in food.
This presentation relates to factors that may affect the health of communities and are able to cause food
poisoning. It will describe some food poisoning outbreaks which have occurred in the southern region and
the identified causes. Based on data analysis, laboratory testing and results from the ongoing monitoring
program every year key activities include: the identification of some food hazards, a review of capacity for
analysis at laboratory and provision of suggestions at some points to improve the management of food
safety in the Southern region of Viet Nam.



2.3. SESSION 3 - TECHNICAL AND INSTITUTIONAL
SOLUTIONS FOR FOOD SAFETY
DEVELOPING SUSTAINABLE AND INCLUSIVE SAFE VEGETABLE VALUE CHAINS: MOC CHAU
EXPERIENCE

Pham Thi Sen Northern Mountainous Agriculture and Forestry Science Institute (NOMAFSI)


Results of consumer and value chain studies show that, for accredited safe and fresh vegetables (i) Ha Noi
consumers have increasing needs and are ready to pay with higher prices, (ii) Moc Chau is a well known
“origin of quality vegetables” for Hanoi people, (iii) there are about 200 stores and supermarkets in Hanoi
with increasing needs and capacity to retail, (iv) Moc Chau small-scale farmers are good potential producers
(they have suitable conditions of climate and land and also have needs to develop vegetables to increase
their household economy). But how to link these stakeholders better and make the two ends meet?

To answer this question, the project “Improved market engagement for counter -seasonal vegetables
producers in North-West Vietnam”, supported by ACIAR and implemented by a multi -principle and multi-
organizational team comprising researchers from UQ, NOMAFSI, CASRAD, VNUA, FAVRI, FS, Helvetas
and CIRAD in partnership with Moc Chau district authority and Son La provincial Department of Agriculture
and Rural Development has spent inputs to (i) diversify the vegetables types and varieties, (ii) develop




                                        Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities     13
 farmer-farmer links, (iii) help farmers organizations to comply the VietGap criteria, (iv) develop links
 between framers organizations – wholesalers – retailers – consumers, and (v) increase the consumers and
 retailers trust in the vegetables safety and quality.

 After four years, the project has developed inclusive value chains for safe vegetables from Moc Chau to
 Hanoi, involving 68 farmers organized in 4 organisations. Each year, through these chains, hundreds tones
 of Moc Chau safe vegetables (complying with VietGap criteria) were supplied to Hanoi consumers via big
 and small retailers, including Fivimart, BigGreen, Metro, Bác Tôm, BigC, Ch ất Việt ect. This has helped to
 increase the gross margins for vegetables per household for member households from an average of 12
 mil in 2012 to 30 mil VND in 2014 respectively. As calculated by farmers the total return in 2015 per hectare
 per year was 150 mil - 350 mil VND with a net income of 75 mil to 150 mil VND depending on the vegetable
 type.

 Acknowledging the benefits from participating in the value chains of safe vegetables, more and more
 farmers in Moc Chau wish to become members of farmers organizations formed under the project. The
 organisations have also planned to extend their markets to other cities than Ha Noi, such as Son La, Ha
 Long and Hai Phong.

 SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT IN VALUE CHAIN OF BROILER, LAYER, AND PIG PRODUCTION

 Nguyen Van Chien C.P. Vietnam


 C.P. Vietnam, owned by C.P. Group, has invested in Vietnam over 20 years. With the aim of improving the
 quality of life for Vietnamese people through safe, quality and low-cost food products, C.P. Vietnam has
 adopted food manufacturing processes based on enclosed standards in chain 3F (Feed, Farm, Food). With
 closed processes, which means that all products from the first step (Feed) go through breeding on farms
 (Farm) to the food processing factories (Food). They are distributed to the consumers after strictly quality
 control to ensure standards, including: food safety, nutritional quality, consumer tastes, traceability of origin,
 and control of chemical residues as a requirement of food regulations.


 The 3F model of closed production of C.P. Vietnam applies the scientific and technological progresses
 which contributes to improve productivity, reduce costs and minimizes the natural resources consumption
 and environmental impact etc. That supports the sustainable and efficient development of C.P. Vietnam
 and as such contributes to safe and healthy life for the people of Vietnam.




 SOLUTIONS FOR MANAGING THE PRODUCTION IN AGRICULTURE AND TRACING THE
 ORIGINAL OF THE AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS

 Do Duy Dang and Nguyen Cong Tri Xac Thuc So Company


 Amid the increased challenges in plant production such as: soil erosion, water contamination, residue of
 chemical fertilizers, promoters, and pesticides, the system of quality control and tracing the original of
 agricultural products is necessary to ensure the food safety. The system of agricultural production control




14   Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
     Priorities
and tracing products’ original focuses on production, inputs – outputs, processing and distribution. This
model can help tracing the origin of agricultural products such as tea, meat, or fruits and vegetables. It
benefits both producers and consumers by saving the cost of paper work related to agricultural production
as well as better management of product’s brands. The model also supports consumers tracing agricultural
products’ origin. Consequently, it will facilitate the food safety management in general.

THE USE OF PROBIOTIC BACTERIA AS ANIMAL FEED SUPPLEMENTS TO REDUCE ANTIBIOTICS

Huynh Minh Viet CEO, BioSpring


Intensive livestock production produces a severe burden on animals resulting in stress, infection and
ultimately production losses. Antibiotics have been applied excessively in feed and at farms to control
diseases, resulting in detrimental consequences in public health.
One advanced technological solution to reduce antibiotics is the application of live bacterial supplements
referred to as ‘probiotics’. Probiotics improve innate immunity, control the growth of with harmful bacteria,
restore the gut microflora, improve digestion, and reduce odor in farming. The most suitable probiotic
bacteria are heat-stable bacteria such as Bacillus in spore form, which can be added to feed and used at
farms. The application of Bacillus bacteria in replacing antibiotics improves farming productivity and reduces
expenses to feed companies and farmers.
BioSpring partners with Royal Holloway, University of London and SporeGen is the global leader in Bacillus
to produce Bacillus spores with highest standards. BioSpring also collaborates with Veracus and FG
Systems, two leading companies in Germany specialized in animal nutrition and immunity, to formulate
sophisticated probiotics products that replace antibiotics and improve animal health.




LABORATORY FOR FOOD SAFETY SYSTEM IN VIETNAM

Chu Van Tuat (NCVH No.1) and Tran Cao Son (NIFC)


Pursuant to the Law of Food Safety dated June 17, 2010, the Circular 13/2014/TTLT-BYT-BNNPTNT-BCT
dated April 09, 2014 allocated tasks and cooperation among regulatory agencies of the Ministry of Health
(MOH), the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD), and the Ministry of Industry and Trade
(MOIT) in food safety management.
MOH is responsible for food safety management of bottled water, mineral water, functional foods,
supplementary micronutrients and micronutrient-fortified foods, food additives, flavorings, food processing
aids, instruments and materials for wrapping and storing food, consumable ice etc.
MARD is responsible for food safety management of cereal, meat and edible by-products of livestock,
blended products that contain meat such as sausages, salami ect.: aquatic animals, vegetables, fruits,
eggs, raw milk, honey, salt, spices, sugar, tea, coffee, pepper, cocoa, cashew, other agricultural products
such as bird nests, seeds and/or genetically modified foods.




                                        Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities       15
 MOIT is responsible for food safety management of beer, alcoholic drinks, processed milk, vegetable oil,
 flour, starch, confectionery etc.
 For each ministry, there is a network of food safety related lab system of management organizations and
 research institutes, professional centers and universities. For some large provinces, there are
 experimentation and analytical service centers related to food safety tests. In addition there are also some
 companies supplying the experimentation and analytical service on food safety.

 Most food laboratories operate in accordance with ISO 17025 requirements. Within the food safety
 management scope of food products, the competent authorities assess, assign, grant professional
 laboratory codes and/or issue decisions with the list of tests for food safety.




 FOOD SAFETY MANAGEMENT OF PLANT ORIGINATED FOODS

 Vuong Truong Giang
 Plant Protection Department, MARD


 In the recent years, food safety management for plant originated food has gained remarkable progresses.
 To name a few, the public regulation documentation system was set up, mechanism for management was
 established and guidance was issued, and the collaboration of different ministries and institutions has been
 strengthened. However, there are some challenges facing the food safety managers. These include: the
 residues of plant protection chemicals in plant food production which excesses the limits of 10% of the
 collected samples and microbial contamination, heavy metal contamination, the mycotoxins and etc., being
 found in plant food products. Moreover, the perceptions of producers in this regard were not high. As such,
 ensuring the plant food safety is still one of the priorities of food safety managers in the current context.
 Assessing the mechanism and implementation in plant food safety management to better inform related
 policies and regulations is a solution for ensuring the food safety for domestic market and export.




 A BUSINESS PERSPECTIVE ON FOOD SAFETY IN VIETNAM

 Marieke van der Pijl Food, Agri and Aqua Business Sector Committee of the European Chamber of
 Commerce; Agribusiness Working Group of the Vietnam Business Forum


 The number of people that get sick because of food poisoning in Vietnam does not really differ that much
 from other countries. It are the health risks at long term that cause worries. Diseases caused by too high
 levels of or incorrect use of additives (saccharin, sodium cyclamate, carmine, amaranth, sulphur dioxide),
 pesticides, antibiotics, certain heavy metals, the use of harmful products such as methanol, growth
 hormones, bleaching chemicals, potassium bromate, toxic packaging material and the presence of
 mycotoxins or mould.




16   Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
     Priorities
Vietnam ranks high for exports of various agricultural products, but Vietnamese products are perceived as
of lower quality and value, competitive on price but not on quality and are often rejected by importing
countries for the same reason as why unsafe food causes health issues. This needs to be changed as it
does not do justice to the Vietnamese products, limits export opportunities and impacts the health of the
Vietnamese population.

From a business perspective we believe that several of the food safety issues are caused by the fact that
laboratories are not up-to-global-standard, there are difficulties in Food Safety Management, there is a lack
of a good traceability system, products that are better for crop, health and environment are treated worse,
there is a lack of best practices for sale and use of pesticides/fertilisers, there are difficulties in training
farmers about best practices, there is a lack of harmonisation and coordination in many areas, ingredients
that damage one’s health are illegally used or still allowed to be used, there are problems with the coldchain
during transport, storage and at customs check-points, the lack of enforcing existing legislation, and finally
the consequences of breaching those regulations not being severe enough.
We believe that a centralised Food Safety Agency could address many of these issues, even though we
realise it will take time to have such an agency in place. Moreover, enforcing existing legislation and making
the consequences for breaching that legislation more severe would in our view improve the overall food
safety in Vietnam even more.




                                         Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities        17
 PART 3. TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE MISSION
 AND LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
 2.4. SESSION 4 - FOOD SAFETY RISK MANAGEMENT:
 LOOKING FORWARDS

 Panel discussion

 Panel 1: Risk-based approach - Discussants: Nguyen Nhu Tiep (NAFIQAD) and Nguyen Viet Hung (ILRI)

 Panel 2: Institutional setup of food safety (legal, laws) - Discussants: Le Van Son (Canada Embassy), Tran
           Viet Nga (VFA)

 Panel 3: Formal, informal market - Discussants: Le Viet Nga (MOIT) and Nguyen Thu Thuy (DAH)


 Panel 4: Prioritization - Discussants: Artavazd Hakobyan (WB) and Pham Xuan Da (NIFC)
 3.1. Technical Assistance Mission

 Food Safety Risks Management: Challenges and Priorities (January 6 – 15, 2016)

 The World Bank has been working with other Development Partners and various ministries and agencies
 of the Government on scaling up support on the food safety agenda. The Food Safety Working Group
 (FSWG) is an initiative to bring key Government Agencies/Line ministries and development partners (DPs)
 together for joint policy dialogue and discussions on food safety issues in Viet Nam. It was created at the
 request of, and convened under the auspices of, the Deputy Prime Minister Vu Duc Dam at a meeting in
 June 2015 chaired by DPM Dam and benefits from the active participation of Office of Government (the
 designated focal point of coordination), Ministry of Health (MoH), Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
 Development (MARD), Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT) from the Government side and of the Food
 and Agriculture Organization (designated focal point among development partners), Asian Development
 Bank (ADB), Canadian Embassy, JICA, New Zealand Embassy, and the World Bank.

 A priority request received from Government was for an urgent assessment of prevailing food safety risks
 in Vietnam, based on international best practice in risk assessment methodology. A concept note has been
 prepared and has benefitted from a technical review and endorsement by DPs and Government agencies
 under the Food Safety Working Group.

 An initial mission has been scheduled from January 6 – 15, 2016. (The mission will take place
 simultaneously with an implementation support mission for the Livestock Competitiveness and Food safety
 Project – Additional Financing [LIFSAP – AF]. Specifically, the relevant objective of this mission is to launch
 the Food Safety Risks Management analysis, with a specific focus on a stock-taking of food safety risks in
 a few selected value chains in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City. This analytical work will be led by the World
 Bank in collaboration with Canadian Embassy, Asian Development Bank (ADB) and Food and Agriculture
 Organization (FAO) and will be coordinated by Office of Government. As such, this analytical work is a joint
 effort by the members of the FSWG to contribute to the on-going efforts from the Government of Viet Nam
 in addressing food safety issues.



18   Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
     Priorities
An initial schedule of the mission is enclosed in following Table.

Attachment: Livestock Competitiveness and Food Safety Project Implementation Support Mission,
Food Safety Risk Management Study (January 6 – 15, 2016)
Table 1. Mission Schedule

     Date       Time                                  Activities                                 Remarks/Venue


  Wednesday,
   January 6    AM     Mission team meeting                                                           WB


                PM     Kick-off meeting with LIFSAP                                              PCU of LIFSAP


   Thursday,           Round table discussion on primary production: biological hazards,              WB
   January 7    AM     residues, banned substances, storage, cold chain, toxins, AMR…


                PM


    Friday,                                                                                           WB
   January 8    AM
                       Round table discussion on quality control, standard and certification;
                       VietGAP, GAHP, risks assessment, inspection, enforcement; traceability,
                       branding, wholesale and retail, food safety law…
                PM


   Saturday,    AM
   January 9           Travel to Ho Chi Minh City


                       Meet with Ho Chi Minh City’s DARD


                PM     Visit wholesale markets and value chains of pork and vegetables


    Sunday,     AM
   January 10          Visit Animal Health Center Zone 6


                       Visit a private sector food processing (TBD)


                PM     Return to Ha Noi


    Monday,
   January 11   AM     Visit wholesale markets in Ha Noi


                PM     Visit GAHP and safe vegetable production zone in Quoc Oai district


    Tuesday,
   January 12   AM     Meeting with Viet Nam Food Administration                                     VFA


                PM     Meeting with NAFIQAD and Plan Protection Department                          MARD


  Wednesday,
  January 13    AM     Meeting with MOIT                                                             MOIT


                PM     Meeting with SPS Office in MARD                                              MARD




                                          Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities     19
      Thursday,
     January 14       AM       Ceremony for Launching of LIFSAP AF                                              TBD


                      PM       Meeting with LIFSAP on AF                                                        PCU


       Friday,
     January 15       AM       Mission team meeting                                                             WB


                      PM
                               Wrap-up with OoG, MOH, MARD, MOIT and other government agencies
                               as relevant


 3.2 List of Participants

 ( Food Safety Risk Assessment Study Workshop 7-8 January 2016, Hanoi, Vietnam)

     No      Name                Position             Institutions/Organizations                Email Address


     1       Le Viet Nga         DDG                  Department of Domestic Market, MOIT       NgaLV@moit.gov.vn


                                                          National Center for Vet Medicine
     2       Chu Van Tuat        Vice Director                                                  cvtuatvet@yahoo.com
                                                                      Control


     3       Pham Xuan Da        Director             National Institute for Food Control       da.pham@yahoo.com


     4       Tran Cao Son                             National Institute for Food Control       caoson32@gmail.com
                                 Head of
                                 Division


     5       Bui Mai Huong                            National Institute for Food Control       buimaihuong_73@yahoo.com
                                 Vice Head of
                                 Department


     6       Ngo Thi Hanh                             Fruit and Vegetable Research Institute    hanhvrqvn@yahoo.com
                                 Head of
                                 Department


     7                                                                                          giangppd@ymail.com
             Vuong Truong        Head of              Division of Food safety and Environment
             Giang               Division             Management, PPD, MARD


     8       Pham Hong Ngan      Vice Dean            Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, VNUA      phngan2001@yahoo.com


     9       Tu Thanh Dung       Lecturer             Can Tho University                        ttdung@ctu.edu.vn


     10                                               CP Company in Vietnam                     chiencp1972@gmail.com
             Nguyen Van          Marketing
             Chien               Director


     11      Do Duy Dang         Officer              Xac Thuc So Technology Jsc.               dangdd@xacthucso.vn


     12      Huynh Minh Viet     CEO                  Biospring Company                         viet.huynh@gmail.com


     13      Nguyen Do Phuc      Head                                                           nguyendophuc@yahoo.com
                                                      Institute of Public Health, Ho Chi Minh
                                                      city




20       Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
         Priorities
14   Dang Van Chinh    Director                                                       cdang2004@yahoo.com
                                            Institute of Public Health, Ho Chi Minh
                                            city


15                     Dean                 Faculty of Food Technology, VNUA          nttthuycntp@vnua.edu.vn
     Nguyen Thi
     Thanh Thuy


16   Dinh Xuan Tung    Scientist            National Institute of Animal Science      xuantung168@yahoo.com


17   Pham Thi Sen      Scientist                                                      phamthisenprc@gmail.com
                                            Northern Mountainous Agriculture &
                                            Forestry Science Institute


18   An Nguyen                                                                        An.Nguyen@dfat.gov.au
                       Country              Australian Center for International
                       Manager              Agriculture Research


19   Tran Quoc Tuan    Director              Southern Center for Fertilizer Testing
                                                                                      dungphuhao8888@gmail.
                                                              in
                                                                                      com
                                            Agriculture, MOIT

20   Vo Thanh Son                           World Bank                                svo@worldbank.org
                       Senior Rural
                       Development
                       Specialist


21   Stephane Forman   Senior officer       World Bank                                sforman@worldbank.org


22                     Senior officer       World Bank                                ntvha2003@gmail.com
     Nguyen Thi Van
     Ha



23                     Senior officer       World Bank                                ahakobyan@worldbank.org
     Artavazd
     Hakobyan



24   Shashi Sareen     Senior officer       World Bank                                Shashi.Sareen@fao.org



25   Dao Lan Huong     Senior officer       World Bank                                hdao1@worldbank.org


26                     Senior scientist                                               H.Nguyen@cgiar.org
     Nguyen Viet                            International Livestock Research
     Hung                                   Institute (ILRI)


       Kieu Phuong
27                     Senior officer       World Bank in Vietnam, (WB)               hkieu@worldbank.org
           Hoa


28   Do Thi Tam        Senior officer       World Bank in Vietnam, (WB)               tdo1@worldbank.org


29                                                                                    vanthuan.nafi@mard.gov.vn
     Nguyen Van        Head of              Agro Forestry Fisheries Quality
     Thuan             Division             Assurance Dept, NAFIQAD, MARD


30   Fred Unger        Senior scientist                                               F.Unger@cgiar.org
                                            International Livestock Research
                                            Institute (ILRI)




                                        Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities        21
     31   Luu Quoc Toan      Lecturer           Hanoi School of Public Health (HSPH)       lqt@hsph.edu.vn


     32                      Lecturer           Hanoi School of Public Health (HSPH)       tth2@hsph.edu.vn
          Tran Thi Tuyet
          Hanh


     33   Pham Duc Phuc      Deputy Director                                               pdp@hsph.edu.vn
                                                Center for Public Health and Ecosystem
                                                Research, HSPH


     34   Dang Xuan Sinh     Researcher                                                    dxs@hsph.edu.vn
                                                Center for Public Health and Ecosystem
                                                Research, HSPH


     35   Scott Newman                          Food and Agriculture Organization in       Scott.Newman@fao.org
                             Senior             Vietnam (FAO)
                             Technical
                             Coordinator


     36   Vo Ngan Giang                                                                    Ngangiang.Vo@fao.org
                             Food safety        Food and Agriculture Organization in
                             Expert             Vietnam (FAO)



     37   Vien Kim Cuong     Consultant         Canada Embassy                             vkc1970@yahoo.com


     38   Dang Kim Khoi      Director                                                      khoi.dang@cap.gov.vn
                                                The center for Agricultural Policy,
                                                IPSARD


     39                      Project Director                                              ttsonphong@apmb.gov.vn
          Ton That Son                          Livestock Competitiveness and Food
          Phong                                 Safety Project (LIFSAP), MARD


     40                      Senior officer                                                mariekevdpijl@gmail.com
          Marieke van der                       European chamber of Commerce in
          Pijl                                  Vietnam (VBFWG &FAASC)


     41   Pham Hoang Van                        International Finance Corporation (IFC)-   pvan3@ifc.org
                             Food Safety        World Bank
                             and Zoonosis
                             Researcher


     42   Le Van Son         Senior officer     Canada Embassy
                                                                                           son.le-van@international.
                                                                                           gc.ca


             Nguyen Thi
     43                      Officer            Department of Domestic Market, MOIT        hongnt@moit.gov.vn
               Hong



     44                      Officer            Department of Domestic Market, MOIT        nhungnth@moit.gov.vn
          Nguyen Hong
          Nhung


     45                      Researcher         National Insitute of Veterinary Research
          Truong Thi Quy                                                                   truongduong2603@gmail.
          Duong                                                                            com




22    Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
      Priorities
46   Phan Thanh Tam    Researcher           University of Science and Technology   tampt67@yahoo.com


47     Nguyen Thi      Officer              VEA, MONRE                             huenm@vea.gov.vn
         Minh
     Hue

48                     Researcher           CIRAD
     Delphine Marie-                                                               delphine.marie-vivien@cirad.
     Vivien                                                                        fr



49   Nguyen Van Hai    Officer              DAH, MARD                              haikkn80@gmail.com



50   Maho Imanishi     Officer              WHO                                    imanishim@who.int



51   Tang Anh Vinh     Officer              DAH, MARD                              vinh.dah@gmail.com


52                     Deputy director      LIFSAP                                 xuantuanlifsap1@gmail.com
     Nguyen Xuan
     Anh Tuan



53   Micheal O’Leary   Senior adviser       USAID                                  moleary@usaid.gov


54   Lam Quoc Hung                          Vietnam Food Administration, MOH       hungdichte@yahoo.com
                       Head of division



55   Kim Thuy Oanh     Officer              USAID                                  okim@usaid.gov



56   Tom Wilson        Officer              NZ Embassy                             tom.wilson@mfat.govt.nz



57   Le Quynh Trang    Researcher           IPSARD                                 trang.le@cap.gov.vn


58   Peter Robson      General              VBFWG & FAASC / DSM                    sec.comms@eurochamvn.org
                       Manager,
                           DSM
                         Nutrional
                       Product

59   Pawn Padungtod    Specialist                                                  PawinP@th.cdc.gov
                                            Food and Agriculture Organization in
                                            Vietnam (FAO)


60   Nguyen Thi Phuc                        WHO Vietnam                            phucn@who.int
                       Technical
                       officer



61   Bianca Rayner     Officer              VECO, Vietnam                          bianca@veco.org.vn


62      Truong Thi     Researcher           NIVR, MARD                             tgiang.vty83@yahoo.com
          Huong
     Giang




                                        Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities        23
     63   Dao Thu Trang      Manager         PAHI, MARD                             thutrangdao@gmail.com



     64   Vu Anh Tuan        Vice CEO        CP Company in Vietnam                  tuancpht@cp.com.vn


     65   Pham Viet Anh      Deputy Head                                            phamvietanh.bnn@gmail.com
                                             The management board of agricultural
                                             projects



     66   Pham Viet Anh      Manager         NZ embassy




24    Food Safety Risks Management in Vietnam: Challenges and
      Priorities
Round table discussion: Food Safety Risk Management in Vietnam

The 2 day round table discussion was held on 7th and 8th of January 2016 in Hanoi. The aims of
this meeting were to provide the technical assistance mission of the World Bank with i) an
overall picture of food safety situation in Vietnam, ii) stock-taking of food safety risks for
selected key food value chains, and iii) brainstorming priorities and potential solutions to address
key food safety risks.
A total of 66 participants across various sectors, institutions and organizations attended the 2 day
discussions and related sessions which included apart from 22 presentations also 4 specific panel
discussions. This document summarizes the main points discussed during the sessions and panel
discussions and wrap-up session.


Panel session: Food safety risk management: looking forwards

Panel 1: Risk-based approach - Discussants: Nguyen Van Thuan (NAFIQAD) and Nguyen
Viet Hung (ILRI), facilitated by Fred Unger (ILRI)

Both panelists gave a statement on the risk based approach use in Vietnam and addressed the
way forward to apply this for food safety management.
- The effectiveness of food safety management relies very much on the hazard and risk
   management. Risk based approach has been known globally, and has several research on
   particular products and hazards.
- MRLs for chemical, physical hazards might be adapted to Vietnam in harmonization with
   international standard.
- In Vietnam during the last 5 years, risk assessment/risk analysis has been applied for food
   safety management.
- However, this approach is still new for Vietnam, and the concept needs to be clearly
   understood and make priorities in commodities for risk based approach management. It is
   needed to develop a roadmap for the FS management
- Food safety law defined high risk food groups need to be managed using risk-based
   approach. However where we should start risk analysis now and to identify for what groups
   of food.
- Recently, each ministry (MARD, MOH and MOIT) is in charge of certain foods and carried
   out risk assessment of some products. There is no a single body to do risk assessment like it
   happens in some developed countries.
- There have been several workshops and training on risk analysis for food safety management
   in Vietnam. Certain capacities in risk analysis exist. There are still some inconsistencies in
   terminology and understanding of risk analysis.
- On Vietnamese Food safety law, there has one separate chapter for Risk analysis – this is a
   good enabling environment for implementing risk based approach.
- There were discussions on the need of having a technical body to conduct risk assessment.
   This could mobilize technical persons from universities and research institutes. We need


                                                 1
-


    keep certain level of independence of risk assessors and risk managers. However in the
    context of Vietnam to optimize the need of risk managers, risk assessors should respond to
    the need of managers, working on priority issues of food safety in the country.
    Vietnam can conduct risk assessment with the current capacities and resources and improve
    them step by step. It is important to adapt risk assessment to Vietnamese context and to build
    more capacities but not to wait until everything is available to start risk based approach. We
    don’t have to understand that risk assessment is something too sophisticated.
-   Finally, food safety management authorities should be open to and increase trust in risk
    assessment studies done by researchers.
-   Risk communication skills need to be strengthened to avoid panic of population and
    economic loss the society.

The discussion of the panel was about to know the existing capacities of risk assessment in
Vietnam, which will serve to identify the gaps to fill in capacity building. The capacity
component and consideration of developing a body for risk assessment would be part of
activities of the food safety working group (recently established between development partners
and government). Understanding what system is operating for food safety management will help
develop practical risk-based approach for the country. FAO colleague gave examples from
Thailand and India. Some participants raised the concern on capacity (both expertise and
financial) to conduct risk assessments. It was proposed to consider establishing a sub-group on
risk assessment under the National committee of food safety. It was wished to prioritize and
conduct concrete research case studies even small scale to gather expertise and strengthen them,
and later enhance the risk assessment quality and information sharing.

Finally there were concerns on slow move of risk based approach for the last 10 years and a
strong recommendation to move forward: risk assessment need to be done by Vietnam with great
assistance from international experts. Risk assessment should be applied in a Vietnamese
context and fit with current capacity and laws and regulations. Researchers should feel free to
publish the risk assessment results from a scientific perspective but the risk management and
communication should do a good job in using smartly and correctly the risk assessment results.
For risk management, there are some initiatives from MARD in collaboration with Ministry of
Public Security to control and prevent the violence actions for example level of hazards related
to banned substances in livestock and crops.

Panel 2: Institutional setup of food safety (legal, laws) - Discussants: Le Van Son (Canada
Embassy), Lam Quoc Hung (VFA), facilitated by Shashi (FAO)

Lam Quoc Hung from VFA/MOH gave a perspective on capacity and implementation of risk
based approach and food safety management related to the regulation:
- Risk analysis has set up in Food safety law since 2010
- Food safety management based on 3 elements: i) regulation/law, ii) food safety testing and
    iii) inspection/monitoring
- Of those: management divide by the field of sectors, and administration borders and the
    contents of management are followed by assigned/regulated responsibilities


                                                2
-


-   The system of Vietnamese regulation to set the conditions: from circulars, degree,
    rule/standards, certificates for each actor along the production chain namely producer,
    processor, traders, etc.
-   Food safety issue is complex and dynamic/changing all the time, also the document system
        The technical standards on food safety, adapt, refer to international (CODEX) or
    developed countries (EU, USA, Canada).
-   Question on risk assessment is costly: who will pay, who are interested in, who will be the
    assessors: all those resources need to be accounted for.

Le Van Son from Canada Embassy gave lessons learnt from Canadian system of food safety
regulation and a perspective on the support of Canada to Vietnam on food safety.
- Previously food safety system in Canada was also quite big and complex. It has changed
    recently with the highest aim to protect the health of people/consumers, community health
    protection law.
- All other elements such regulations, risk assessment, HACCP… There is a need to
    emphasize on the accountability, transparency, but always for an update of regulations and
    situation.
- There is a specific body to evaluate and review documents and there is only one agency for
    the food safety inspection (based on the requirement of producers, consumers, and
    administration authorities)
- Principle of food safety in Canada apart from technical issues is moving more to religion and
    trust/belief based and put the role of consumers at a center position.
- The inspection system is unified at all level at state and counties levels (before it was under
    Agriculture Ministry, and trend now also reported to MOH.
- The inspection agency has accountability for both agriculture and health ministries,
    especially for the import products.
- Under an established consultation mechanism, the inspection agency also receives and reacts
    to feedback from consumers or related reports.
- If sanction, the sanction is serious, therefore producers try to comply to avoid sanctions -
        Recent support and project from Canada (CFIA report to) to support FS review for
    Vietnam (with MARD).
- Canada will support Vietnam (phase 1 and 2 of project) on food safety regarding supply
    (producers, processors and distributors), demand (role of consumers, awareness, choice and
    pressure from consumers), and support GoV in regulation set up/policy making, testing and
    risk assessment.
- How to do and enforce sanction on food safety in Vietnam?
- Under TPP, Canada and Vietnam are members therefore there are future opportunities for
    support on food safety.

Other points from discussions:
-What structure of food safety system is suitable for Vietnam? Do we consider single or multiple
agencies, product based, value chain based, or one food safety agency?




                                                3
-


-Maybe for the issue of food safety structure or system: it takes time (years) and under level of
Gov and long run/roadmap. Need to focus on how to enforce the law/regulation and make the
recent system becomes more effective.
-We should think about accountability and transparency, the report of the survey/inspection, e.g.
level of violence, who violate and raise the force/pressure coming from consumers.
-Responsibilities should be clear, including complain mechanism, or inspection/ monitoring of
people, can people ask more detailed questions from yearly report?
 If one or many ministries involved might be another story, as changes may take time. This year
the food safety law is evaluated after 5 years implementation. So, any comments, inputs can
support adjustment and amendment of FS law.
-Regulations/laws need always be revised and updated to suit the real situation (Hung VFA) -
Risk assessment needs to be enhanced and scientific based, avoid to make miscommunication/ or
being a threat to the public, violating companies/firms, or negative effect to economic activities
(Hung VFA)

Panel 3: Formal, informal market - Discussants: Le Viet Nga (MOIT) and Tang Anh Vinh
(DAH), facilitated by Pham Van (IFC)

Ms. Le Viet Nga from MOIT gave an overview on the challenge of market management and
food safety.
- Vietnam has now about 8600 market, 700 supermarket and thousands of household shops to
   distribute agro-fishery products/goods
- Modern outlets provide about 30% of good, but less than 5% is VietGAP, this needs to be
   strengthened through multiplication of the model and enhance traceability and involvement
   of small and medium producers into to chain.
- About 2 million households access to food markets are under the management of provinces
- The informal markets system are still at level 3 (water, environment was not good), under
   commune management
- Quite difficult for authorities to manage markets
- Large/big enterprises have been invested into agriculture and market, eg. VISSAN,
   Vingroup, They seek for the producers groups, and distribute under their own system.
- Such last year, about 5800 cases of food safety violence in trade, using ban substances
Mr. Tang Anh Vinh (DAH) raised the issue on slaughterhouse management.
- To monitor slaughterhouses is a challenge for DAH, more than 30,000 slaughterhouses in
   Vietnam and distributed over approximately 11800 communes
- Veterinary services cannot cover all those slaughterhouses, slaughterhouse or meat
   inspection is under control, even the authorities stamp is not significance for the consumers
   (lack of trust on this)
- Hanoi has 4 big slaughterhouse, but only one is working

The discussion was contributed by Mr Ton That Son Phong from LIFSAP, stating that before
LIFFSAP started, there were about 50,000 slaughterhouses (in 2007), now about 30,000
slaughterhouses in Vietnam, trend is decreasing. The number of small markets or vendors is less


                                                4
-


in the south compared to the north, since in the north more small scale production are located,
however small scale pig producers have also reduced (from 11 millionhousehold to 7 million).
LIFSAP invested to improve markets which have more than 20 stall/shops, veterinary
surveillance, and commune/district authorities are able to fulfill the condition/criteria after
investment. Set up the value chain is key: producers produce under safe condition, and enough
products for markets (e.g vegetable), and are linked to the market. NAFIQAB representative
proposed that if the management of the market is properly done, we can solve all other issues
related to food safety.




                                                5
Panel 4: Prioritization - Discussants cum wrap-up session: Artavazd Hakobyan (WB) and
Pham Duc Phuc (HSPH). Facilitated by Vo Thanh Son (WB)

Artavazd Hakobyan (WB)
- Key priorities need to be paid to the private sectors and to capacity building. Food safety
    standards need to be followed.
- Violations can come from lack of knowledge in production, and other can be the criminal
    under specific condition (eg. subjective to add harm substances). The criminal act is a high
    concern of the public. However, the police will have to deal with the violation or criminal
    problems.
- More focus on support to produce safe food when the producers don’t know how to do, and
    the role of policy management.
- How to have good and effective policy to help produce better food, and this policy is easy to
    apply. Shaping food policy: Giving more knowledge to producers and other factors
There was a discussion on the need of developing a food safety crisis management plan for
Vietnam. MOH representative Lam Quoc Hung stated that a crisis management plan exists for
managing food poisoning outbreak events but more efforts need to be done for improving
information, communication and management related to outbreak under MOH. The plan at MOH
is to improve the food poisoning outbreak response, to divide the duty for each unit/agency.
Information on food poisoning outbreak need to collaborate to response, eg. poisoning outbreak
(need hospital), contaminated product (need collaborate to other sectors).
Ms. Ngan Giang from FAO recommended to use risk-based approach for priorities identification,
depending on each ministries to have long run plans, in short term, what should we identified to
do. E.g base on proposal from each agencies from different ministries and strengthen the
collaboration among them, utilize the infrastructure capacity, and under regulation/state frame,
which is need to socialize or need support. We have many requirement and exercises.
Ms. Nga from MOIT proposed to focus on most popular food/scale, high risk and value chain
approach:
-   On the scale, the specious experience on market management, if not well manage, can be
    explorer for the price, especially under the sustain market price program, more than 30%
    business, but we need still maintenance for small scale/retailers by support/subside to involve
-   Hand over for the business, GoV only coordinate, guide/direct and support, we can apply in
    big city, then big/medium scale business, support by training, consultation, support for
    capitals, and rental mechanism.
-   Enhance the business/business fair, and inspection/monitoring along value chain and
    certification


The discussion also emphasized the need of technical support and budget to implement the
inspection and monitoring, connection among value chain actors (such as production chain or
market/distribution chain). Also follow the national food safety strategy, 2015-2020 and vision to

                                                 6
2030 to focus risk assessment, management, support value chain production, and renew
production relationship/linkage. Collaborate to police to inspection/finding violation, set up the
suitable communication measure. Finally it was suggested that training risk assessment for public
health/medicine and agriculture students and staff is needed, which will provide human resources
and capacity in risk analysis to implement risk based approach to food safety management.
At the wrap-up, the following points were mentioned:
-   Food safety management has to use a value chain approach
-   Risk based approach will be key for food safety management, therefore capacity building for
    risk analysis implementation is needed
-   Inspection and surveillance need to be improved and invested
-   Lab system are to be equipped
-   More immediate actions for food safety intervention for key and focus on a few key value
    chains.




                                                7
Annex 3: List of people met during the mission

List of people met during the mission 1, 7-15 January 2016


No    Name                      Position                     Institutions                                   Contact
                                                             Regional Animal Health Office No.6 (
                                                             RAHO6 )
  1 Ngo Thanh Long              Vice Director
                                                             521/1 Hoang Van Thu, Ward 4, Tan Binh
                                                             dist., Ho Chi Minh city
  2 Mr Quy                                                   VPH Lab, RAHO6

  3 Mr Hoang                                                 Testing lab, RAHO6

  4 Bui Thi Minh Thu                                         Saigon Coop
                                                             Phat Thanh company, 157-159 Bui Huu
  5 Lam Ba Tai                  Manager
                                                             Nghia, Ward 7, District 5, Ho Chi Minh city
  6 Dang Van Chinh              Director                     Institute of Public Health, Ho Chi Minh city   cdang2004@yahoo.com
                                                             Center for Food Safety and Testing in the
  7 Phan Bich Ha                Head                         South Vietnam , Institute of Public Health,
                                                             Ho Chi Minh city
                                                             Center for Food Safety and Testing in the
  8 Nguyen Duc Thinh            Deputy Head                  South Vietnam , Institute of Public Health,
                                                             Ho Chi Minh city
                                                             Center for Food Safety and Testing in the
  9 Nguyen Do Phuc              Deputy Head                  South Vietnam , Institute of Public Health,    nguyendophuc@yahoo.com
                                                             Ho Chi Minh city

 10                                                          Den Lu wholesale market

 11                                                          Sub-NAFIQAB Hanoi
 12                                                          Sub-DAH Hanoi
 13 Nguyen Van Lam                                           LIFSAP site in Quoc Oai, Hanoi

                                                                     1
No   Name                  Position                      Institutions                                  Contact
14                                                       JICA Veggie farm
15 Lam Quoc Hung           Head of division              Vietnam Food Administration, MOH              hungdichte@yahoo.com
                           Deputy Head, Division of
16 Mr Nam                  Legal regulation and          Vietnam Food Administration, MOH
                           Integration
                           Division of Legal
17 Ms. Nhan                                              Vietnam Food Administration, MOH
                           regulation and Integration
                           Division of Testing and
18 Ms. Tam                                               Vietnam Food Administration, MOH
                           Standard
                                                         National Agro Forestry Fisheries Quality
19 Nguyen Nhu Tiep         DG                            Assurance Department (NAFIQAD) -
                                                         MARD
                                                         National Agro Forestry Fisheries Quality
20 Nguyen Van Thuan        Head of Division              Assurance Department (NAFIQAD) -              vanthuan.nafi@mard.gov.vn
                                                         MARD
                                                         National Agro Forestry Fisheries Quality
                           Division of Planning and
21 Ms. Hong                                              Assurance Department (NAFIQAD) -
                           International Collaboration
                                                         MARD
                                                         ICD MARD
22 Mr Minh                 DDG
                                                         SPS
                                                         Viet Nam SPS Office
                                                         International Cooperation Department,
     Mr. Tran Viet Cuong   Deputy Director                                                             cuongtv.htqt@mard.gov.vn or
23                                                       Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
                                                                                                       tranvietcuongsps@gmail.com
                                                         Development

                                                         Division of Food safety and Environment
24 Vuong Truong Giang      Head of Division              Management, Plant Protection Department,      giangppd@ymail.com
                                                         MARD
                                                         Division of Planning and International
25 Ms. Dung                                              Collaboration, Plant Protection Department,
                                                         MARD
                                                         Technical and Planning Office, Agricultural
26 Mr. Pham Viet Anh       Deputy Head                   Project Management Board (APMB) under
                                                         MARD
     Mr. Nguyen Xuan Anh
27                         Deputy Director               LIFSAP PCU, APMB under MARD
     Tuan

                                                                 2
No   Name                 Position               Institutions                             Contact
28 Ms. Nguyen Thi Thao    Deputy Head            Economic Office, Nam Tu Liem District
29 Ms. Nguyen Thi Nhung   Staff                  Economic Office, Nam Tu Liem District
                                                 Fresh rice noodle Club of Phu Do Craft
30 Mr. Nguyen Van Hoa     Chairman
                                                 Village
                                                 Fresh rice noodle Club of Phu Do Craft
31 Mr. Ngo Van Hung       Vice Chairman
                                                 Village
                                                 Fresh rice noodle Club of Phu Do Craft
32 Mr. Nguyen Thanh Nam   Member
                                                 Village
                                                 Fresh rice noodle Club of Phu Do Craft
33 Mr. Ngo Manh Ngoc      Member
                                                 Village
                          Technical
34 Ms. Le Thi Thu Ha                             Hanoi LIFSAP PPMU
                          Assistant/Consultant
                                                 Tran Ngoc Men Noodle Factory at Hamlet
35 Mr. Tran Ngoc Men      Owner                  4, Phu Do Ward, Nam Tu Liem District,
                                                 Hanoi
                                                 Chien Thom Noodle Factory at Hamlet 3,
36 Ms. Nguyen Thi Thom    Owner                  Phu Do Ward, Nam Tu Liem District,
                                                 Hanoi
                                                 International Cooperation Division,
37 Duong Xuan Dieu
                                                 Ministry of International and Trade
38 Nguyen Quy Duong                              Plant Protection Department, MARD
39 Nguyen The Hinh        Vice directors         Agricultural Projects Management Board
40 Le Thi Ngoc Bich       Translator             Translator
                                                 Scientific and technology department,
41 Nguyen Van Ha          Officer
                                                 MARD
42 Do Thi Quy             Officer
                                                 Veterinary Public Health Department,
43 Huynh Thi Thanh Binh   Head
                                                 DAH, MARD
                                                 International Cooperation Division,
44 Le Minh Tuan           Specialist
                                                 MARD
                                                 International Cooperation Division,
45 Chu Van Chuong         Vice head
                                                 MARD
46 Vu Thi Lien Huong      Officer                Department of Livestock Production


                                                         3
No    Name                      Position                 Institutions                             Contact
 47 Dinh Tuong Lan              Staff                    CIRAD
 48 Jong Ha Bae                 Representative           FAO representative
 49 Vu Van Tam                  Vice Minister            MARD
 50 Nguyen Cong Hien            Minister officer         Minister office, MARD
                                                         International corporation division,
 51 Le Hong Lam
                                                         Government office
                                                         International corporation division,
 52 Ho Anh Tai
                                                         Government office
 53 Pham Viet Anh               Vice head                Agricultural Projects Management Board
 54 Ton That Son Phong          Director                 LIFSAP PCU
 55 Truc                                                 LIFSAP PCU
 56 Long                                                 LIFSAP PCU
 57 Tran Ngoc Huyen                                      LIFSAP PCU
 58 Nguyen Van Quyet                                     Agricultural Projects Management Board
 59 Pham Thi Lan Huong                                   LIFSAP PCU
 60 Dang Quang Tien                                      LIFSAP PCU
 61 Dam Thi Bich Ngoc                                    LIFSAP PCU
 62 Ta Viet Hoang                                        LIFSAP PCU
 63 Hoang Thi Lien                                       LIFSAP PCU


List of people met during the mission 2, 4-13 May 2016

No    Name                      Position                 Institutions                             Contact

  1                             DDG technique            Aquatex Ben Tre

  2                             DDG marketing            Aquatex Ben Tre

  5 Nguyen Trung Anh            R&D Director             Pan Group

                                                                 4
No   Name               Position             Institutions                          Contact
 6                      CEO                  Fresh studio
     Lê Thị Thu Hường   Senior Agriculture
 7                                           Fresh studio
                        Consultant
 8 Gabor Fluit          CEO                  De Heus LLC
 9                      Director             Sub-VFA HCM city

10 Mai                  Vice director        Sub-VFA HCM city

11                                           DARD HCM city – Sub NAFIQAD
12                                           DARD HCM city – Sub PPD
13                                           DARD HCM city – Livestock division
14                                           Vietnam Customs in Ho Chi Minh City
15                                           DARD HCM city
                                             Mega Market (Formerly Metro Cash
16 Thom
                                             and Carry Viet Nam)
17 Huynh Minh Viet      CEO                  BioSpring
18 Tuong                DDG                  DABACO
19                                           DABACO
20 Le Ba Lich           President            Feed Association




                                                     5
   Annex 4: Matrix of laws, decrees, decisions and circulars relevant to food safety management by MARD
Title              of Description/Scope                   Objectives                                      Date      Enacted/   Responsible
Law/Number/Year                                                                                           Effectivity          Agency/Institution
Law on Food Safety    Provides     for    rights   and    1. To elaborate strategies and master plans June 17, 2010/July       • Ministry of Health
No. 55/2010/QH 12     obligations of organizations and    on food safety assurance, regarding the 1, 2011.                     • Ministry of Agriculture
                      individuals in assuring food        planning of zones for safe food production                             and               Rural
                      safety: conditions for assuring     according to the food supply chain as a                                Development
                      safety of foods and food            priority key task.                                                   • Ministry of Industry
                      production, trading, import and     2. To use state resources and other                                    and Trade
                      export; food advertisement and      resources to invest in scientific research and                       • People's Committees
                      labeling; food testing; food        technological application to serve food                                at all levels
                      safety risk analysis: prevention,   safety risk analysis; to build new laboratories                      • Ministry             of
                                                                                                                                 Information         and
                      stopping and remedying of food      and upgrade some existing ones up to
                                                                                                                                 Communications
                      safety incidents; food safety       regional or international standards; to raise
                                                                                                                               • Ministry of Education
                      information, education and          the capacity of existing analysis laboratories;                        and Training
                      communication;               and    to support investment in building zones
                      responsibilities     for    state   producing safe food materials, wholesale
                      management of food safety.          markets for farm produce and food, and
                                                          industrial-scale      cattle    and     poultry
                                                          slaughterhouses.
                                                          3. To encourage food producers and traders
                                                          to renew technologies and expand their
                                                          production: to produce high-quality and safe
                                                          food; to fortify food with essential
                                                          micronutrients: to build their brands and
                                                          develop their safe food supply systems.
                                                          4. To establish a legal framework and realize
                                                          a roadmap for compulsory application of


                                                                           1
Title           of Description/Scope                Objectives                               Date      Enacted/ Responsible
Law/Number/Year                                                                              Effectivity        Agency/Institution
                                                   good manufacturing practices (GMP), good
                                                   agricultural practices (GAP), good hygiene
                                                   practices (GHP) and hazard analysis and
                                                   critical control points (HACCP) and other
                                                   advanced food safety management systems
                                                   in food production and trading.
                                                   5. To undertake international cooperation,
                                                   step up the conclusion of treaties and
                                                   international agreements on accreditation
                                                   and mutual recognition in the field of food.
                                                   6. To promptly commend and reward
                                                   organizations and individuals that produce
                                                   or trade in safe foods.
                                                   7. To encourage and create conditions for
                                                   domestic         societies,     associations,
                                                   organizations and individuals and foreign
                                                   organizations and individuals to invest or
                                                   participate in the elaboration of standards,
                                                   technical regulations and testing of food
                                                   safety.
                                                   8. To increase investment in and diversify
                                                   forms and methods of public information
                                                   and education to raise public awareness
                                                   about the consumption of safe food, sense
                                                   of responsibility and business ethics of food
                                                   producers and traders towards the
                                                   community.
Law on Standards and Provides for the formulation, 1. To attach importance to investment in June            29, • Ministry of Science
Technical Regulations announcement and application building material-technical foundations and 2006/January 1,    and Technology

                                                                   2
Title            of Description/Scope                  Objectives                                   Date      Enacted/ Responsible
Law/Number/Year                                                                                     Effectivity         Agency/Institution
NO. 68/2006/QH11    of standards; the formulation,     training human resources for the state 2007                     • Ministries           and
                    promulgation and application of    management of activities in the domain of                         ministerial-level
                    technical regulations; and the     standard and the domain of technical                              agencies
                    assessment of conformity with      regulation.                                                     • Provincial/municipal
                    standards     and      technical   2. To support and promote scientific                              People's Committees
                    regulations                        research and application and technological                      • Production           and
                                                       development in service of activities in the                       business   organizations
                                                                                                                         and individuals
                                                       domain of standard and the domain of
                                                                                                                       • Associations         and
                                                       technical regulation.
                                                                                                                         unions
                                                       3. To encourage domestic and foreign
                                                       organizations and individuals as well as
                                                       overseas Vietnamese to participate in
                                                       formulating and applying standards and
                                                       technical regulations, invest in developing
                                                       activities in the domain of standard and the
                                                       domain of technical regulation in Vietnam,
                                                       and training in standard and technical
                                                       regulation knowledge for econo-technical
                                                       branches.
Law on Product and Provides for the rights and         1. To encourage organizations and November                  21, • Ministry of Science and
Goods Quality      obligations of organizations and    individuals to formulate and apply advanced 2007/July 1, 2008.    Technology
NO. 05/2007/QH12   individuals producing or trading    standards to products and goods as well as                      • Line ministries
                   in products or goods as well as     the management and administration of                            • Peoples Committees at
                   organizations and individuals       production and business.                                          all levels
                   conducting activities related to    2. To formulate national programs on raising
                   product and goods quality; and      the        productivity,     quality    and
                   the management of product           competitiveness of products and goods.
                   and goods quality; includes         3. To invest in and develop the testing
                   awarding of national prizes and     system to meet the requirements of

                                                                       3
Title           of Description/Scope                 Objectives                                       Date      Enacted/ Responsible
Law/Number/Year                                                                                       Effectivity        Agency/Institution
                   prizes awarded by organizations   production, business and state control of
                   or individuals for good quality   product and goods quality.
                   products                          4. To enhance training and retraining of
                                                     human resources for product and goods
                                                     quality control.
                                                     5. To propagate and disseminate policies
                                                     and laws on product and goods quality; to
                                                     form a sense of producing and trading in
                                                     quality products and goods for consumers’
                                                     interest, which save energy and are
                                                     environment-friendly; to raise social
                                                     awareness about consumption and build
                                                     civilized consumption habits.
                                                     6. To encourage and create conditions for
                                                     domestic and foreign organizations and
                                                     individuals to invest and participate in
                                                     testing, inspecting, verifying and certifying
                                                     product and goods quality.
                                                     7. To expand cooperation with other
                                                     nations,        territories,    international
                                                     organizations, regional organizations as well
                                                     as foreign organizations and individuals in
                                                     activities related to product and goods
                                                     quality; to enhance the conclusion of
                                                     treaties and agreements between Vietnam
                                                     and       other      countries,   territories,
                                                     international or regional organizations on
                                                     mutual recognition of conformity evaluation
                                                     results;     to     encourage    Vietnamese

                                                                      4
Title           of Description/Scope                     Objectives                                  Date      Enacted/ Responsible
Law/Number/Year                                                                                      Effectivity        Agency/Institution
                                                         conformity evaluation organizations to sign
                                                         agreements on recognition of conformity
                                                         evaluation results given by corresponding
                                                         organizations of other countries or
                                                         territories so as to facilitate the
                                                         development of trade between Vietnam and
                                                         those countries or territories.
Law on Inspection    Provides for the organization       1. To detect loopholes in management November            15, • The        Government
No. 56/2010/QH12     and     activities   of     state      mechanisms, policies and laws and 2010/July 1, 2011.        Inspectorate
                     inspection       and    people's       recommend remedies to competent state                     • Inspectorates         of
                     inspection, including specialized      agencies                                                    ministries           and
                     inspection                                                                                         ministerial-level
                                                         2. To prevent, detect and handle law                           agencies
                                                            violations; assist agencies, organizations                • Inspectorates         of
                                                            and individuals in properly observing law;                  provinces            and
                                                            bringing into play positive factors;                        centrally run cities
                                                            contribute to raising the effect and                      • Inspectorates         of
                                                            effectiveness of state management                           provincial-level
                                                            activities;                                                 departments
                                                                                                                      • Inspectorates of rural
                                                                                                                        districts,         urban
                                                         3. To protect the interests of the State and                   districts,  towns    and
                                                            the rights and legitimate interests of                      provincial cities
                                                            agencies, organizations and individuals.                  • Agencies assigned to
                                                                                                                        perform              the
                                                                                                                        specialized inspection
                                                                                                                        function
Law on Governmental Provides for the position and        To regulate the organizational structure, December       25, • The Cabinet
Organization        functions of the Government,         responsibilities, powers and working regime 2001/January 7, • Prime Minister
No.32/2001/QH10     Duties and powers of the             of the Government (Cabinet) and its                          • Deputy Prime Minister

                                                                         5
Title           of Description/Scope              Objectives       Date      Enacted/ Responsible
Law/Number/Year                                                    Effectivity        Agency/Institution
                   Government,     Duties    and members           2002               • Ministers and Heads
                   powers of the Prime Minister,                                        of       Ministry-level
                   Duties and powers of Ministers                                       agencies as members
                   and Heads of Ministry-level                                          of the Cabinet
                   agencies, Working regime of
                   the Government.




                                                               6
Decrees
April 18, 2012     Decree No. 36/2012/ND-CP             Defining the functions, tasks and organizational structures of Ministries and
                                                        Ministerial-Level agencies
April 25, 2012     Decree No. 38/2012/ND-CP             Detailing implementation of a number of Articles of the Food Safety Law 2010

Nov 14, 2013       Decree                               Sanction of administrative violations on food safety
                   No.178/2013/ND-CP
Nov 26, 2013       Decree No. 199/2013/ND-CP            Defining the functions, tasks, powers, and organizational structure of MARD

Circulars and Decisions
Dec 18, 2011         PM Decision No.2406                Issuing the list of national target programs 2012-2015; includes target program
                                                        on food safety and hygiene

January 04, 2012   PM Decision No.: 20/QD-TTg           Approval of the National Strategy for Food Safety in the period of 2011-2020
                                                        and a Vision toward 2030

April 9, 2014      MOH-MARD      Joint  Circular   No. Allocation of tasks and cooperation among regulatory agencies in food safety
                   13/2014/TTLT-BYT-BNNPTNT-BCT        management

Oct 27, 2014       MOH-MARD-MOIT Joint Circular No. Guidance on the labeling of goods for foods, food additives, and packaged food
                   34/2014/TTLT-BYT-BNNPTNT-BCT     processing aids

March 25, 2015     MARD-MHA      Joint Circular    No. Instructions on functions, duties, power, and organizational structure of agencies
                   14/2015/TTLT-BNNPTNT-BNV            specialized in agriculture and rural development under People’s Committees at
                                                       district and provincial levels

April 4, 2015      MARD Decision No. 670/QD-BNN-TCCB    defining functions, responsibilties, powers, and organizational structure of the
                                                        NAFIQAD

April 17, 2015     MARD Decision No. 1290/QD-BNN- assigning and decentralizing monitoring and inspection of food safety for
                   TCCB                           agricultural, forestry and fishery products within authority of MARD


                                                                 7
Others listed by NAFIQAD
• PM Decision No 48/2005/QĐ-Ttg on establishment of National Steering Committee on food hygiene & safety
• PM Decision No 01/2012/QĐ-Ttg on supporting application of GAP in agriculture production
• PM Decree 210/2013/ND-CP, Decision No 62/2013/QĐ-Ttg encouraging linkage between agriculture production and distribution
• Relevant government projects for strengthening food safety communication; enhancing food safety inspection; development of safe food
  supply chain; improving food hygiene & safety in slaughtering and distribution
• Food safety criteria and limits (biological tolerances and chemical MRLs)
• Hygiene and safety conditions for food production and distribution ( codes of practices)
• System and procedures for food safety surveillance, inspection and control of locally produced and imported foods
• National Food standards produced by line Ministries and published by Ministry of Science and Technology
• Producer/trader standards: Private standards




                                                                  8
Annex 5a Food safety governing system in Vietnam
                    Ministry of Agriculture and                               Ministry of Industry                    Ministry of Health
                            Rural Development                                     and Trade

          Plant protection                        Dept. of Animal Health                     Science and Technology
            Department                                                                             Department
                                                       Livestock Production                        Market
       Department of Quality                                                                                             Vietnam Food
                                                           Department                       ManagementDepartment         Administration
        Management Agro-                                AFF Processing and
        forestry & Fisheries                           Trading Department                        Domestic market
                                                                                                   Department
       Directorate of Fishery                     Directorate of Forestry




                                                                              Department of Industry and
                                      DARD                                             Trade                           Department of Health


        Crop Production Div.                     Livestock Production Div.

           Technical Div.                               Aquaculture Div.


                                                                               Market Management
     Aminal Health Sub-        Plant Protection Sub-         NAFI-Sub. Dept                                           Food Safety Sub-Dept.
           Dept.                      Dept.                                           Sub-Dept.

                                                                                                                           Health Div.
                 District Economics/Agriculture Division                       Market Management
                                                                                     Teams
                                                                                                                         Health Station
     District Veterinary         District Plant
           station             protection station

                                Local agricultural
                                   extension
Annex 5b Decentralization of MARD food safety responsibilities
through province and district level
Area                              Central Level                    Local Level

Agro-food with plant origin

Crop production (including pre-   Crop Production Department       Provincial Plant Protection Sub-
processing at crop production     (CPD)                            Departments and Provincial Crop
entities)                                                          Production Sub- Department.
                                  Plant Protection Department
                                  (PPD)

Independent primary processing    Department of Processing and     Provincial Agro-Forestry-
and processing                    Trading Agricultural, Forestry   Fisheries Quality Assurance Sub-
                                  and Aquatic Products and Salt    Departments (Provincial Sub-
                                                                   NAFIQAD)

Distribution and consumption      NAFIQAD                          Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
(wholesale markets, auction
markets, specialized trading
entities, independent transport
vehicles)

Import and export                 PPD                              Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
                                  NAFIQAD

Agri-food with animal origin (except for fishery products)

Livestock production              Livestock Production             Animal Health Sub-Department
                                  Department                       and Provincial Livestock
                                                                   Production.

Slaughtering, primary             Animal Health Department         Provincial Animal Health Sub-
processing                                                         Department.

Processing (grilled chopped       NAFIQAD                          Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
ham, meat, canned meat,
groceries, backed ham, salt-
curing meat)

Distribution and consumption      Animal Health Department         Animal Health Sub-Department;
(wholesale markets, auction                                        Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
                                  NAFIQAD
markets, specialized trading
entities, independent transport
vehicles)

Import and export                 Animal Health Department         Provincial Animal Health Sub-


                                               1
                                       NAFIQAD                          Department and Provincial
                                                                        Livestock Production.

Fishery foodstuff

Aquaculture                            Directorate of Fisheries         Sub-Department of Fisheries

Capturing                              Directorate of Fisheries         Sub-Department of Fisheries

Procurement, primary                   NAFIQAD                          Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
processing, processing
(including processed fish boat),
independent cold stores

Distribution and consumption           NAFIQAD                          Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
(wholesale markets, auction
markets, specialized trading
entities, independent transport
vehicles)

Import and export                      Animal Health Department         Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
                                       NAFIQAD

White salt

Production, primary processing,        Department of Processing and     Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
processing, packing, domestic          Trading Agricultural, Forestry
consumption, import and export         and Aquatic Products and Salt

Mixed products (plant, animal, aquatic), ice producers, other products under management of
MARD and MOIT as regulated in Inter-Ministerial Circular 13/2014/TT-BYT-BNNPTNT-BCT.

Primary processing, processing          NAFIQAD                         Provincial Sub-NAFIQAD
cold stores, packing material
producers linked with
agricultural, forestry and aquatic
producers, circulation,
consumption, import and export;
ice for storage purpose,
processing of agricultural, forestry
and aquatic products.

NOTE: Fishery Division and Inspection Division of DARD will be in charge if the province does not have
Sub-Department of Fisheries in accordance with DARD Director




                                                     2
Annex 6 Further details on organizational structure of food safety
management, inspection under MARD

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development manage food safety in initial production of all
the food chains and all stages from preliminary processing, processing, storage, transportation
import and export and trading of the nine food chains under three groups of crops, livestock and
fisheries. With the current broad-scale management, MARD is also developing a huge food
safety management system, with 6 Departments and 2 General Departments at central level and
the vertical industry system under the Ministry of Agriculture consists of 8 local units (see
Figure below: MARD’s organizational structure on food safety management).
Specifically MARD assigns the National Agro-Forestry-Fisheries Quality Assurance Department
(NAFIQAD) as the coordination agency in organizing the implementation of legislation on
quality and safety of agro-forestry-fishery products within MARD’s authority1. MARD also
assigns seven Departments with the monitoring and inspection of agricultural, forestry and
fishery food products authority2... Table 1 shows the assignments of Departments within MARD
and province and district agencies.
This type of organizational structure is regarded as having horizontal lines of responsibilities. It
divides the ministry’s responsibilities into line departments with specified mandates for food
sectors and associated programs including food safety. The central level has responsibility of
issuing food safety related legal documents and the local level has the role of implementation.
There is not inconsistency in responsibility assignment between central and local agencies.
Furthermore, the responsibility assignment of this activity at the local level is not really
consistent between provinces. In some provinces, the direction and monitoring of production
activities concentrate in only one unit to take responsibility. The existing institutional structure
on vegetable, fruit and meat value chains shows that the current assignment is not separated
between the food safety management and the risk assessment. As the assignment described in
table 1, the plant protection department covers the responsibility of both risk management of
chemical production inputs and risk assessment under the area of residue control in vegetable
and fruits. These two functions are undertaken by one agency. At the local level, these activities
are also implemented by only one agency. It can be assumed that the effectiveness of these
activities is not achieved as its expected objectives. Then, food safety issues have not yet solved
completely.
There are many agencies and Departments in MARD undertaking inspection services that
results in a poor capacity to communicate, coordinate and integrate between departments.
There is not have clear lines of vertical accountability within MARD for ensuring food safety
across the different departments/ sectors, and not be consistent means of assessment risk
across the food safety system. It is recommended that MARD consider in reviewing the number
of agencies and Departments in MARD undertaking inspection services. Where feasible,
agreements should be reached to ensure professional alignment in training so that inspections
and audits are carried out to the same standard and level of proficiency. This would mean that
any inspection / audit done by one Department can meet the needs of all.




1Decision   No. 670/QD-BNN-TCCB issued on April 4, 2015
2Decision   1290/QD-BNN-TCCB issued on 17 April 2015

                                                          1
   Figure: MARD’s organizational structure on food safety management

                                                                    Minister of Agriculture and Rural
                                                                              Development


                                                                   Food safety Steering Committee
                                                                        (Standing agency: NAFIQAD)


Directorate    Crop Production    Plant Protection          Animal               Livestock                                Directorate      AFF and salt processing
                                                                                                         NAFIQAD
ofForestry          Dept.              Dept.              Health Dept.        Production Dept.                             of Fishery         & Trading Dept.

              3 Rep. agencies &   9 Regional Sub-         7 regional AH       2 Rep. agencies &          7 regional       Rep. Office in   Rep. Office in HCMC & 1
                  1 center        Dept & 9 centers        agencies & 5            1 center              centers & 2          HCMC                   center
                                                             centers                                      agencies

                                                     Department of Agriculture and Rural Development


                                              Livestock Production Div.                     Crop Production Div.

                                                     Aquaculture Div.                          Technical Div.


                                     Animal health Sub-Dept.              Sub-NAFIQAD            Plant Protection Sub-Dept.

                                            Vet station            Agriculture Div-Fishery            Plant Protection
                                                                         QC section                       Station

                                          Communal Vet                    QC collaborator           Communal PP officer

                                                                              2
Annex 6b Additional material on surveillance and monitoring
National plan of rapid detection system for food safety
In 2013, the Prime Minister approved Decision No. 518/QĐ -Ttg to establish rapid alert systems and risk analysis of
food safety in Vietnam. The overall objective is to develop adequate capacity to carry out rapid processing of
information on food safety and foodborne disease outbreaks thus contributing to enhanced food safety and public
health. The specific objectives are to:
      develop and organize the operation of the rapid alert system for food safety in Vietnam including the
         national, ministry, province and local levels;
      improve the quality of information required for the operation of rapid alert systems and risk analysis of
         food safety in Vietnam; and
      analyse the risk of food safety for some common food groups in Vietnam.

Under this decision, a warning centre point was to be established at VFA, MOH to receive and process information
and provide warnings about foodborne disease outbreaks at the national level. The information would be received
from Alert Level 1 and Alert Level 2 points as shown below:

         Level 1 warning points organized at each ministry and province and include VFA (MOH), NAFIQAD
         (MARD), Department of Science and Technology (MOIT) and provincial VFA.

         Level 2 warning points established in the relevant units under the ministries, provinces and the focal point
         related to the work of ensuring food safety, including:
               Units of the ministries: inspection, monitoring, registration of product certification, specialized
                  institutes, testing centres, food safety zones and state inspection agencies on food imports
               Provincial VFA, Provincial Centre for Preventive Medicine and Centre for Food Safety Testing
                  which would ensure food safety in the provinces
               Enterprise production, large-scale food businesses, food safety associations and the Association
                  of Standardization and Consumer Protection



Food safety surveillance and monitoring in Ho Chi Minh City
Ho Chi Minh City has around 59,000 food establishments (food processors, food-related businesses, traders and
restaurants); this is a challenge for the city to manage food safety and conduct surveillance. The city has applied
yearly active food safety surveillance, both periodic and surprise surveillance.

From 2011 to 2015, a total of 4,044 samples were tested from periodic surveillances and 1428 samples from
surprise surveillances. Biological (E. coli, coliforms and Pseudomonas aeruginosa), chemical (sodium benzoate,
potassium sorbate, borax, cyclamate, 2-ethylhexy phthalate, formol and methanol) and physical hazards were
tested in roast pork, ice, rice noodles, fried oil, wine, soft drinks and bottled water. For periodical food safety
surveillance, 57.8% of the tests were for biological hazards and 42.1% for physio-chemical hazards. From 2011 to
2015, the average percentages of samples not meeting the standards for biological and physio-chemical criteria
were 39.6% (34.4–43.4) and 12.3% (5.6–23.1), respectively. The highest percentage of samples not meeting
biological standards was 57.2% (for Pseudomonas aeruginosa), followed by coliforms (44.8%) and E. coli (19.5%),
and 9.5% of samples did not meet the chemical standard for borax.

For surprise active food safety surveillance carried out from 2011 to 2015, an average of 25.6% of samples (19.7–
35.3) did not meet the standard requirement. Some of the failed samples were related to 2-ethylhexy phthalate
(3/18 samples tested positive in syrup, jelly, milk tea, fruit jelly, fruit juice) or cyclamate, saccharin and lead (in

                                                           1
jam). After identifying the cases of food adulteration, the sub-VFA of Ho Chi Minh City informed the People’s
Committee for sanction and management.

Based on the findings from surveillance and inspections, the city has formed a steering committee (including sub-
MOIT and sub-VFA) to control, monitor and solve the food safety violation issues. The city also focuses on
strengthening communication with the food establishments, food businesses and consumers and educating them
on selection of raw food and food safety practices. There is a need to increase periodic active surveillance sampling
and inspection within the city. It is also a need to issue uniform and clear regulations and guidelines for monitoring
and inspecting food businesses, including their hygienic conditions. The government may consider providing
increased budgets to increase sample size and food types under the food safety surveillance activities.

As one of the solutions to improve food safety surveillance, Ho Chi Minh City is developing a plan to merge all the
food safety bodies in the city (from health, agriculture, trade and industry sector) into a single organization under
the Ho Chi Minh City People’s Committee which will manage food safety. It is likely that the sub-VFA of Ho Chi
Minh City will lead this single organization. If this materializes, it will be the first example of Vietnam in re-
structuring the food safety management model and could be replicated in other provinces.




                                                          2
Annex 7 Further details on inspection for domestic vs.
import/export market inspection frequencies and violations

(a) Inspection production for domestic markets:
For implementing food safety inspection of Agriculture production, the central level (MARD)
has responsibility of issuing legal documents and the local level has the role of implementation.
The success of domestic management and improvement in food safety outcomes is largely
dependent on the capacity of local levels (province, district and commune local government).
Implementation of inspection of fresh fruits, vegetables and meat production focus on the
production chain and the supply to the market to meet the consumers’ demand. For example,
vegetables and fruits are harvested, packed and sold directly in the market or wholesale
markets through distribution channels at key markets, supermarkets, or retailed at markets.
Together with Circular No. 14/2011/TT-BNNPTNT for agriculture production management,
two legal instruments are identified as being relevant to food safety within the national food
supply chain. They are the Ministry of Health’s (MOH) Decision No. 4196/1999/QĐ 29/12/1999
on Food Safety in Production Conditions and the Ministry of Industry and Trade’s (MOIT)
Circular No. 45/2012/TT-BCT on Food Safety for Trading (distribution) Food Products.
    Monitor on VietGAP, GAPs, GMP, HACCP, Hygienic condition compliance
Producers, enterprises undertake self mornitoring and audit on GAPs, HACCP, technical
regulations compliance. Provincial Plant Protection Sub-Department, Provincial Animal Health
Sub-Department assigned by DARD conduct external mornitoring, audits on GAPs, HACCP,
technical regulations compliance. The quality assurance, quality control staff from
cooperativies, production farms, processing establishments, undertake self audit by using
monitoring checklists of GAPs, HACCP.
    Implementation of investigation/ assessment food safety
The provincial inspection agencies assigned by DARD undertake investigation/ assessment of
food safety producction conditions and for compliance to GAP and technical regulation of
production farms, cooperatives, enterprises and markets. The investigation/ assessment food
safety procedures are based on regulations as prescribed in Circular No. 14/2011/TT-
BNNPTNT. Investigation/ assessment food safety tools including inspection checklists are laid
down in Appendix of Circular No. 14/2011/TT-BNNPTNT. The results of investigation/
assessment food safety investigation identify and categorize agriculture production farms,
cooperatives, enterprises and distributors on level of food safety and hygiene condition. There
have followed up activities based on investigation, assessment results as:
- For the first violation, non-compliance: Give warning, request the establishment to
  collaborate with sampling officer to conduct traceability, investigate the cause, and
  implement corrective action. The establishment is subject to the next sampling.
- In case of reoccurrence of violation: Inform inspection agency to conduct investigation at site,
  re-sampling (when necessary) and settle the violation according the regulations if the testing
  result of the re-sampling is positive.
- The punishment applied to violated establishment follows regulations as specified in Circular
  No. 14/2011/TT-BNNPTNT and Decree No. 91/2012/ND-CP on the penalties for
  administrative violations of food safety.
MARD’s report on results of one year target program food safety in Agriculture sector showed
that by February, 2016 all 63 provinces, cities have for applied Circular No. 14/2011/TT-
BNNPTNT to investigate, assess food safety production condition for producers, enterprises,
establishments. There is an increase rate of agriculture production and trading enterprises that

                                                1
meet requirement of food safety production conditions; 83% by February 2016 in compared
with 67% in September 2015. There is 27, 8% grade C of agriculture production and trading
enterprises that has upgraded to grade A, B.
    Implementation of official inspection
An inspection plan is planned based on surveillance sampling results, and investigation
resulting on categorization result on food safety and hygiene condition in fresh vegetable
production farms and distributors according to Circular No. 14/2011/TT-BNNPTN. The
inspection focuses on violated production farms, cooperatives, enterprises and distributors.
Unscheduled inspection to establishments are conducted when warning of food safety risks are
addressed through sample testing results or based on the risk assessment when the risk is
reflected from market, media, press, hospital, consumers.
Follow-up of official inspection results:
- Traceability, warning and violation punishment, follow-up of corrective action taken by
  farm/production and trading establishments are conducted.
- If the re-occurrence of violation is found, the punishment will be applied according to
  existing regulation by inspection agency.
- For a product batch, if testing results of product sample show contamination, residues of
  chemicals that are excessive MRLs, banned to use, out of the approved list and affect
  seriously to consumers’ health, the product will be subject to food safety risk warning, re-
  sampling: number of sample will be increased to monitor and at the same time to conduct the
  examination of food safety and hygiene conditions of producers and distributors premise.
- List of good performance establishments or the establishments which regularly violate food
  safety requirements is reviewed to announce on mass media.
In 2015, Department of Plant Protection carried out official inspection trips to 17 pesticide
production and distribution outlets and 46 pesticides samples were taken for testing pesticide
compound quality. The testing result showed that there are 7 samples out of 46 samples had
less active ingredient than on the label and 1 pesticide production establishment was incorrect
labeling pesticide products. Department of Crop Production organized inspection and sampling
for 44 vegetables producers (farms, cooperatives, enterprises) in 18 provinces. Theyfound 8/50
vegetables samples had pesticides residues above the MRL.
    Current food safety inspection for domestic consumption – Related issues
The laws, regulations and standards have not been well addressed for the domestic producers,
processors and retailers. At field level, agriculture production are not properly monitored and
audited on good practices and technical regulation compliances by both sides as self-audit by
cooperatives, enterprises and external monitor and audit by government authorities. It is rare
that a food business controls every step from primary production, through processing and
manufacture to retail and consumption. The monitoring activities are now implemented under
the local program and beyond the request of producer and distributor. Therefore, most of
production activities are not fully monitored. Especially, almost small farmers are not applying
any good practices, so it is difficult to monitor safe food production activities.
Almost agriculture products are not ensured as safe products. Inspection, enforcement imposes
only to food production cooperatives, enterprises, while, small farmers are not subjected to the
technical regulations. For example, QCVN 01-132:2013/BNNPTNT National Technical
Regulation on Fresh Vegetable, Fruit and Tea - Conditions for Ensuring Food Safety in
Production and Packing subjects, apply to enterprises, centralized production facilities,
excluding small producers. Moreover, food safety inspection does not focus on safe product
outcome. Therefore, about 80% agriculture products selling in traditional markets are not
ensured as safe products.


                                               2
(b) Inspection production for export markets.
This section provides details on type and level of inspection done for exported goods while the
institutional mechanism and responsibilities were describe already under 5.1.4.4. As said the
respective Ministries are responsible for their products groups. The standards used are those of
the importing country. Major exports are fish and fishery products among others.
Types of inspection:
Under the system there are two type of inspection:
(1) Documentary check to check inspection registration against relevant information on food
safety conditions of fishery business operators (FBO) and issue certificate of food quality and
safety (Health Certificate) without onsite inspection and; (2) Onsite inspection and sampling for
analysis: to check inspection registration and conduct on-site inspection and sampling for
analysis.
The level of oversight varies depending on performance of the FBO and is classified under 3
categories as below:
a. Reduced inspection: applied to FBO which meet the following requirements concurrently
during 12 months:
- Being Grade A;
- Not having products found non-compliant with regulations on food safety by inspecting bodies
or competent authorities of importing countries;
- Not being detected non-compliant with food safety conditions by inspecting bodies or other
competent authorities.
b. Normal inspection: applied to satisfactory FBOs (Grade A or B).
c. Tightened inspection: applied to the following FBOs:
- FBO being Grade C but its Certificate of Compliance has not been revoked
- FBO has its products notified as being non-compliant by competent authorities of importing
     countries.

Inspection frequency
An overview on inspection frequency is provided in the table 5.2.3below:

Table 1: Inspection and sampling frequency by group of product
                                          (1) Inspection and sampling frequency


                                                                  Intensified
 Group of products             Common inspection                                         Relaxed
                                                                  inspection
                                                                                        inspection
                            Type A(2)          Type B(2)           Type C(3)
Group of low-risk              1/5               1/3          Every consignment           1/10
products (4)               consignment       consignment                               consignment
Group of high-risk             1/3               1/2                                 1/5 consignment
products (5)               consignment       consignment
Note: (1): Inspection and sampling frequency is determined by each independent production
establishment, the importing market and group of similar product with the same level of food
safety risk.
(2): The last result of food safety conditions classification of the production establishment.
(3): Applied to establishments whose certificate of compliance with food safety regulation is not
revoked?
(4): Group of low-risk products:
- Fish sauce and pickled fish products.
- Fish and other fishery products except group of high-risk products.
(5): Group of high-risk products:

                                                3
- Ready-to-eat fish and fishery products.
- Fish and fishery products with a food safety hazard associated with species:
   + Fish species with natural hazard of biological toxins.
   + Fish species associated with a histamine hazard.
- Fish and fishery products of aquaculture origin.
- Heat-treated fish and fishery products.
(c) Common violations, types of sanctions, implementation, and reporting

In 2013, there were 800 vegetable samples taken under MARD’s surveillance plan. Laboratory
results showed 81 samples out of 800 samples having pesticides residues exceed MRL, which
accounts for 11.6% (table below).


Table 2: Vegetables testing results for pesticides under MARD for 2013
                                      Number of         Number of samples          Percentage of
 SEQ.       Type of vegetables
                                       samples            exceed MRL             samples >MRL(%)
   1      Morning glory                   250                   35                    14.00
   2      Cabbage                          45                    0                    0.00
   3      Green mustard                   205                   12                    5.85
          Tropical leafy
   4                                       50                    5                    10.00
          vegetable
   5      Fruit bean                      250                   29                    11.60
 Total                                    800                   81


Source: (Plan Protection Department 2013)
In 2014, results of laboratory analysis of 350 vegetables, there are 116 samples have pesticides
residues (33.14%), in which 22 samples exceeded MRLs (6.2%). A MARD’s report on results of
one year target program for food safety in Agriculture sector showed that by February, 2016
there are 326 out of 6166 vegetables, fruits were detected pesticides residues > MRLs account
for 5.3%; There are 106 of 5433 fresh meat and processed meat products have chemical
residues, anti-biotic exceeded MRLs (2%); There are 834 out of 5433 meat samples have micro
biological contamination exceeded MRLs (15,4%). For fish products, there are 397/5048 fish
samples have chemical residues, anti-biotic exceeded MRLs (7.9%).
For export, In first quarter of 2015, tracking the European Union Rapid Alert System for Food
and Feed (RASFF) for Vietnamese fruit, vegetable and tea imports into the EU; the banned
fungicide Carbendazim occurs in the alerts, also the MRLs are being exceeded for the fungicide
iprodione in dragon fruit. Vietnamese dragon fruit is now high risk under the EU Food Safety
Agency’s risk management procedures.




                                                4
Annex 8 Fresh fruits, vegetables and meat inspection model

                  FARMS                  Post Harvest / Packaging               Market
WHAT   VietGAP, Global GAP, Baic        1) GMP (HACCP-based),            1) Labels
       GAP, technical regulations       HACCP compliance
                                                                         2) Certificate Number
       compliance
                                        2) Good Hygiene Practices
                                        compliance
                                        3) Technical regulation
                                        (circular, Decision..)
WHO    Inspection Agency:               Inspection Agency:               Inspection Agency:
       1) Department of Plant           1) Department of Plant           1) NAFIQAD and
       Protection                       Protection                       Provincial Sub-
                                                                         NAFIQAD in wholesale
       2) Department of Animal          2) Department of Animal
                                                                         markets.
       Health                           Health
                                                                         2) Ministry of Trade
       3) Provincial Plant              3) Provincial Plant
                                                                         and Industries in wet
       Protection Sub-Department        Protection Sub-Department
                                                                         markets, retail
       (DARD)                           (DARD)
       4) Provincial Animal Health      4) Provincial Animal Health
       Sub-Department                   Sub-Department
HOW    1) Mornitor on VietGAP,          1) HACCP-based controls,         1) Assess/ Investigate
       GAPs compliance                  hygien conditions                food safety and hygien
                                                                         trading enterprises.
       2) Assess/ Investigate food      2) Assess/ Investigate food
       safety producction               safety producction               2) Inspection and
       conditions of productors,        conditions of premary            sampling.
       enterprises                      processing establishments .
       3) Inspection and sampling       3) Inspection and sampling


WHEN   1) At least 2x/year as per       1) At least 2x/year or           1) At least 2x/year as
       Technical Standards              randomly for self-audit          plan or randomly
       2) At least 1x/year as plan or   2) At least 1x/year as plan or   2) Once a year as plan
       non plan                         randomly                         or
                                                                         unannounced/targeted
       3) At least 1x/year as plan      3) Once a year as plan or
                                                                         inspection (at the
       or unannounced/targeted          unannounced/targeted
                                                                         market level) in the
       inspection as needed in cases    inspection as needed in
                                                                         cases of
       of non-compliance follow-up.     cases of non-compliance
                                        follow-up.                       4) Consumer
                                                                         complaints or
                                                                         emergency situation.
Annex 9: Classification of lab testing parameters under MOH in terms of food
and technique used
Group 1: Microbiology
           Analysis of the microbiological target such as total number of microorganisms, coliform, fecal
            coliform, E.coli, Enterobacteriaceae, Staphylococcus aureus, Salmonella, etc. in food, aquatic
            products, agricultural products, drinking water, waste water, ect.to assess the status of sanitation,
            contamination of bacteria in food;
Group 2: Food chemical compositions
    -       Analysis of the macronutrients composition such as protein, lipid, sugar, water, fibers
Group 3: Organic micronutrients
    -       Analysis of the organic micronutrients composition such as Vitamins, amino acids; Food Additives:
            Preservatives, color, tasting and flavoring substance, flavoring, the sweetener; additives enhancing
            digestion, absorption such as soluble fiber, enzymes, DHA, EPA…
Group 4: Inorganic minerals and heavy metals
    -       Analysis of trace elements and heavy metals such as As, Pb, Hg,…
Group 5: Contaminant and Residues
        -   Analysis of pesticide residues of organochlorine compounds, organophosphorus compounds,
            pyrethroid, carbamate group;
        -   Antibiotic residues of chloramphenicol, metabolites of Nitrofurans, Malachites, Fluoroquinolones,
            Sulfonamides, Tetracyclines etc.; Growth hormones such as Clenbuterol, Salbutamol, DES…. ;
            Gibberellic acid, α-NAA, β-NOA,…
        -   Biological Toxins: Aflatoxin, ochartoxin A, DON, zearelanon,… in cereal and milk; 3 -MCPD and in soy
            sauce; Histamin in fish sauce,…
        -   Other chemicals: antioxidant
Group 6: Genetically modified food and food origin
    -       Analysis of genetically modified products (GMO), DNA testing of chickens, cows, goats, sheep.

Group 7: Food production environment
    -       Environmental indicators of food establishment: Analysis and evaluation of environmental indicators
            of water, wastewater, air quality, lighting, noise and etc.
Annex 10: Overview on samples analyzed by year at NIFC (2014-2015) in Ha
Noi and IPH in Ho Chi Minh city 2011-2015)

On the public health side, two laboratories (NIFC in Ha Noi and the Institute of Public Health [IPH] in
Ho Chi Minh City) analysed a large number of samples. The NIFC laboratory analysed 15,000 samples
in 2014 and 18,000 in 2015. Microbial analyses accounted for about 20% (in 2014, chemical and
microbial analysis of 56,880 and 15,120 samples, respectively and in 2016, chemical and microbial
analysis of 65,727 and 17,665 samples, respectively). At IPH, the number of analyses varied from
16,000 to 21,000 samples per year. Further details on the specific number of samples analysed at
NIFC (2014-15) and IPH (2011-15) by year are set out below.


 Year                      Number of samples        SOPs                      Chemical / Microbial

 NIFC in Ha Noi

 2014                      15.000                   72.000                    Chemical: 56.880

                                                                              Microbial: 15120

 2015                      19.528                   83.392                    Chemical: 65.727

                                                                              Microbial: 17.665

 IPH in HCMC

 2011                      20.700                   115.000                   NA

 2012                      22.500                   133.000                   NA

 2013                      16.300                   87.000                    NA

 2014                      22.000                   100.000                   NA

 2015                      20.000                   110.000                   NA

    -
Annex 11: Laboratory organization beyond MOH

Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
MARD has a setup of laboratories under its various departments which are highlighted below.

        NAFIQAD carries out the state governance of quality and safety of agricultural, forestry and fishery
        products and salt nationwide. NAFIQAD consists of six branches (Hai Phong, Da Nang, Khanh Hoa, Ho
        Chi Minh, Ca Mau and Can Tho), each with its own laboratories.

        The Department of Animal Health carries out the state governance of veterinary diagnosis, quality
        control of drugs and bio-products, veterinary sanitary and animal hygiene. DAH consists of two
        centres for quality control of drugs and bio-products, two centres for veterinary sanitary and hygiene
        (at Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh) and respective laboratories at national level and seven Regional Animal
        Health Offices (RAHOs) located at Ha Noi, Hai Phong, Nghe An province, Da Nang, Dak Lak province,
        Ho Chi Minh and Can Tho. The specialized centres are an indispensable tool to DAH to meet its
        obligations on a national and international level in veterinary hygiene and safety of animal-source
        food. At the regional level, each RAHO has its laboratory for testing of veterinary hygiene and safety
        of food of animal origin. It is responsible for technical management and support including laboratory
        skills in veterinary hygiene testing, safety of animal-source food and meat inspection at
        slaughterhouses for provincial sub-DAH in the region.

        At the provincial level, there are 63 sub-departments of animal health or livestock that are in direct
        line management of DAH or the RAHO. At the district level, the provincial sub-departments manage
        the district veterinary stations which in turn have links with commune and village veterinary and
        veterinary para-professional teams. Some coastal provinces such as Thanh Hoa have a sub-
        Agroforestry Fisheries Quality Assurance Department which also includes a laboratory.

        The Plant Protection Department carries out the state governance of plant quarantine activities,
        plant protection work in the field and registration of pesticides in Vietnam. The department consists
        of Centres for Pesticide Control and Testing located in the North (Ha Noi) and South (Ho Chi Minh),
        including laboratories. These centres are responsible for providing technical guidance to 63 provincial
        plant protection sub-departments.

        The Department of Livestock Production has laboratories in the National Institute of Animal Sciences
        and Centre for Appraisal of Livestock Breeds and Feed Quality Testing, both in Ha Noi. Some provinces
        also have laboratories which belong to the DARD of each province such as in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh.

Most laboratories are accredited in accordance with ISO 17025 standard. Following this standard
and based on their capacity, MARD will appoint agriculture and development sector laboratories
with the recognition code, ‘LAS-NN’. Some national government laboratories operate at a very high
level of performance, thus providing assurances on the reliability of analytical results. Selected
criteria are listed below:

       State-of-the-art equipment is available (for example, gas chromatography, high pressure
        liquid chromatography and ultra-performance liquid chromatography).
       Sufficient, highly trained staff are available.
       Training records available and many staff have participated in international training courses.
       Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for validation are available including all the
        requirements of Commission Decision No. 2002/657/EC.
       The management of standards is satisfactory, equipment is properly identified and
        calibrated, and maintenance of equipment is routinely performed and recorded.
       There is regular participation in proficiency tests with generally satisfactory results.


                                                       1
Laboratory capacity example based on number of performed tests: Regional Animal Health
Office (RAHO) 6, Ho Chi Minh City
As an example of laboratory capacity performance in the animal health sector, data obtained from
the RAHO No. 6 in Ho Chi Minh City are presented below. Generally, the RAHO 6 laboratories meet
Biosafety Level 2 standards while some practices even meet Biosafety Level 3 standards. The
laboratory has all necessary facilities and trained staff to carry out the required microbiological,
serological and viral testing including residues. Methods such as enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay are used for screening antibiotics and growth promotion substances in food and animal
products. Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry is used for confirmatory analysis. For
biological parameters, besides traditional methods for detection and analysis of bacteria in food and
animal products (for example, culturing), reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction and
automatic identification system (VITEK® 2) are used to support rapid results. In 2015, RAHO 6
analysed 264,240 samples originating from beef, pork, chicken, goat, sheep, honey, bone meal, fish
and shrimp. An overview of the tests performed on animal products in 2014 and 2015 is presented
in Figure 1. As shown, around 25% more tests were performed in 2015 compared to 2014.
Figure 1: Animal products tested in RAHO 6 for 2014 and 2015

                             Tested for              2015            2014          2014 vs. 2015
            1                                             16,619    13,564            + 22.52
                     Physic-chemical Analysis
            2        Residue detection                     5,461     3,666             +48.96

            3        Parasite detection                    1,409     1,519                 -7.24

            4        Bacteria detection                   225,547   176,875            +27.54

            5        DN detection                         15,204    14,449             +5.23

             Total                                        264,240   210,073            +25.8



In regard to selected microbiological food safety hazards, 225,547 tests were performed in 2015.
More than half (52%) of the tests were related to detection of Enterobacteriaceae, E. coli and
Salmonella spp. (Figure 2). In the same year, RAHO 6 carried out 3737 tests related to antibiotics
(chloramphenicol and isothermal titration calorimetry) and residues of hormone/growth promoters
(for example, salbutamol and clenbuterol). Tests on antimicrobials accounted for 74%.
Figure 2: Food safety tests performed in 2015, RAHO 6.


                                            6%
                                                                        Enterobacter
                                                8%                      Staphylococcus aureus
                                  29%
                                                     9%                 Listeria monocytogenes
                                                                        Escherichia coli
                                                 20%
                            2%                                          Salmonella spp.
                                     26%
                                                                        Vibrio parahaemolyticus




                                                             2
Ministry of Industry and Trade
The Food Industry Research Institute (FIRI) of MOIT specializes in research and production of traditional
fermented foods and beverages such as beer, wine, rice alcohol, vinegar, fermented milk and fermented
sauces from shrimp, fish or soy. The institute has the National Centre for Food Analysis and Assessment that
offers analytical services on nutritional composition; materials and food products; chemical and physical
analysis; microbiological analysis; inspection and certification of quality of food products; inspection, testing
and quality control of raw materials and semi-products and food safety; technological lines, equipment,
machinery and spare parts of the food processing industry; and evaluation and certification of conformity to
standards and regulations.



Ministry of Science and Technology
At the regional level, there are three Quality Assurance and Testing Centres (QUATESTs) at Ha Noi, Da Nang
and Ho Chi Minh City. The QUATEST 3 at Ho Chi Minh City is the ASEAN reference laboratory in microbiology
testing. At the provincial level, each province has a laboratory under the Department of Science and
Technology.



Ministry of Finance
There are laboratories under the General Department of Vietnam Customs known as Analysis and
Classification Centres which perform tests on imported goods in general, including food ingredients. These are
located at Ha Noi, Da Nang and Ho Chi Minh City.



Private laboratories
Private laboratories mainly focus on testing of exported food. Most of the private laboratories are branches of
international companies and based in the south of Vietnam. Due to the export and import requirements of
international food trade, the laboratory quality and services should meet the needs of their customers. The
private laboratories push the government laboratories to improve the quality of their services. Some
important private laboratories include:

        Intertek Vietnam Company Limited which offers solutions for product, process and food processing
         systems; testing of agricultural products; agricultural expertise; food and fisheries testing; food
         inspections, certification, assessment and consulting; testing of food packaging; physical analysis of
         food safety; food service equipment and consultancy on compliance requirements of food.
        Hoan Vu Company Limited Science Technology which offers analytical services for import and export
         goods, agricultural food products, seafood products, macronutrients, micronutrients, food additives,
         preservatives, flavourings, bleach, mould and toxic and antibiotic residues.
        Sac Ky Hai Dang Science Technology Services Joint Stock Company which provides testing, technical
         consulting and other related services for enterprises and organizations in Vietnam. Testing and
         technical consulting services include quality control of agro-products and food, aquatic products, raw
         materials and finished products as well as analysis of water, air, soil and waste.




                                                         3
Annex 12: Provision of academic training in Vietnam related to food safety

1. Examples of some current training courses on food hygiene and safety at (i) Ha Noi School
of Public Health and (ii) agriculture universities and (iii) other universities

    (i)        Ha University of Public Health (formerly Hanoi School of Public Health)

Food Safety Management, 2 credits for undergraduate students at Ha Noi School of Public Health, with the
following objectives:
      Present the standard and guideline systems on food safety and food product registration in Vietnam.
      Present the basic principles of food product labeling.
      Describe the responsibilities of food inspection from the production to packaging products.
      Understand the food management system using GMP, HACCP approaches.
      Implement management measures to ensure food safety at restaurants and food selling shops.
Basic food safety and nutrition, 2 credits for undergraduate students at Ha Noi School of Public Health, with
the following objectives:
        Present the nutrition needs for some prioritized groups (children under 1 year of age, pregnant
         women and patients of some chronic diseases)
     Implement nutritional status assessment and implement communication activities on nutrition issues.
     Involve in the identification of common food poisoning and food borne diseases in the community.
     Present some preventive and intervention measures to manage some common food safety and
         nutrition issues in the community.
Community nutrition and Food safety, 2 credits for Master of Public Health and Specialist Level I in Public
Health students atHa Noi School of Public Health, with the following objectives:
        Analyze prioritized nutritional and food safety issues in the community in Vietnam.
        Apply methods for nutritional and food status assessment in the community.
        Analyze intervention programs/measures to prevent and control food and nutrition issues in the
         community in Vietnam.
     Analyze current common food contaminations and hazard management measures for food selling
         agencies/places/shops
     Implement steps of food poisoning investigation procedure.
Food borne diseases and food safety risk analysis , 3 credits for undergraduate Public Health students. This is
the only course at Ha Noi School of Public Health that introduce to students on food safety risk analysis. The
objectives of this course are:
        Present the concepts and procedures of risk analysis, quantitative microbial risk assessment and
         chemical risk assessment in foods.
      Involve in identifying, investigating, managing and reporting food poisoning cases/outbreaks and food
         borne diseases in the community.
      Implement and interpret the laboratory test results applied in food safety and risk assessment.
Environmental Health Risk Assessment; Environmental Health Risk Assessment and Health Impact Assessment:
2 credits for both undergraduate and post graduate students. These training courses focus on risk assessment
methods applied for chemical, biological and physical hazards in water, air, soil and foods.



    (ii)       Universities of agriculture
There are seven main public universities of agriculture in Vietnam, namely:

          Vietnam National University of Agriculture in Ha Noi
          Thai Nguyen University of Agriculture and Forestry in Thai Nguyen Province


                                                      1
              Bac Giang Agricultural and Forestry University in Bac Giang Province
              Hue University of Agriculture and Forestry in Hue City, Thua Thien – Hue Province
              Tay Nguyen University in Dak Lak Province
              Nong Lam University (Ho Chi Minh City University of Agriculture and Forestry) in Ho Chi Minh
               City
              Can Tho University in Can Tho City

The main functions of these universities are training, research and transfer of scientific and
technological advances in agriculture-related fields. Most food materials are agricultural products, so
these universities play very important roles in food safety, especially as regards education and
training. They offer diverse training programs at different levels, of which veterinary medicine,
animal science, aquaculture, crop science and food science and technology are more related to food
safety than the other programs. Many subjects of these training programs deal more or less with
problems along the food chain. Graduates from these training programs are an important human
resource in producing animal and crop products.

Some common courses related to food safety at agriculture universities in Vietnam include:
              Risk analysis, 2 credits core course at VNUA for undergraduate students
              Food safety, 2 credits, core course at VNUA for undergraduate students
              Advanced food chemical and biological safety, 3 credits, core course at VNUA for post graduate
               students
              (Advanced) Hygiene and safety of food of animal origin, 2 credits, core course for both undergraduate
               and post graduate students.
              Veterinary Inspection, 3 credits core course at VNUA for undergraduate students and an advanced 2
               credits selective course for post graduate students


       (iii)       Food safety training programs at other universities
Engineer of Food Technology and Bachelor of Food Technology are the main training programs that
are offered in Ha Noi University of Science and Technology and Ho Chi Minh City University of
Science and Technology. These are broad majors. They cover many areas of food science, including
food safety. Their curricula are mapped to the topic of food safety. There are some courses that
relate to food safety as stated below.
Safety and contamination of food
              Physical contamination of food
              Food additives
              Chemical contamination of food
              Microbiological contamination of food
              Quality assessment of food
              Food traceability
              Food value chains
The Master of Food Technology training program is provided at Ha Noi University of Science and
Technology1 and Ho Chi Minh City University of Science and Technology2. Some components of the
courses are related to food safety; examples are given below.

              Quality management in the food industry

1   http://sbft.hust.edu.vn/user/index.php?module=training&action=typeNews&dpId=2&language=vi
2   http://www.pgs.hcmut.edu.vn/thac-si/tra-cuu/ctdt

                                                            2
          Food additives
          Food toxicology

Ha Noi School of Public health offers a Bachelor of Public Health Training Program, majoring in Nutrition and
Food Safety and Hygiene.
Training programs for Food Technology Engineers are offered at Ha Noi University of Science and Technology 3
and Ho Chi Minh City University of Science and Technology4.


2. A list of Vietnamese text books related to food safety currently used

Ha Noi School of Public health (2014), Community Nutrition and Food Safety, Textbook for master of Public
        Health, Medical Publishing House, Ha Noi (Trường Đại học Y tế công cộng (2014), Dinh dưỡng cộng
        đồng và an toàn thực phẩm, Tài liệu giảng dạy cho cao học YTCC, NXB Y học, Hà Nội)
Nguyen Cong Khan, Tran Dang, Lam Quoc Hung, Luu Quoc Toan, Bui Mai Huong (2013), Food contamination
       and food borne diseases, Social and Labour Publishing House, Ha Noi (Nguy ễn Công Khẩn, Trần Đáng,
       Lâm Quốc Hùng, Lưu Quốc Toản, Bùi Mai Hương (2013), Ô nhiễm thực phẩm và các bệnh truyền qua
       thực phẩm, NXB Lao động Xã hội, Hà Nội)
Tran Thi Tuyet Hanh, Nguyen Viet Hung et al. (2013), Environmental – Occupational Health Risk Assessment.
         Textbook for undergraduate of Public Health students, Environmental – Occupational Health Tracking,
         Social and Labour Publishing House, Ha Noi (Trần Thị Tuyết Hạnh, Nguyễn Việt Hùng và CS, 2013.
         Đánh giá nguy cơ Sức khỏe môi trường- Nghề nghiệp: giáo trình đào tạo cử nhân YTCC, định hướng
         SKMT-NN. Nhà xuất bản Lao động Xã hội, Hà Nội).
Nguyen Cong Khan, Nguyen Viet Hung, Tran Thi Tuyet Hanh et al. (2011), Microbial Risk Assessment in Food in
       Vietnam, Medical Publishing House, Ha Noi (Nguyễn Công Khẩn, Nguyễn Việt Hùng, Trần Thị Tuyết
       Hạnh và CS, 2011. Đánh giá nguy cơ vi sinh vật trong thực phẩm tại Việt Nam. Nhà xuất bản Y học, Hà
       Nội.)
Nguyen Cong Khan et al. (2008), Community Nutrition and Food Hygiene and Safety, Education Publishing
       House, Ha Noi (Nguyễn Công Khẩn và CS (2008), Dinh dưỡng cộng đồng và an toàn vệ sinh thực phẩm,
       NXB Giáo dục, Hà Nội).
Ministry of Health – Vietnam Food Aministration (2001), Food borne diseases, Youth Publishing House, Ha Noi
         (Bộ Y tế - Cục An toàn vệ sinh thực phẩm (2001), Các bệnh lây truyền qua đường thực phẩm, NXB
         Thanh niên, Hà Nội).
Nguyen Cong Khan et al. (2013), Food Safety Management, Social Labour Publishing House, Ha Noi (Nguy ễn
       Công Khẩn và CS (2013), Quản lý An toàn thực phẩm, NXB Lao động Xã hội, Hà Nội).
Ha Noi School of Public Health. Community Nutrition and Food Safety and Hygiene, Teaching material for
        bachelor of Public Health students (Trường Đại học Y tế công cộng. Dinh dưỡng cộng đồng và an toàn
        vệ sinh thực phẩm. Tài liệu giảng dạy lý thuyết cho cử nhân Y Tế Công Cộng).
Ministry of Health (2005), Food Safety Control for Street Foods. Youth Publishing House, Ha Noi. (Bộ Y tế
         (2005), Kiểm soát an toàn thực phẩm thức ăn đường phố, Nhà xuất bản Thanh niên, Hà Nội).




3   http://sbft.hust.edu.vn/user/index.php?module=training&action=catNews&dpId=1&sdpId=2&language=vi
4   http://www.aao.hcmut.edu.vn/index.php?route=catalog/chitietsv&path=5980&tid=816

                                                         3
Annex 13: Procedure of audit of VietGAP certification

+The audit form of VietGAP certification body:
   - Initial audit is conducted after the producer signs a contract with the CB for VietGAP
certification.
   - Audit of corrective actions carried out is conducted after the producer is audited but ineligible
for issuance, maintanance or extension of VietGAP certificate.
   - Re-audit will be made upon the producer’s request on re-issuance of VietGAP certificate when
validity of the certificate is expired.
   - Monitoring audit of post certification shall be implemented. Monitoring audit can be
implemented periodically (with prior notice) or as surprise audits (without prior notice); Time of
monitoring audit is determined by the certification body depending on each case, that is to ensure a
continuous application of VietGAP by producer.
  - Surprise audits are made in the following cases: i) there are complaints about VietGAP non-
compliance by the producer; ii) VietGAP certified products are found to be non-compliant and
unsafe; and iii) Upon request of the State management agencies.
+ Methods of audit: Method for auditing products produced/processed in compliance with VietGAP
requirements is as follow: Audit the production and processing process and analysis of typical
samples; monitor through auditing the production and processing process and analysis of typical
samples, which are collected in the production field and in handling/packing house.
+ Order and content of audit:
   - The auditment of production process follows the audit checklist and guidelines pre-described
in VietGAP for each commodity.
   - Collect samples (soil, water, air), input materials, waste materials, or typical sample of product
and identify testing parameter as specified in VietGAP (if the producer is not possible to provide
testing results or the testing result is not relevant); sampling method, testing method as specified in
technical regulation or regulation, if the regulation is not available, testing method of accredited
and designated testing laboratory will be followed.
   - For the producers with many members:
      o Audit internal quality management system as specified in Appendix 10 attached to this
        Circular;
      o Review documents;
      o Audit reprensentative member of a group: Number of representative member of a group
        shall be determined by certification body for each specific case but it must be at least equal
        to square root (for initial audit) or a minimum of 2/3 of square root (for re-audit) or a
        minimum of 1/2 of square root (for monitoring audit) of the total member of a group.
   - VietGAP certification body develop a guidelines detailing registration dossier, audit order and
contents, schedule, granting VietGAP cerficate for each kind of product, and notice to organization,
individual, who have registered VietGAP certification.
+ VietGAP Certificate:


                                                  1
   - Validity of VietGAP certificate: is a maximum of 2 (two) years since the date of issuance; This
can be extended for a maximum 3 (three) months in case that producer has been certified but after
the expiry of certificate, they have not been able to reapply for renewal of certificate
   - Code of VietGAP certification: The code of VietGAP certificate is obtained automatically through
website from 01st January 2013 under the authorization of Directorate of Fisheries, Crop
Production Department, and Livestock Production Department.




                                                 2
Annex 14: Food safety biological hazards in the food chain

Table. Food safety biological hazards in the food chain
Hazards            Food chain          Situation in food chain in Vietnam
                   /commodity
Biological group
Prion (BSE)        Ruminant            Not yet found in Vietnam (Cuong et al, 2007)
Virus
Hepatitis A        Animals and
                   vegetable process
Norovirus
                   related
Rotavirus
Astrovirus
Influenza          Pig                 Results showed that a maximal seroprevalence of H1N1pdm
                                       of 55.6% in the slaughterhouse at the end of December 2009,
                                       2 weeks after the peak of reported human fatalities with
                                       H1N1pdm. Farm-level seroprevalence was 29%. In
                                       seropositive farms, within-herd seroprevalence ranged from
                                       10 to 100% [54].
Bacteria
Bacillus anthracis Pig, ruminant       - No reports of Bacillus anthracis in pigs in Vietnam
                                       - Cattle: Son La, Dien Bien (cases in buffalo) [y]
Bacillus cereus
Brucella spp.      Pig and cattle      -No reports of Brucellosis in pigs in Vietnam
                                       - Cattle
Campylobacter      Poultry, pig        - C. jejuni prevalence was 28.3% in canteen poultry meat
spp.                                   [55]
                                       Nothing for pigs?
Clostridium        Canned food
botulinum
Clostridium        Canned food
perfringens
Coxiella burneti   Pig                 no reports of Coxiella burnetii in pigs in Vietnam

                                                  1
Hazards           Food chain         Situation in food chain in Vietnam
                  /commodity
E. coli           Meat, vegetable,   - E. coli prevalence in raw meat, fish, and vegetables were
                  fish               21.3%, 6.6%, and 18.5%, respectively [55].
Listeria          Milk, vegetable,
monocytogenes     fish,
                  smoked/fermented
                  food
Leptospirosis     Pig                -A total of 424 sows had sera collected in the Mekong delta
                                     in Vietnam, the overall leptospiral seroprevalence for titres >
                                     or =1:100 and > or =1:400, was 73 and 29%, respectively,
                                     and was higher at small- than at large-scale farms [56].
Mycobacterium     pig                - No reports of Mycobacterium spp in pigs in Vietnam
spp.
Salmonella spp.   Animals,           - Pig: Prevalence on cecal contents, carcass swabs exceed
                  vegetable, aquatic 50% [57].
                  animals            - Poultry meat: prevalence 8.3% [55].
                                     - Salmonella was isolated from 69.9% of the pork samples,
                                     48.6% of the beef samples, 21.0% of the chicken meat
                                     samples, 22.3% of the duck meat samples, and 24.5% of the
                                     shrimp samples [58].
                                     - 32.8% of retail pork, 15.5% of slaughterhouse carcasses,
                                     47.4% of floors, 38.1% of weighing bowls, 28.6% of
                                     cooking boards and 16.7% of tank water samples [59]
                                     - Prevalence at slaughterhouse at 36.9%, while 34.9% found
                                     on pig carcass. At the market, Salmonella prevalence
                                     illustrated 41.4%, whereas 42.9% Salmonella was identified
                                     in pork [60].
Shigella spp.     Animals,
                  vegetable
Staphylococcus    Animals,           - occurrence were 21.8%, 14.2%, 13.8% in grilled pork meat,
aureus            vegetable, ready   nemchao (raw meat) and fermented meat, respectively [61]
                  to eat foods
Streptococcus suis Pig               - Forty one percent (41%, 222/542) of pigs carried S. suis of
                                     one or multiple serotypes. 8% (45/542) carried S. suis
                                     serotype 2 which was the most common serotype found
                                     (45/317 strains, 14%). 80% of serotype 2 strains belonged to
                                     the MLST clonal complex 1, which was previously

                                              2
Hazards             Food chain        Situation in food chain in Vietnam
                    /commodity
                                      associated with meningitis cases in Vietnam and outbreaks
                                      of severe disease in China in 1998 and 2005. Slaughterhouse
                                      pigs are a major reservoir of S. suis serotype 2 capable of
                                      causing human infection in southern Vietnam [25]
Erysipelothrix      Pig               No reports of Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae in pigs in
rhusiopathiae                         Vietnam
Vibrio cholerae     Sea food
Vibrio           Sea food             - In shrimp:
parahaemolyticus
Yersinia            Food related
enterocolitica      sources
Parasite/Protozoa
Entamoeba           Animals,
histolytica         vegetable
Cryptosporidium Pig, vegetable        -Prevalence 14.5 % (n=193) in pig fecal samples and two
spp.                                  species/genotypes (Cryptosporidium suis and
                                      Cryptosporidium pig genotype II) (Nguyen St et al 2013)
                                      - Water spinach:
Giardia spp.        Pig, vegetable    - No reports of Giardia duodenalis in pigs in Vietnam
                                      -Water spinach
Toxoplasma          Animals           - Seroprevalence varied from 23% to 40% in finishers, sows,
gondii                                and boars[62]
                                      - In Hue, 72.3% cats, 41.3%live pigs and 69.1%slaughtered
                                      pigs tested positive for T. gondii antibodies
Echinococcus        Pig               No reports of Echinococcus spp in pigs in Vietnam
granulosus
Ascaris spp.        Pig               Ascaris suum found in pig manures was 64.1 % for Ascaris
                                      suum [63]
Cysticercus spp.    Pig               0.04 – 0.09% in slaughter pigs across Vietnam with highest
                                      values for the Highlands [64]
Faciola spp.        Cattle
Trichinella spp.    Pig, carnivores   - Trichinella seroprevalence in pig was 5.6%, 4% and 0% in
                                      pigs, dogs and cats, respectively [65]

                                               3
Hazards            Food chain     Situation in food chain in Vietnam
                   /commodity
                                  - North Vietnam in 2012, involving 24 patients among 27
                                  people who consumed raw pork together. Six of these
                                  patients visited several hospitals in Hanoi for treatment and
                                  all of them were positive reactions against Trichinella
                                  spiralis antigen and all cases showed positive biopsy results
                                  for Trichinella sp. larvae in the muscle [66]
Fungi
Aspergillus flavus Pig, Poultry
Chemical groups
Physical groups




                                           4
Process flow and the related hazards in growing the crops


 Steps                                       Input                        Hazards

                                                                          Biological,
 Selection   and     preparation     of      Soil, water source, soil
                                                                          Chemical,
 production site                             additives,etc.
                                                                          Physical


                       Planting              Seed, seedling, planting     Biological,
                                             materials and equipment      Chemical


                       Watering                                           Biological,
                                             Water, watering tools
                                                                          Chemical


                                             Fertilizer,     additives,
                       Fertilizer
 Production                                  water,         application   Biological,
                       application
                                             equipment                    Chemical


                                             Pesticides,        water,
                       Plant protection                                   Chemical
                                             application equipment


                       Other
                                                                          Biological,
                       cultivation           Equipment, materials
                                                                          Chemical
                       actions


                       Management of
                                                                          Biological,
                       domestic     and      Chemicals, materials
                                                                          Chemical
                       pest animals


                                                                          Biological,
                                             Harvest        equipment,
                                                                          Chemical,
 Harvesting                                  worker
                                                                          Physical




                                              5
Harvesting and postharvest handling - process flow
Steps                                 Inputs                              Hazards
                                      Harvest       equipment,   tools,   Biological, Chemical,
Harvesting
                                      workers                             Physical


                                      Water, cleaning equipment,          Biological, Chemical
Cleaning
                                      tools, workers                      Physical


Preliminary              treatment,   Workers, equipment, package,        Biological, Chemical,
classification, packaging             container....                       Physical


                                                                          Biological, Chemical,
Product buffer                        Buffer materials, workers
                                                                          Physical


Storage       (Freezing,   storage    Water, hygience conditions,         Biological, Chemical,
treatment,...)                        workers                             Physical


                                                                          Biological, Chemical,
Transportation                        Transporation vehicles
                                                                          Physical




                                                6
Annex 15: FS hazards included, key message and limitations of
WHO FERG from a global perspective

Hazards included in FERG
 Hazards causing enteric      Hazards causing health Parasitic diseases         Chemical
 diseases                     effects other than                                hazards
                              enteric diseases
 Campilobacter spp.           Brusella spp.               Ascaris spp.          Aflatoxin
 Cryptosporidium spp.         Hepatitis A Virus           Echinococcus          Cassava cyanide
                                                          multilocularis &
                                                          granulosus
 Entamoeba histolytica        Listeria spp.               Clonorchis sinensis   Dioxin
 Enteropathogenic E. coli     Mycobacterium bovis         Fasciola spp.
 (EPEC)
 Enterotoxigenic E. coli      Salmonella enterica         Intestinal flukes
 (ETEC)                       (invasive infections)
                              non-typhoidal
 Giardia spp.                 Salmonella enterica         Opisthorchis spp.
                              Paratyphi A
 Norovirus                    Salmonella enterica         Paragonimus spp.
                              Typhi
 Salmonella enterica (non-                                Taenia solium
 invasive) non typhoidal
 Shigella spp.                                            Toxoplasma gondii
 Shiga-toxin producing E.                                 Trichinella spp.
 coli (STEC)
 Vibrio cholerae
Source: (WHO FERG 2015)


Key finding (WHO FERG 2015)
 Of the roughly 600 million cases of illness caused by the 31 food borne hazards, infectious
  agents leading to diarrheal diseases account for the overwhelming majority (550 million)
  and are attributed to 420,000 deaths in 2010. Out of the 420,000 deaths food b o r ne
  diarrheal disease agents are responsible for 230,000 fatalities (54.7%). Of these no n- t y p
  ho id al Salmonella enterica ( NTS), E. coli (EPEC/ETEC), norovirus account for 59,000
  (25.6%), 72,000 (31.35) and 26,000 (11.3%) deaths respectively. The major non-diarrheal
  cause of FBD was due to S. typhi (52,000).
 The global disease burden of FBD (31 hazards) was 33 million DALYs. 54% of this (18
  million DALYs) were attributed to diarrheal disease agents and here to NTS (4 million
  DALYs). In addition S. typhi contributed considerable to the disease burden with 3.7 million
  DALYs alone.

                                               1
 With 33 million DALYs FBD are of a similar burden in order of magnitude as the “big three”
  infectious diseases HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis with 92, 55 and 44 million DALYs
  respectively.
 While children less than 5 years of age represent only 9% of the global population 43% of
  disease burden was subjected to this group..
 Substantial regional differences were observed in the burden of FBD. The highest burden
  per 100,000 population was o b served in Africa (AFR sub region D, 1300 DALYs; AFR sub
  region E, 1200 DALYs), followed by South-East Asia sub-regions ( SEAR B, 690 DALYs and
  SEAR D, 710 DALYs). Note, that none of the sub-region included Vietnam but sub-region B
  included the neighboring country of Thailand.
 The contribution of individual hazards to the FBD burden differed substantially between
  sub-regions. Diarrheal disease agents w ere the leading cause of foodborne disease burden
  in most of sub-regions; highest burden was attributed to both African sub-regions (70%)
  followed by SEA R sub-regions (50%) and here in particular related to NTS S. enterica, EPEC
  and norovirus.
 Some hazards such as NTS (S. enterica) are an important cause of FBD globally while others,
  e.g. parasitic helminths were highly focalized. E.g. opisthorchis was almost exclusively
  localized to SEAR B (40 DALYs/100000), and here mainly Thailand.
 The burden to chemical hazards was also in general much more focalized with highest
  estimates (e.g. for Aflatoxin) in AFR D and SEAR B.
 While the global burden of FBD is considerable all over the globe the report concludes that
  in particular persons in low-income regions are heavily affected.


Limitation (WHO FERG 2015)
 The report is subjected to certain limitations mainly due to uncertainties in the data
  available on disease burden and attributed estimates. This is in particular the case for low-
  income countries where burden was highest while data availability was most challenging.
 Data gaps and uncertainties were even more problematic at country level, therefore this
  report chose to present findings at sub-region level.
 Another limitation was that co-morbid conditions were not addressed, e.g. if FERG would
  have included invasive Salmonella infections in HIV co-infected person substantial higher
  dead’s could have been expected although not Salmonella infection can be attributed to food.
 Due to its limitations the provided estimates are expected to be conservative which may
  result in underestimates rather than overestimates and more studies are needed to address
  the described data gaps.
 It should be also noted that DALYs (used for disease burden quantification in this study)
  may not address sufficiently social impact of FBD e.g. trade impacts or losses in agriculture
  and food sector.




                                              2
Annex 16 Other burden of disease estimates (partly foodborne)
than WHO FERG

The Global Burden of Diseases Initiative (GBD 2010), Institute of Health and Metrics Evaluation
(IHME GBD) used prevalence based DALYs (FERG used incidences), a more extensive
mathematical modelling compared to FERG to address data gaps and looked at all sources of
diseases. Note, that there are methodological related considerable differences in disease burden
estimates between both initiatives. Interestingly the IHME provides a data visualisation tool
which is open access and displays leading causes of DALYs by various strata such as developing
countries, geographic area, country, year, gender and age among others (GBD 2016). An
example is provided in table 5.3.11 for developing countries comparing leading causing DALYs
for 1990 and 2013. Diarrhoea, which includes FBD, is among the first five leading causes of
DALYs in both time strata (GBD 2016).
                             Table 5.3.11: Leading causes of DALYs

             1990                                2013

             Lower respiratory infections        Ischemic heart disease (IHD)

             Diarrheal diseases                  Lower respiratory infections

             Neonatal pre term                   Stroke
             complications

             COPD                                Back and neck

             Malaria                             Diarrhea diseases

             Stroke                              Neonatal preterm complications

             Protein energy malnutrition         HIV

             TB                                  Road accidents

             Neonatal encephalopathy             Malaria

             Ischemic heart disease              TB
Annex 17: Key pork and vegetable value chains in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City
This annex more extensively describes the pork and vegetable value chains in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City in
order to illustrate and better document the findings, analysis and recommendations made in the report.

1.                                    Pork value chain in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City
The pork value chains in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City are similar (Figure 1). However, these two cities are
differentiated in terms of pork volume flow between players in the chain and their levels of food safety risk.
The implementation of food safety management in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh, therefore, has to be tailored to
specific local contexts of each city in order to be effective.

Figure 1: Pork value chain supplying Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City.


                                             Own
                                                                                                      SLAUGHTERING HOUSES




                                           produced
                                                                                         FAMILY-RUN




                                             feed
                                                                                                                                                                 Retail Markets




                                                                                                                                                                                        HOUSEHOLD CONSUMERS
 PRODUCERS (HOUSEHOLDS OR FARMS)




                                                                                                                               Carcass Traders/ Businesses
                                                                                         SLAUGHTERING CENTER S or




                                                                                                                                                                   Wholesale
                                                                                           IDUSTRIAL PROCESSING




                                                                                                                                                                    markets
                                                                                                FACILITIES




                                                                                                                                                                 Super markets,
                                                                                                                                                                   convenient
                                                                                                                                                                      store
                                                 Local / Inter -province Pig




                                                                                                                                                                 Organizationa
                                                                               Traders




                                                                                                                                                                   l buyers
                                                                                                                                                                 (Restaurants,
                                                                                                                                                                    hotels)
                                                                                                                                                                                     Importers
                                                                                                                                                                                      Overseas




                                      Local                                                                                 Traders or animal                                     Overseas
                                   distributor                                                                               feed producers                                       exporters,
                                   s of animal                                                                                                                                    domestic
                                       feed                                                                                                                                       suppliers
                                                                                                                                                                                     for
                                                                                                                            Piglet Producers                                      (material
                                    Piglet Traders                                                                                                                                 animal



Key aspects of the value chain structure in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh
     Increasing modern trade outlets such as supermarkets and convenience stores
     Significant demand from organizational buyers, such as hotels, restaurants and schools
     Insufficient production requires supplementary supply of pork from other provinces
     Retail (wet) markets dominate sale of pork
     Small-scale producers and small slaughtering facilities dominate the value chain

While the two first bullet points create a strong demand for traceability the last three create unfavourable
conditions for this to be carried out.




                                                                                                                                                             1
1.1.     Pork value chain in Ha Noi
A quantitative summary of Ha Noi’s pork value chain is given in Table 1.

Table 1: Key data on the pork value chain in Ha Noi
Level                                       Supermarkets/         Wholesale         Retail markets      Total
                                            convenience           markets
                                            stores
Distribution    Quantity (tons per day)     94.5                  17.5              518                 630
                Share of volume (%)         15                    3                 82                  100
                No. of markets/stores       103                   4                 426
Processing                                  Semi-industrial       Manual            Family-run
                                            slaughterhouses       processing        slaughterhouses
                                                                  central houses
                No. of operations           14                    93                2490
                Quantity (tons per day)     152                   93                385                 630
                Share of volume (%)         24.1                  14.8              61.1                100
Production                                  Supply from Ha Noi                      Supply from other provinces
                Quantity (tons per day)     500                                     100
                Production model            Large farm (30% of city’s production)   Smallholder (70% of city’s
                                                                                    production)
                                            Organized value chain: 30 tons per      Un-organized value chain: >
                                            day                                     550 tons per day
Source: Analysis of consumption, DARD Vietnam Statistics Office

Consumption
With an average annual pork consumption of 27 kg per capita in Vietnam 1 and population of 7 million, the
total demand for pork in Ha Noi is estimated at 630 tons per day. This does not include demand from the
significant number of daily visitors to the city; hence, in reality, the actual pork consumption may be even
higher. Moreover, most studies show that meat consumption is higher in urban areas so we would expect
urban Ha Noi to have higher per capita pork consumption than the country average.

Consumption of pork outside the home is increasing. In 2012, it was estimated that Vietnam had 430,000
street stalls/kiosks, 7,000 fast-food restaurants, 80,000 full-service restaurants and 22,000 cafeterias/bars. Ha
Noi also has a large number of institutional food providers including government, educational, medical and
industry canteens.

Production
As at October 2014, Ha Noi had more than 1.4 million pigs, accounting for 5.3% of the national herd (26.5
million pigs)2. This contributes more than 500 tons of pork per day for the capital’s residents. Thus, deriving the
630 tons demand per day, Ha Noi should be importing more than 100 tons per day from other provinces. In
terms of geographical production organization, Ha Noi has four major specialized production zones with
120,000 pigs. By production organization, there are 802 pig farms which are normally outside residential
places and contribute 30.9% of the whole city’s production. Farm businesses (as opposed to pig rearing in the
family backyard) are increasing but many would be considered of small or moderate scale 3.

Organized production based on value chains, in which traceable linkages between players are systematically
set, has been strongly encouraged. By the end of 2014, the supply from this model was estimated at 11,000
tons, 30 tons per day or 5% of the total consumed in Ha Noi. One of the major issues of pig production in
Vietnam is that the cost of feed is high and the sector relies on over 70% of feeds imported from other
countries (Viet Nam Alliance for Agriculture 2015).


1 IFC Report, Pork and Broiler Chicken Industry Development in Vietnam
2 Vietnam Statistics Office
3 DARD, Ha Noi



                                                           2
Pig processing system
Slaughterhouses in Ha Noi are of three major types:
      Semi-industrial processing: 14 businesses
      Manual processing: five different sites with multiple slaughter places at each
      Family-run slaughterhouses: with capacity of one to five pigs a day at each household and the
         slaughtering is mainly carried out in the backyards of residential houses

Staff from DAH and VFA are present in semi-industrial and manual processing slaughterhouses but have
limited oversight of the estimated 2,490 family-run slaughterhouses. Allocation across slaughtering categories
is shown in Figure 2.

Figure 2: Ha Noi's share of daily pork volume by slaughtering type.




                                                              Semi-industrial
                                                           slaughterhouses, 152
                                                               tons/day, 24%
                                  Family-run
                            slaughterhouses, 385
                                tons/day, 61%                                                 Manual processing
                                                                                             slaughterhouses, 93
                                                                                                tons/day, 15%




Distribution system
From the slaughterhouses, pork reaches the end consumers through (i) supermarkets or convenience stores,
(ii) retail markets, (iii) wholesale then retail markets or (iv) organizational buyers. As per Ha Noi DARD, the
third channel is composed of four major markets (Minh Khai, Phung Khoang, Den Lu and Van Quan) with an
average volume of 7.5 tons a day4. There are no data reporting the flow of pork via supermarkets or
convenience stores; nevertheless, it is generally estimated that 15% of all foods are sold at modern trade
outlets, suggesting 94.5 tons of pork move through this channel. (However, in developing country
supermarkets, typically the share of processed and non-perishable foods is much higher than the share of
fresh foods so this probably over-estimates the pork sold through modern outlets.) The pork that goes directly
from slaughterhouses to retail markets is estimated to be at least 518 tons5.

Food safety risks
Food safety control is more manageable in supermarkets or convenience stores and semi-industrial and
manual processing slaughterhouses as concentration in one place can enable better monitoring and evaluation
of pork safety. However, there is limited evidence that the management of food safety in one location is more
effective at reducing food hazards (Grace 2015) and there are some aspects of concentrating production,
processing and retail that can increase contamination. Building up and maintaining business credibility creates
incentives for supermarkets to develop traceability for products on shelves. However, in Southeast Asia, fresh
foods sold in supermarkets often do not have traceability as they are sourced from wholesale markets and not
from farms. Some important aspects of food safety risks in pork supply for the Ha Noi market are:




4On  average, there are 60 outlets at each market; each outlet trades one pig of 73 kg per day.
5Total pork consumption of Ha Noi is 630 tons (based on annual per capita consumption of 27 kg and a population of 7
million).

                                                            3
Supply from external provinces amounts to 100 tons per day or 20% of the city’s consumption. By legal
stipulation, the pigs from this source are to be sanitarily certified. However, in reality, the tracing (if needed) is
difficult because of involvement of multiple trader levels and different monitoring and evaluation agencies at
different provinces. It appears that the information system on pork supply for Ha Noi by provinces is not well
established and updated.

Supply from non-farm models, accounting for 70% of Ha Noi’s consumption. Monitoring many small farms is
difficult. Knowledge, attitudes and practices of farmers may also result in food safety risks and farmers may
not easily respond to official recommendations on GAP. On the other hand, use of veterinary drugs is often
higher on large farms and disease may be more common and harder to control on large farms (if not fully bio-
secure) because of the concentration of animals and frequent opportunities for contact (Figure 3).

Figure 3: Share of daily pork supply in Ha Noi by farm, non-farm and other provinces.

                                                                          Other provinces, 100
                                                                             tons/day, 16%
                                              Farm, 89
                                           tons/day, 14%




                                           Non-farm, 441
                                           tons/day, 70%




Family-run slaughtering, which accounts for 60% of the total processing output in Ha Noi, typically involves
slaughtering one to two pigs per day in the family backyard and then selling the meat directly to consumers or
to distributors who sell in retail markets. According to DARD Ha Noi, there are currently 2,490 businesses
operating this model in Ha Noi, creating a challenge for meat inspection. According to DAH Ha Noi, the
department’s workforce only meets 50% of the actual workload required. It is, therefore, pra ctically impossible
to exercise effective control over family-run slaughtering activities.

Retail markets: Some 426 retail markets account for more than 80% of pork sold. Control of food safety in this
channel is challenging in Ha Noi. Because wholesale markets and supermarkets are able to absorb less than
50% of output from semi-industrial and manual processing slaughterhouses (112/245 tons), it is likely that
meat from family-run slaughterhouses is fully directed to retail markets. As a result, meat sold in wet markets
may not have been checked or inspected at any point from farm to point of purchase.

1.2.     Pork value chain in Ho Chi Minh City
A summary of the pork value chain Ho Chi Minh City is shown in Table 2.




                                                           4
Table 2: Key data on the pork value chain in Ho Chi Minh City
 Level                                   Supermarkets/            Wholesale            Retail markets not    Total
                                         convenience              markets selling to   linked to wholesale
                                         stores                   retail
 Distribution      Total yearly          53,292                   190,592              22,574                266,458
                   production (tons)
                   Daily production      146                      522                  62                    730
                   (tons)
                   Share of daily        20                       72                   8                     100
                   production (%)
 Processing                              Slaughtering centres                          Small
                                                                                       slaughterhouses
                    No. of workshops       21
                    Volume (tons per       682                                         48                    730
                    day)
                    Share daily output     93.5                                        6.5                   100
                    (%)
 Supply             Supply source          Ho Chi Minh City       Other provinces      Unknown sources
                                           production
                                           (including
                                           companies’ value
                                           chain)
                   Daily volume (tons      327–377                178                  178                   730
                   per day)
Source: Analysis of data from DARD

Consumption
Total pork consumption in Ho Chi Minh City is estimated at 730 tons per day. Similar to the analysis of Ha Noi,
the calculation is based on the assumption of average annual pork consumption of 27 kg per capita and Ho Chi
Minh City population of 8.2 million and does not include visitors or adjust for higher urban consumption.

Production
According to DARD, pork production in Ho Chi Minh City is 85,000 tons per year, equivalent to 227 tons per
day. To cover the demand gap, supplementary supply is sourced from other provinces, that is, 65,085 tons per
year or 178 tons per day. We estimate a daily amount of 100–150 tons are also provided by some large
companies from their own value chains; Vissan (Vietnam Meat Industries Limited Company), for example, sells
70 tons per day to the Ho Chi Minh City market. Thus, in light of 730 tons per day consumption as estimated
above, it appears that around 100–150 tons are being consumed without going through a known or reported
channel (Table 3).

Table 3: Analysis of supply sources for daily pork consumption in Ho Chi Minh City
 Production       Supply from other        Estimated supplies from         Estimated              Total
 (tons)           provinces (tons)         companies with own              unreported             consumption
                                           value chains (tons)             volume (tons)          (tons)
 227              178                      100–150                         100–150                730

Pig processing system
A total of 682 tons of pork is processed at slaughtering centres 6, suggesting that 50 tons are slaughtered from
outside Ho Chi Minh City (Table 4). Ho Chi Minh City currently aims to terminate the operation of all small
slaughterhouses by 2017. The implementation of this objective appears to be well on track to date.




6DARD:   249,035 tons are from slaughtering centres. This is converted into 682 tons per day.

                                                              5
Table 4: Pork processing capacity of Ho Chi Minh City
                                        Slaughtering centres in      Meat processed       Total daily
                                        Ho Chi Minh City             from outside         consumption
 Volume (tons)                          682                          48                   730
 Processing capacity as at 2015         7555 pigs                                         8000 pigs
 Processing capacity plan               17 centres, 8000 pigs                             8000–9000 pigs
 towards 2016                           Six new factories:
                                        10,000– 15,000 pigs
Source: DARD and analysis of currently available data

Distribution system
Unlike Ha Noi, most pork in Ho Chi Minh City is distributed via the wholesale market channel: 522 tons per day
or 190,592 tons per year, which is divided between Binh Dien and Tan Xuan with a volume of 68,110 tons per
year and 122,482 tons per year, respectively 7. In this channel, the wholesalers at wholesale markets sell to
other agents who retail the meat to end users in retail markets. There are no data reporting the pork sold at
supermarkets and convenience stores. Compared to Ha Noi, the modern trade system in Ho Chi Minh City is
more advanced and hence may be more important. We estimate that the pork sold in this system may be 20%
of the city’s daily consumption (730 tons), that is, 146 tons (Figure 4). The amount of pork supplied directly
from slaughterhouses, inside or outside the city, to retail markets is about 50 tons per day.

Figure 4: Share of daily volume of pork sold in Ho Chi Minh City by type of distribution channel.

                 Retail
               markets, 62
              tons/day, 8%                                          Supermarkets
                                                                    / convenience
                                                                      stores, 146
                                                                    tons/day, 20%




                   Wholesale
                  markets, 522
                 tons/day, 72%

Food safety risks
In comparison to Ha Noi, the pork value chain in Ho Chi Minh City is theoretically more favourable to food
safety control because:
      Small-scale processing at residential houses is almost replaced by slaughter centres where monitoring
         and evaluation can be conducted more effectively and efficiently.
      The installed capacity of modern slaughtering businesses can well capture the current demand of
         8,000 pigs per day. The additional facilities planned to be launched in 2016, which cover six factories
         for 10,000–15,000 pigs per day, can also accommodate the demand growth in the medium term8.
      There is an increasing share of large companies that have built up their own value chains to ensure
         traceability and pork quality. For instance, Vissan recently provided 70 tons of VietGAP-certified pork
         to Ho Chi Minh City; many other businesses are understood to be moving in this direction.
      Seventy-two per cent of pork is traded at wholesale markets under monitoring and evaluation of the
         local government.




7Data provided by DARD.
8The consumption of pork in Vietnam is estimated at 3% (IFC report: Pork and broiler chicken industry development in
Vietnam). The growth in Ho Chi Minh City should be higher than 3% to cover production for consumption outside the city.

                                                             6
However, there is very little evidence on whether moving from small-scale to large-scale production,
processing and retailing actually improves the safety of pork. There are some elements of large-scale
production which are inherently more risky than small-scale. Moreover, although inspection is easier in larger
units, its effectiveness will depend on two elements: (i) the effectiveness of visual inspection for assuring food
safety and (ii) the way legal enforcement is exercised on the ground. In general, visual inspection is not
considered to be an effective way to assure meat safety and in many developing countries, food safety
regulations are not effectively implemented along the value chain.

Moreover, food safety risks still remain at the following:
     The unreported supply of 100–150 tons to supplement for the production gap of Ho Chi Minh City
        may represent the flows that are not monitored or inspected and have gone straight to retail
        markets. This accounts for about 15% of the city’s daily consumption.
     Ho Chi Minh City can only meet about one-third of its pork demand by its own production. A large
        volume is imported from other provinces. The safety of pork from this source is, therefore, mainly
        driven by the monitoring and evaluation activities by local agencies in the provinces of production
        and if linkages between players can support traceability in inter-province value chains.
     The 682 tons per day output of slaughtering centres or 93% of demand suggests a balance of 7% (48
        tons) being processed somewhere and may not be properly inspected by local authorities.

2.       Vegetable value chain in Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City
The vegetable value chain supplying Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City is depicted in Figure 5.

Figure 5: Vegetable value chain supplying Ha Noi and Ho Chi Minh City.

     EXPORTERS

                                                                  Vendors


                                                               Retail Markets



                                                          Wholesale markets
                         Traders/
                         Cooperatives                                                     Household
  PRODUCERS                                                                               Consumers

                                                                Super markets,
                                                               convenient store


                                                          Organizational buyers
                                                          (Restaurants, hotels)
                          Processors or
                            Exporters
                                                                                           Overseas
                                                                                           markets




     Local                                        Traders or plant                         Overseas
  distributors                                  protection medicine                        exporters
    of plant                                         producers
   medicine




                                                           7
2.1.       Vegetable value chain in Ha Noi
Table 5 presents the overall production and distribution flow of vegetables in Ha Noi.

Table 5: Summary of production and distribution flow of vegetables in Ha Noi
                                          Local sales    Wholesale       Vendors           Supermarkets        Estimated total
                                                         markets                                               consumption
    Flow volume (tons per year)           104,441        325,950         419,609           150,000             1,000,000
    Share of total supply (%)             10             33              42                15                  100
                                          Ha Noi                         Other provinces                       Total
    Total production (tons per year)      600,000                        400,000                               1,000,000
    Total production (tons per day)       1,644                          1,096                                 2,740
    Share of total demand (%)             60                             40                                    100
Source: DARD, Ha Noi and analysis of data from DARD

Consumption
Because of the unavailability of data on the specific market demand for vegetables in Ha Noi, the city’s level of
consumption of vegetables was estimated. We assumed an average Vietnamese would consume 0.3 –0.5 kg of
vegetables per day. The total consumption of vegetables in Ha Noi is, therefore, projected at 2000–3000 tons
per day. To obtain an overall picture of the flow of vegetables by volume, an average daily consumption of 0.4
kg per person may be estimated to show the level of demand in Ha Noi (Table 6).

Table 6: Estimated level of consumption of vegetables in Ha Noi
    Level of consumption*                                   Quantity
    Average consumption (kg/person per day)                 0.4
    Total consumption per day (tons)                        2,838
    Total consumption per year (tons)                       1,035,870
*Based on Ha Noi population of 7,095,000 people

Production
The level of production of vegetables in Ha Noi is nearly 600,000 tons per year or 1,644 tons per day. With a
consumption level of about 1 million tons per year, Ha Noi has to import a substantial amount of vegetables
from other provinces (Table 7).

Table 7: Level of production of vegetables in Ha Noi and other provinces
                                               Ha Noi         Other provinces             Total
    Production (tons per year)                 600,000        400,000                     1,000,000
    Production (tons per day)                  1,644          1,096                       2,740
    Share of total demand (%)                  60             40
Source: DARD, Ha Noi

The supplementary supply is mainly from provinces in the Red River Delta, namely, Vinh Phuc, Hung Yen, Hai
Duong, Bac Ninh, Bac Giang and Hoa Binh. This is expected to increase in future because of the rapid
urbanization process that will further shrink agricultural land in the capital. Notably, it is widely reported in the
media that a considerable amount of vegetables originate from China. However, the source of official data of
this flow is unfortunately not available.

Unlike the pork business where the farm model is becoming popular, vegetable plantations are dominated by
thousands of households. Due to historical reasons, an average plantation per household is less than 2,000 m2,
divided into four to five slots scattered at different places on the field 9. Given around 12,000 hectares of



9Denis Sautier, D., Dao, T.A., Nguyen, N.M., Moustier, P. and Pham C.N. 2013. Enjeur de l’agriculture periurbaine et
croissance urbaine à Ha Noi. Metropoles aux Suds, Parois, Edition Ketharla. pp. 271–285.

                                                              8
vegetable land and an average of 2,000 m2 per household, about 60,000 households are probably participating
in vegetable production in Ha Noi.

Though many co-operatives have been formed by vegetable farmers to address the weakness of small-scale
production through strengthened horizontal linkages and other collective actions, the capacity of such co-
operatives generally remains weak.

Currently, Ha Noi has 5,000 hectares recognized as a safe vegetable production area 10. With an average annual
yield of 40 tons per hectare, this amounts to 200,000 tons per year. In parallel to this is the development of a
distribution system for safe vegetables with more than 200 sale points mainly spread over Ha Noi’s urban
districts. In this system, vegetables and other agricultural products are traceable to the original production
sites and hence claimed to have assured food safety. Significant marketing efforts to differentiate safe
vegetables from others, which may be safe or not, are also constantly made, but the effect of such is not
always realized in reality due to the lack of credible evidence to show to the buyers.

There are some issues related to production of vegetables in Ha Noi. On one hand, the above-mentioned 5,000
hectares may imply a misleading signal that the produce from all of the other production areas is not safe;
what is more, 200,000 tons of vegetables from safe zones only represen t 20% of the city’s total demand, which
is estimated at 1 million tons per year. On the other hand, provided that a sale point of safe vegetables has an
average sale volume of 50–100 kg per day, the volume traded through safe vegetable shops is roughly less
than 12,000 tons per year, or 6% of the 200,000 tons per year claimed to be of assured food safety, suggesting
that the distribution capacity for safe vegetables obviously remains under-developed.

Distribution
Major vegetable distribution channels in Ha Noi are:
      Local markets near the plantation areas: the vegetables are sold by producers or vendors at local
          markets to local consumers.
      Wholesale markets: there are 10 wholesale markets in Ha Noi. Vegetables are transported to these
          markets in large volumes, often by traders who source the supplies from various plantation areas,
          including those inside or outside Ha Noi. From wholesale markets, the vegetables are then distributed
          to multiple retail markets in Ha Noi or to other provinces.
      Vendors: retailers/vendors directly purchase vegetables from producers or wholesale markets and
          then sell in retail markets.
      Supermarkets and organizational buyers, for instance, hotels, restaurants and schools.

Estimates of the quantity of vegetables in each channel are provided in Table 8. According to Ha Noi DARD,
325,950 tons are traded at wholesale markets. Provided that about 15% of consumption (150,000 tons) is of
vegetables sold in supermarkets (probably an over-estimate), there is a balance of more than 500,000 tons
consumption and this amount is believed to consist of (i) direct supplies from producers/vendors (inside or
outside Ha Noi) to local or retail markets somewhere else and (ii) imports from China.

Table 8: Flow volume of vegetables in Ha Noi by distribution channel
                    Local              Wholesale        Estimated sales      Estimated           Estimated
                    consumption        markets          of producers or      volume via          total
                                                        vendors              supermarkets        consumption
 Flow volume        104,441            325,950          419,609              150,000             1,000,000
 (tons per year)
 Share of total     10                 33               42                   15                  100
 supply (%)
Source: Data of local consumption and wholesale markets provided by DARD, Ha Noi; volume through supermarkets is
based on the assumption of 15% share of this channel. The volume of direct flow to retail markets (not through wholesale
ones) is derived by assuming Ha Noi’s total consumption of vegetables to be 1 million tons per year.

A study on the perceptions of food safety and daily vegetable shopping practices found that despite
government efforts in socially engineering everyday food shopping towards supermarkets, established

10   DARD, Ha Noi

                                                             9
practices (for example, purchase of vegetables from wet markets) persist or are adjusted to the transformative
context of Vietnam (Wertheim-Heck 2015).

Food safety risks
The following are the food safety risk points of the vegetable value chain in Ha Noi:
     Small-scale production, by its nature, generates small profits and households may not be able to
         invest in infrastructure or skills needed to produce safe vegetables. Moreover, farm inspection is
         difficult because of the involvement of many producers in a geographically wide area.
     There is some evidence of improper use of plant protection pesticides. Besides over-using amounts
         and doses of pesticides, farmers are reported as having used wrong pesticides for different crops
         from time to time.
     Control of supplies from other provinces is difficult, involving coordination between different agencies
         on the ground. In reality, vegetables from other provinces are transported to Ha Noi’s wholesale
         markets at night by hundreds of trucks and then quickly unloaded for Ha Noi wholesalers or uploaded
         on other trucks to be sold on to other provinces. Tracing of vegetables, in the event a sample tests
         positive for a specific hazard, is almost impossible. Since other provinces account for 40% of the city’s
         total consumption (1,096 tons per day), the risk associated with this supply source cannot be ignored.
     Supply from China is not officially recorded, although the high frequency of media reports on China-
         sourced vegetables and fruits suggests a significant import volume from China. Public doubt of food
         safety is always cast over Chinese products. However, this is not well backed by the available data and
         test information.
     While the flow through wholesale markets can be presumably better controlled, the flow that goes
         directly from vendors or producers to retailers in open markets cannot be properly monitored. In Ha
         Noi, 491,609 tons of vegetables per year are estimated to flow directly from producers or vendors to
         retail markets where the inspection is fairly loose in comparison with wholesale markets. This is
         consistent with the findings from a recent study of the vegetable supply chain in Ha Noi that 42% of
         vegetables in Ha Noi are supplied by small vendors11 whose products do not pass through the state
         monitoring system.
     Local consumption represents the amount that is sold locally by producers. Such flow is unfortunately
         not under inspection but is significant enough (104,441 tons or 10% of Ha Noi’s consumption).

2.2.     Vegetable value chain in Ho Chi Minh City
Consumption
Similar to Ha Noi, the consumption of vegetables in Ho Chi Minh City is estimated at 1.2 million tons per year,
equivalent to more than 3,000 tons per day (Table 9).

Table 9: Estimated level of consumption of vegetables in Ho Chi Minh City
 Level of consumption*                                   Quantity
 Average consumption (kg/person per day)                 0.4
 Total consumption per day (tons)                        3,290
 Total consumption per year (tons)                       1,200,704
*Based on Ho Chi Minh City’s population of 8,224,000 people

Production
With 14,500 hectares of land, Ho Chi Minh City generates 366,704 tons of vegetables yearly. Its production,
therefore, meets 39% of the total consumption of 1,200,704 tons. The remaining more than 800,000 tons
(61%) is of course to be sourced from other provinces. Ho Chi Minh City has signed some inter-provincial
agreements for food trading as a mechanism to improve food safety in the trade between provinces. In respect
to vegetables and fruits, these are with five provinces: Lam Dong, Long An, Tay Ninh, Tien Giang and Cà Mau.
Safe value chains have been particularly targeted and set up, providing 20,914 tons of safe vegetables and



11Nguyen Thi Tan Loc and Do Kim Chung. 2015. Giai phap phat trien tieu thu rau. Journal of Science and Development
13(4): 850–858.

                                                          10
fruits for Ho Chi Minh City12. In addition, concerted efforts have been made to expand VietGAP-certified
plantations, but uptake has been rather limited to date. The VietGAP vegetable output achieves 50,929 tons
per year, equivalent to only 4% of the total consumption.

Distribution
Two major distribution channels in Ho Chi Minh City are (i) wholesale markets to retail markets and consumers
and (ii) supermarkets to end users. Estimates of trade volumes through wholesale markets and supermarkets
are shown in Table 10.

Table 10: Estimated trade volumes of vegetables in Ho Chi Minh City
                                     Wholesale markets        Supermarkets       Estimated total consumption
 Trade volume (tons per year)        1,020,598                180,106            1,200,704
 Share of total supply (%)           85                       15                 100

The trade through the wholesale channel is in fact consistent with the volume reported by DARD Ho Chi Minh
City, which is about 1 million tons per year13. Hence, unlike Ha Noi, the available data suggest that vegetables
sold at retail markets almost always originate from wholesale markets. The issue of vendors circumventing
wholesale markets to retail markets is not picked from the data analysis.

Food safety risks
Ho Chi Minh City shares common risks at household level with Ha Noi. These include the issues associated with
small-scale production and the application of plant protection pesticides. VietGAP-certified production is used
as a tool to ensure food safety, but only takes a 4% share of the city’s consumption. However, in distribution,
Ho Chi Minh City has more challenges in controlling the supply of vegetables from other provinces; this
channel accounts for 60% of total consumption, as opposed to only 40% in Ha Noi. Though serious attempts
have been made for more effective coordination in the inter-province vegetable value chain, the trade in such
value chains is only 20,914 tons per year to date, trivial in comparison to the 800,000 tons per year supply
from sources outside Ho Chi Minh City. As indicated from consolidated data, Ho Chi Minh City does not suffer
the risk of having vegetables from producers or vendors circumventing the wholesale markets and going
uninspected as a result. But on the other hand, this strengthens the need for thorough coverage of monitoring
and evaluation activities at the three major wholesale markets in the city.

3.        Summary of focal risks in the supply chain
Putting aside the current issues related to the implementation of food safety legal rules and policies on the
government side, the major risks to food safety in pork and vegetables are presented in Table 11.




12Report of DARD, Ho Chi Minh City
13There are three major wholesale markets in Ho Chi Minh City with total vegetables and fruits volume of 1.5 million tons,
of which one-third is transferred to other provinces. The volume for internal consumption of Ho Chi Minh City is, therefore,
estimated at 1 million tons of vegetables.

                                                            11
Table 11: Major risks to food safety in pork and vegetables
Level              Pork                                               Vegetables
Input supply       Inclusion of growth promoters (illegal) by         Very high use of pesticides. Lack of legal regulations
                   animal feed producers and high use of              to eliminate market distortion of low quality plant
                   antibiotics for growth promotion (legal)           protection pesticides, discouraging quality-qualified
                                                                      products
Processing         Lack of control over small processing facilities
                   Large processing facilities may increase
                   contamination
                   Inspection is not able to detect food safety
                   problems as it is mainly visual and process-
                   based
                   Lack of enforcement of regulations
Distribution       Lack of control over the flow from small               Lack of control over the flow from small-scale
                   slaughterhouses to retail markets                      producers straight to retail markets
                   Effectiveness of control in wholesale markets          Effectiveness of control in wholesale markets not
                   not known                                              known
                   Traditional buying habits focused on factors not fully related to food safety, such as freshness and
                   appearance
                   Under-developed distribution channel which occupies less than 20% of market sales in city areas
Consumer           Inability to (i) differentiate between safe and unsafe foods, (ii) know when they suffer as a result of
                   food safety violations and (iii) effectively complain and be compensated in case of having been
                   affected
                   Preference for fresh, warm pork supplied by traditional markets versus chilled, frozen pork from
                   supermarkets (Lapar and Toan 2010; Lapar et al. 2012)
                   Distrust of certification (Lapar and Toan 2010; Lapar and Tiongco 2011)
                   Lower income consumers are unwilling to pay a premium for safe food
Overall            Lack of traceability, lack of linkages in the chain, un-differentiated products, lack of effective and
                   trusted certification, lack of effective control and enforcement, lack of information on priority risks
                   and poor risk communication

It is worth noting that the above issues are generic, differentiated in terms of magnitude between locations.

4.        Some important highlights in the value chains: the case of Ha Noi
An example of an inspection and monitoring scheme of an agriculture value chain (fresh fruit, vegetables and
meat) which describes ‘what, who, how and when’ is presented in Annex 8. Pork production is 500 tons per
day and supply from other provinces is 100 tons per day. Out of 500 tons produced in Ha Noi, large farms
produce around 30% and organized value chains produce 30 tons per day. At the processing level, there are 14
semi-industrial slaughterhouses producing 152 tons per day (24.1%), 93 manual processing slaughterhouses
producing 93 tons per day (14.8%) and 2,490 family-run slaughterhouses producing 385 tons per day (61.1%).
Distribution is through 103 supermarkets (94.5 tons or 15%), four wholesale markets (17.5 tons or 3%) and 426
retail markets (516.6 tons or 82%). Based on the assessment of the value chains in relation to the institutional
infrastructure, some further analysis and recommendations are provided below by sub-sections discussed in
this section.

4.1.      Responsibilities of different ministries and departments
         MARD: Responsible for pig production, inspection and slaughter; post-harvest handling including
          processing and wholesale wet markets. It also implements a residue monitoring program (started very
          recently), development of VietGAP standards and scheme and its implementation.
         MOIT: Responsible for wholesale and retail markets including supermarkets and food stores.
         MOH: Safety in restaurants and canteens including serving of pork and its products, policy
          coordination and coordinating implementation of food safety measures. Development of standards
          for pork and pork products and overall labelling requirements.
         The smaller businesses are the responsibilities of provincial level agencies while the larger businesses
          are generally addressed at national level.




                                                                12
Issue: At the market level, both MOIT and MARD have a responsibility. At restaurants and canteens, the
responsibility lies with MOH but strong coordination is needed with the MARD veterinary service. Regarding
labelling, again, strong coordination is required. At the provincial level, coordination is needed not only among
the inter-ministerial departments but also within MARD and its local departments: NAFIQAD which operates
the residue control program, DAH and DARD.

Recommendation: To strengthen coordination, it may be useful to have a single food control authority as is
being proposed at the provincial level in Ho Chi Minh City. If this model is successful, it could be replicated in
other provinces and, if needed, at the national level. Targets under the Food Safety Strategy will need to focus
on food safety outcomes and not only on processes and process controls.

4.2.     Laws and regulations
In Vietnam, food laws and regulations are generally prescriptive with the aim being to implement the
processes and procedures. Often, laws are not implemented in a true spirit to ensure safe food. In the pork
value chain, levels of veterinary drug residues need to be within the criteria prescribed; generally, these should
not be permitted in feed inputs or should be restricted to the bare minimum levels essential for the purposes
of treatment of animals. However, it was observed that the use of antibiotics in animal feeds is the norm and
in certain cases farmers were using as many as 15 veterinary drugs in the feed. Targets under the National
Strategy for Food Safety need to be more outcome-based; however, these are generally in terms of the
numbers of units implementing HACCP, irrespective of their effectiveness.

4.3.     Surveillance, inspection and preventive approaches
With the large number of household farms producing pigs, the 2,490 family-run slaughterhouses processing
61% of pork consumed in the city and the 518 retail markets distributing 82% of the meat, even a single visit a
year will require a large workforce. Even then, the quality and safety of pork are not guaranteed. It is,
therefore, absolutely essential to look into preventive approaches and risk-based surveillance and inspections
with responsibilities shared between ministries and departments.

Although risk-based food control management is being implemented in some areas, it is not being done
uniformly across ministries, departments and provinces. It is recommended that a risk-based approach be
followed across the board to ensure best utilization of resources and lead to an effective food control system
in the country. It may also be useful to synergize private-sector initiative in this area.

Currently the focus is more on end-product inspection and testing for ensuring food safety rather than
implementing preventive approaches by food business operators. It should be recognized that end-product
testing cannot build safety into a product, nor is it cost-effective. Although VietGAP has been initiated, the
numbers seen are very limited. It is important for the government to build in preventive approaches for food
safety and use testing to validate the effectiveness of preventive measures put in place by the food businesses.

4.4.     Available data
As discussed in Section 4 of the main report, the most prevalent microbiological hazard in pork is Salmonella
and a number of studies are quoted in the report. Antibiotic residues and growth promoters are also being
used in the pig farms, as evidenced from literature. The data currently available from governmental and
research institutions are not harmonized. However, the data are also not scientifically collected, analysed and
used for development of standards and other risk management activities. Data linking public health and
foodborne illnesses to the food are neither scientifically collected nor coordinated between ministries and
departments. There is a need for better data collection including the implementation of national residue and
contaminant monitoring programs across the country and use of data in a systematic and planned manner.
There is also a need for a focus on hazards and impacts on public health, as well as the development of
comprehensive and joint national surveillance programs.

4.5.     Food safety laboratories
Each ministry has its own network of laboratories with different capacities. The government is now looking at
procurement of rapid test kits for testing of products at markets so that immediate results may help to allay
the fears of consumers and the government. However, this will require significant testing both in terms of


                                                        13
products and parameters to determine their safety. Further, testing should not be used for food control but to
confirm that the implemented activities deliver safe food. It is important to implement the National Residue
Control Plan and to consolidate the test facilities in both government and private-sector laboratories for better
resource utilization and management. The concept of networking of laboratories at national level is needed.
There is also need to use the private sector to strengthen the governmental food control activities.

4.6.     Training
As seen from the analysis, small-scale producers and processors produce 70% of the pork supplies. It is
important to train and increase awareness of producers and processors. Training is also needed for
government agencies, especially at local levels. Consumers also need awareness on food safety to be able to
understand foodborne hazards and risks and demand hygienic and safe products which will then lead to safer
production and application of hygienic practices.

5.       Food safety production models
High public concern over unsafe foods has clearly indicated an unsatisfied demand on the consumer side.
Many players in agricultural value chains adopt safety as a core selling point for their products. Emerging
models include the following:

5.1.     Vertical integration
Large firms manage all stages in the value chain to enhance traceability and quality assurance. For example,
Vincom, a big corporation in Vietnam, has set up its own network of retail outlets (VinMarts) and sources
supplies from its own production sites. There are, however, medium businesses running this model on a
smaller scale. For example, Organica with retail shops in Ho Chi Minh City and vegetable farms in Dong Nai and
Lam Dong; Mavin in Ha Noi with its own operations in feed, production and processing in pork business and
BacTom with a growing number of outlets in Ha Noi supplying pork and vegetables of known origin. Vertical
integration is challenged by the increased cost and there is little compelling evidence that the products are
safer.

5.2.     Linkages
In the context of resource constraints to expansion, linking with firms that require high quality is perhaps the
best currently available option. A typical linkage is between well-known distributors, co-operatives and
processing companies. For example, many VietGAP-certified products can be now obtained from Saigon Coop
Mart, a prominent modern distributor that has well established relationships with many co-operatives and
companies in Ho Chi Minh City and many other provinces in Vietnam. Supermarkets may also provide an outlet
for safe foods. However, given the small number of modern markets, vegetable producers are often faced with
fierce competition by others and relatively few producers can be included in linkages. Moreover, there is
limited evidence that supermarkets actually sell safer products. The higher price of fresh foods and more
difficult access are other challenges for supermarket products. In the case of pork, consumers prefer fresh,
warm pork rather than the chilled or frozen meat sold in supermarkets (Lapar and Toan 2010; Lapar et al.
2012).

5.3.     Co-operatives
Multiple households come together to use standardized GAP. This can address issues associated with small-
scale production at households and improve marketing capacity. While many co-operatives are formed as a
result of governmental initiative, which is a top-down approach and often associated with much support from
the government, there are rare cases where co-operatives are set up voluntarily and run successfully to some
extent. The Vietnam Rabbit Co-operative in Ho Chi Minh City is an example of such; with almost 200 members,
the co-operative is able to supply supermarkets in Ho Chi Minh City daily with over 100 tons of vegetables of
diverse varieties while ensuring that VietGAP farming techniques are strictly adhered to. The management
capacity in production organization and marketing is believed to be a vital factor in the co-operative’s success.
Overall, co-operatives have not been very successful in Vietnam, either in their operation or scale.




                                                       14
5.4.     VietGAP
In this ‘field-to-table’ model, good farming practices in producing vegetables and good manufacturing
practices (GMP and HACCP) in packaging, processing, transport and storage with hygiene and management
standards are applied to ensure strict control at all stages of food value chains. At production level, farmers
have to comply with GAP standards and among these is VietGAP, a process of GAP established and issued by
MARD from 28 January 2008. Many supermarkets, canteens and safe vegetable stores now require vegetable
products originating from certified safe agricultural zones or produced under VietGAP principles. VietGAP
standard is necessary for co-operatives and large-scale farms to meet safe product outcomes. For example,
Saigon Coop Mart only buys safe vegetables from VietGAP-certified farms and co-operatives.

A good example of the use of standards can be found in the implementation of the Canadian International
Development Agency–Food Agricultural Product Quality Development and Control project 14, in which VietGAP
and GMP technical tools were applied in 15 vegetable and fruit value chains in seven pilot provinces at various
production scales such as (i) small-scale households in a co-operative, (ii) joint production groups and (iii)
farms or companies. Evidence from the project shows the usefulness and efficiency of VietGAP and GMP
technical tools. In particular, the project reported that the technical tools were easy to use and that testing
fruits and vegetables showed a decrease in contamination. The tools were also used by DARD in expanding the
pilot projects of agricultural product value chains under the framework of MARD’s program on food safety
quality management to be implemented by DARD in 33 provinces and cities.

However, the application of VietGAP and GMP technical tools faces some challenges in changing farmer
behaviour and non-compliance issues arise from time to time. In addition, many ordinary farmers perceive the
VietGAP certification fee to be too high. Some argue that VietGAP is too complex for small-scale farmers. The
main difficulties are keeping of proper records and adherence to the health and safety requirements.
Therefore, VietGAP is under-applied in vegetable production. By the end of 2014, 376 co-operative groups,
households and manufacturing facilities were VietGAP-certified with nearly 2,000 hectares out of 830,000
hectares of vegetables grown annually in the whole country15.

5.5.     Basic GAP
With technical support from JICA, a project on improving crop productivity and quality developed and
evaluated Basic GAP which is specific, simpler and more accessible for farmers to deliver good farming
practices without having to use the term ‘towards VietGAP’. In 2014, MARD issued a Decision No. 2998/QD -
BNN-TT, Basic GAP Guidance for Vegetable Production in Vietnam. Basic GAP has been applied by farmers to
produce safe vegetables for domestic markets. However, while this is a promising approach, there is as yet
little evidence on whether Basic GAP can overcome the problems of scalability of GAP while assuring food
safety.

5.6.     Community-based certification
As an alternative to VietGAP, in which registration through a certification organization or body is required,
food safety monitoring could be a community-based model. Such community-based models are effective in
many countries, especially in small-scale production that involves a quality management system such as
Participatory Guarantee System (PGS). In Vietnam, PGS has been used by the Agriculture Development
Denmark Asia and VredesEilanden Country Office Vietnam for safe organic vegetable production. It has also
been used for production and distribution management in small-scale farmer households in Thanh Xuan, Soc
Son and Tan Duc–Viet Tri. The process is: (i) selection of a production site that satisfies the safe vegetable
production requirements, (ii) selection of volunteer producers with rich experience in vegetable growing and
(iii) selection of the target distribution area. Training is provided to members of the PGS group on the following
skills: development of a production plan, logbook record, risk prevention and control, fertilizer and pesticide
application, harvest and handling. Once the producer group is established and to ensure that the group
maintains regular application of field management measures, an inspection committee is established to
regularly inspect the group and provide instruction on any corrective action needed. Members of the
inspection committee are consumers as well as officials from the plant protection sub-department, communal

14Canadian  International Development Agency-funded Food Agricultural Product Quality Development and Control project
final submitted report, 2014
15Presentation of Crop Production Department at a GAP workshop organized by MARD, JICA and ADB in December 2014



                                                         15
people’s committee and agriculture co-operative. The committee has scheduled and unscheduled inspection
plans. In addition, the communal people’s committee and consumers ensure that producer groups comply
with production procedures and take responsibility for the quality of local agro-products before distribution.
This promotes the production activities, reduces the pressure on state management of monitoring, inspection,
direction and certification, and encourages the producers to take responsibility for providing safe products to
consumers. However, while community-based certification is promising, there is as yet little evidence on
whether it can overcome the problems of the scalability of GAP while assuring food safety.

MOH, MARD and MOIT have authority to implement food safety standard certification in accordance with food
product groups which are under the management of these three ministries. MOH authorized VFA to
implement food safety standard certification for food producing and trading organizations at national level. At
this level, it is authorized to certify the organizations producing and trading functional food, micronutrient
food, food supplements, food additives and natural mineral water. Other authorities from provincial to local
levels are responsible for certifying the rest of the food groups.

In addition to the above-mentioned VietGAP standard for safe production of vegetables, fruits and tea, the
Vietnamese Good Animal Husbandry Practices standard is applied to livestock production. For fishery
products, Vietnam applies standards such as Good Aquaculture Practices for primary production and HACCP in
processing establishments.

The new Circular No. 48/2012/TT-BNNPTNT regulates certification of crops, livestock and aquatic products
produced and processed in accordance with VietGAP. According to this circular, DCP and the Department of
Livestock Production are agencies that designate certification bodies for vegetables, fruits, tea and livestock
products certification as per VietGAP. By December 2015, out of the 23 national certification bodies, 17 had
been designated by DCP for the purpose of VietGAP. A full list of the nationally accredited certification bodies
is available on the VietGAP website (http://www.vietgap.gov.vn).

At the end of April 2015, a total of 14,498 households (5,400 hectares) within the QSEAP provinces were
VietGAP-certified for fruit and vegetables, with an estimated 115,959 tons of certified produce. As mentioned
earlier, there are an estimated 800,000 hectares under vegetable production in Vietnam, so it can be seen that
the coverage of VietGAP is almost negligible (less than 1%). The VietGAP audit certification procedure is given
in Annex 13. In parallel, DCP has also data on numbers relating to the whole country which are compared with
the QSEAP numbers in Table 12.

Table 12: Numbers of VietGAP-certified households and hectares
 Crop               DCP number of               QSEAP number of              QSEAP number of
                    hectares certified          hectares certified           households certified
 Vegetables         1,897                       1,217                        5,970
 Fruit              6,633                       1,683                        4,206
 Tea                4,205                       2,500                        4,322
 Total              12,736                      5,400                        14,498
Source: DCP seminar presentation (April 2015) and QSEAP progress report (2015)

With respect to GAP benchmarking for international markets, there have been a number of issues concerning
the authentication of the national accreditation process and recognition of the accreditation body of the
certification bodies that are accredited to undertake certification of VietGAP. For the accreditation and
certification schemes to be equivalent to other schemes around the world, DCP must comply with the ISO
17067:2013 standard, Conformity Assessment – Fundamentals for product certification and guidelines for
product certification schemes. However, at the time, the accreditation process was undertaken using ISO 65
guidelines as the accreditation body (DCP) had not gained accreditation for that standard and, therefore, the
certification bodies have national recognition only.

The capacity of third-party certification bodies for VietGAP (vegetables and fruits) is still limited and not
homogeneous. The reputation of certification bodies for VietGAP is low and they are not recognized by
customers. There is lack of a legal basis for certification of GMP for off-farm establishments (packing houses).




                                                          16
Certification fees are still very high. Farmers have indicated that the average VietGAP certification fee is 25
million Vietnam Dong for 2–3 hectares of vegetables. Without support from government and official
development assistance projects, farmers and co-operatives find it difficult to pay for VietGAP certification.

There is need to provide support and capacity building to certifying bodies to ensure the credibility of the
products issued under VietGAP. In order to improve the VietGAP audit process, certification body auditors
should be trained based on the ISO 9001:2008 standard and the related standard on auditing, namely, ISO
19011:2011 which includes the background and experience of the auditors undertaking the audit process.

5.7.      Safe Agricultural Zones
Branding of specific production areas as ‘Safe Agricultural Zones’ is intended to assure production of safe
agricultural food products in terms of uncontaminated locations, primary processing and trading. Sustainable
Safe Agricultural Zones could ensure (i) food safety risks in agro-production are avoided, (ii) production
activities are organized and efficiently linked with processing and marketing, (iii) efficiencies from investments
in processing and marketing infrastructure are attained and (iv) the climate for encouraging greater
investments by farmers and agribusiness is conducive. The ADB QSEAP supported 16 provinces to establish
and plan Safe Agricultural Zones; the zones cover 178,780 hectares across all 16 participating provinces,
accounting for 71% of the total area under fruits and vegetables (251,605 hectares)16.

However, there are some challenges in the implementation of Safe Agricultural Zones. It is difficult to
differentiate the vegetables from safe zones and those from other zones and consumer confidence has not
been attained. What is more, besides the 16 provinces supported by QSEAP, a large area of farm land in other
provinces is not assessed for conditions of safe vegetable production by soil and water analysis. In the big cities
and provinces with rapidly increasing urbanization and industrialization, the farm land is moved nearer to
contamination sources. Certainly, almost all farmers do not know if the land on which they are growing
vegetables is appropriate and uncontaminated for safe production or if there is a high risk of heavy metals and
microbiological contamination of produce. Local government agencies do not have resources and do not pay
attention to soil and water analysis of land for safe vegetable growing. Together with uncertified VietGAP and
GAP, untraced vegetables produced by small individual farmers are likely considered unsafe products.

References
Grace, D. 2015. Food safety in low and middle income countries. International Journal of Environmental
          Research and Public Health 12(9): 10490–10507.
Lapar, L. and Toan, N. 2010. Demand for pork by Vietnamese consumers: Implications for pro-poor livestock
          policy and development agenda in Vietnam. Improving the Competitiveness of Pig Producers in
          Vietnam Project Brief 1. Nairobi, Kenya: ILRI.
Lapar, M.L.A., Nguyen Ngoc Toan, Staal, S., Minot, N., Tisdell, C., Nguyen Ngoc Que and Nguyen Do Anh Tuan.
          2012. Smallholder competitiveness: Insights from pig production systems in Vietnam. Presentation at
          the 28th triennial conference of the International Association of Agricultural Economists, Foz do
          Iguaçu, Brazil, 18-24 August 2012.
Viet Nam Alliance for Agriculture. 2015. Viet Nam Livestock market: structure changes to improve the
          competitiveness.
Wertheim-Heck, S. 2015. We have to eat, right? Food safety concerns and shopping for daily vegetables in
          modernizing Vietnam. PhD thesis. Wageningen, the Netherlands: Wageningen University. (Available
          from http://www.freshstudio.vn/images/media-archive/Publications/2015/20151029%20Thesis%20-
          %20We%20have%20to%20eat%20right%20-%20SCO%20Wertheim-Heck.pdf ) (Accessed on 13
          August 2016)




16QSEAP   final report, December 2015

                                                        17
