Multisectoral
      Nutrition
 Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved
First published 2017


       Standard Disclaimer:
	      This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
       and Development/World Bank Group. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
       expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors
       of the World Bank Group or the governments they represent. The World Bank Group
       does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
       colors, denominations, and any other information shown on any map in this work do not
       imply any judgment on the part of the World Bank group concerning the legal status of
       any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.



Copyright Statement:
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of
this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its work
and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax
202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org

Photo credits: Chapter 01,04,06: Anuki Premachandra and Chapter 02,03,05: Smriti Daniel.
Multisectoral
      Nutrition
 Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector




              i
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector
                 Table of Contents
                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS	                                                      IV
                 ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS	                                             V
                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY	                                                      1

                 CHAPTER 1
                 INTRODUCTION	9
                 1.1	 Sri Lanka: The Country Context	            9
                 1.2	 The Estate Sector- a Disadvantaged Group	 10
                 1.3	 Objectives of the Study	                  12
                 1.4	 Structure of the Report	                  12

                 CHAPTER 2
                 METHODOLOGY	14
                 2.1	 Conceptual Framework for the Determinants of Malnutrition	 14
                 2.2	 Data and Sampling	                                         16
                 	    2.2.1	 The Household Survey Data	                          16
                 	    2.2.2	 Data for Gap Analyses	                              17

                 CHAPTER 3
                 NUTRITION STATUS OF THE ESTATE POPULATION	                             19
                 3.1	 Sample features	                                                  19
                 3.2	 Nutrition Status in the Estate Population	                        21
                 3.3	 Anemia		                                                          24
                 3.4	Birthweight	                                                       25

                 CHAPTER 4
                 DETERMINANTS OF UNDERNUTRITION IN THE ESTATE SECTOR	                   28
                 4.1	 Determinants of Child Undernutrition:
                 	    Feeding Practices in the Estates and a Bivariate Analysis	        28
                 4.2	 Determinants of Child Undernutrition: A Multivariate Analysis	    33

                 CHAPTER 5
                 POLICIES, INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR NUTRITION
                 PROGRAMMING AND GAPS IN CURRENT NUTRITION- SPECIFIC,
                 NUTRITION-SENSITIVE PROGRAMS	37
                 5.1	 Policies and Legislation	                                         37
                 5.2	 Stakeholders in Nutrition Service Delivery	                       39
                 5.3	 Current Nutrition Programs and Gaps in the Estate Sector	         41
                 	    5.3.1	 Interventions to Address Adolescent Health and Nutrition 	 41
                 	    5.3.2	 Nutrition Interventions for Women before Pregnancy	        42
                 	    5.3.3	 Nutrition Interventions for Pregnant Women 	               43
                 	    5.3.4	 Nutrition Interventions and Health Services for Children	  44
                 5.4	 Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions and Gaps	                       49
                 	    5.4.1	 Education and Early Childhood Development	                 49
                 	    5.4.2	 Water and Sanitation	                                      51
                 	    5.4.3	 Social Protection	                                         52
                 	    5.4.4	Agriculture	                                                53

                 CHAPTER 6
                 RECOMMENDATIONS 	                                                      56

                 REFERENCES	59
                 ANNEX		                                                                64




ii
Table of Figures
ES .1		       Prevalence of Undernutrition by Wealth Quintiles	                               4
Figure 1.1	   Stunting among Children Under-Five Years, Global (2015)	                        9
Figure 1.2	   Nutrition Indicators by Sectors and Ages in Sri Lanka	                         11
Figure 2.1	   Conceptual Framework to Assess the Determinants of Malnutrition
              in the Estate Sector (adapted from the UNICEF Framework)	                      15
Figure 3.1	   Sample Distribution by Estate Type	                                            19
Figure 3.2	   Prevalence of Stunting In Children 0–59 Months	                                22
Figure 3.3	   Prevalence of Undernutrition by Wealth Quintiles	                              22
Figure 3.4	   Prevalence of Underweight in Children 0–59 Months Underweight by
              Age and Gender	                                                                23
Figure 3.5	   Prevalence of Wasting in Children 0–59 months	                                 23
Figure 3.6	   Prevalence of Low Birthweight	                                                 26
Figure 4.1	   IYCF Practices	                                                                28
Figure 4.2	   Age at Introduction of Complementary Feeding (0–23 Months) 	                   29
Figure 4.3	   Children Dietary Intake by Food Type 	                                         29
Figure 5.1	   Percent of Pregnant Women who Received Micronutrients
              and Food Supplements During Pregnancy	                                         44
Figure 5.2	   Advice Provided for Children with Poor Weight Gain	                            46
Figure 5.3	   Health and Nutrition Services Given to Children (Percent of Children)	         46


Table of Tables
Table 3.1	    Household Characteristics by Category of Estate	                                21
Table 3.2	    Public Health Significance of Child Undernutrition and Anemia
              (Based on WHO 2010)	                                                            24
Table 3.3	    Anemia in Children and Pregnant Women	                                          25
Table 4.1	    Prevalence of Undernutrition in Children (0–59 Months): a Bivariate Analysis	 32
Table 4.2	    Determinants of Child Undernutrition (Probit Marginal Effects)	                 34
Table 5.1	    Sri Lanka Maternity Benefits Package	                                           38
Table 5.2	    Pre- and During Pregnancy Care	                                                 43
Table 5.3	    Current Nutrition-Specific and Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions
              and Gaps in the Estate Sector	                                                  47
Table 5.4	    Availability and Sanitary Facilities in Estates (Percent)	                      51
Table 5.5	    Water Quality Assessment	                                                       52
Table A1	     Nutritional Status by Estate Type	                                              64
Table A2	     Nutritional Status by Estate Type	                                              64
Table A3	     Maternal Knowledge Regarding Foods and Their Main Nutrient Component	           65
Table A4	     Institutional Delivery and Advice on Child Growth (% of Children Under 5 Years)	65
Table A5	     Health and Nutrition Services for Children (Percentage of Children)	            66
Table A6	     Water Quality at Different Sources by Estate Type	                              66




                                                                                                   iii
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector
                 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                 This report was prepared by a core team comprising Nkosinathi Mbuya (Senior Nutrition Specialist),
                 Kumari Vinodhani Navaratne (Senior Health Specialist), Preeti Kudesia (Senior Health Specialist),
                 Zelalem Yilma Debebe (Young Professional), Yi-Kyoung Lee (Senior Health Specialist), Phoebe Folger
                 (Operations Officer), Deepika Attygalle (Senior Health Specialist), Owen Smith (Senior Economist),
                 Nayana Fernando (Consultant), Dilinika Peiris-Holsinger and Anuki Premachandra (External and
                 Corporate Relations Team) and Kerima Thilakasena (Program Assistant) from the World Bank and
                 Upul Senerath and Angela De Silva (both Senior Lecturers from the University of Colombo) and
                 Sujatha Samarakoon, Public Health Specialist.This publication has been produced thanks to the
                 contribution of The Government of The United Kingdom and the European Commission, through the
                 South Asia Food and Nutrition Security Initiative (SAFANSI).

                 Several others made major contributions to the initial report formulation. In addition to Angela De
                 Silva, Upul Senerath and Sujatha Samarakoon, we would like to acknowledge the contributions of
                 Rohanthi Perera, Lasantha Weerasooriya, Indika Siriwardhana, Y. M. Nimsath, A. Chandrasena,
                 Ranjith Wanasinghe, Inoka Damayanthi, and Tharuka Nayanathara from the Sri Lanka Business
                 Development Centre.

                 Experts from various organizations formed the technical working group established to review the
                 study. The members provided very helpful written and verbal comments during the report’s planning,
                 implementation and completion phases. The technical experts included: Dr. Hiranya Jayawickrema,
                 Consultant Community Physician, Family Health Bureau; Dr. Sapumal Dhanapala, Consultant
                 Community Physician, Family Health Bureau; Dr. Nithershini Periyasamy, Consultant Community
                 Physician, Estate and Urban Health Unit; Dr. Senerath Mahamittawa, Deputy Director Nutrition
                 Unit and currently Director Estate and Urban Health Unit; Dr. Shanthi Gunawardena, Director,
                 National Nutrition Coordination Unit; Dr. Saseela Subash, Registrar, Estate and Urban Health Unit;
                 Dr. Neelamani Hewageegana, Director Health Education Bureau and currently the Deputy Director
                 General Planning; and Dr. Ravi Nanayakkara, Medical Director, Plantation Human Development Trust.

                 We also want to thank the survey respondents. The women and children in the estates spent
                 considerable time with the field teams, responding to questions willingly and patiently and consenting
                 to having measurements taken. Without their cooperation, we would not have been able to complete
                 this research project. In addition, we want to thank the public health inspectors and public health
                 midwives who helped us to identify preselected households in the estates and to collect water samples.




iv
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
BCC	      Behavior Change Communication
BFHI	     Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative
BMI	      Body Mass Index
CDC	      Child Development Centers
CDO 	     Child Development Officers
CHDR	     Child Health Development Record
CI 	      Confidence Interval
DHS 	     Demographic and Health Survey
EE 	      Environmental Enteropathy
FAO 	     Food and Agriculture Organization
FHB 	     Family Health Bureau
GDP 	     Gross Domestic Product
GOSL	     Government of Sri Lanka
IEC 	     Information, Education and Communication
IQ 	      Intelligence Quotient
IYCF 	    Infant and Young Child Feeding
LBW	      Low Birthweight
MCH 	     Maternal and Child Health
MDG 	     Millennium Development Goals
MMN 	     Multiple Micronutrient
MoH 	     Ministry of Health, Nutrition and Indigenous Medicine
MRI 	     Medical Research Institute
MsAPN	    Multi-sector Action Plan for Nutrition
NCD 	     Non-Communicable Disease
NGO 	     Nongovernmental Organization
NNP 	     National Nutrition Policy
PDHS 	    Provincial Directors of Health Services
PHDT 	    Plantation Human Development Trust
PHI 	     Public Health Inspector
PHM 	     Public Health Midwife
PHNS 	    Public Health Nursing Sister
PPP	      Purchasing Power Parity
RDHS 	    Regional Director of Health Services
RPC 	     Regional Plantation Companies
Rs	       Rupees Sri Lankan
SD 	      Standard Deviation
SHPP	     School Health Promotion Program
SMI 	     School Medical Inspection
UNICEF	   United Nations Children’s Fund
WASH	     Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
WFP	      World Food Program
WHO 	     World Health Organization
WHZ 	     Weight-for-Height Z-score




                                                                  v
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector




vi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Problem: Undernutrition as a Persisting Developmental Issue
1.	      Despite impressive improvements in most health indicators, undernutrition among mothers and
         children under-five years continues to be a chronic human development issue in Sri Lanka.
         In 2012, 23.5 percent of children under-five years of age were underweight, 19.6 percent
         were wasted, and 13.1 percent were stunted.1 These national aggregates, however, mask
         wide inequalities between geographical locations. Undernutrition is concentrated in the estate
         sectors and in some rural and urban areas. Districts with a high percentage of tea estates have
         the highest rate of stunting among under-fives. For example, in Nuwara Eliya, the stunting rate
         in 2006-07 was 41 percent 2 (Demographic and Health Survey (DHS) 2006-07). In addition
         to undernutrition, overall health and socioeconomic indicators in the estate sector population
         are poorer than the rest of the country (Department of Census and Statistics 2009). Also, poor
         health due to undernutrition results in reduced economic productivity by workers, particularly
         through lower wages, lower physical and mental capabilities, and increased absenteeism due
         to illness. According to the DHS 2006-07, 64 percent of the estate population were in the
         lowest wealth quintile while only 8.3 percent of the urban dwellers and 19.2 percent of the rural
         dwellers were in this quintile.


                             Nutrition - National Aggregates 2012
                             Children under 5 years




                                              23.5% 19.6% 13.1%
                                               UNDERWEIGHT                        WASTED                       STUNTED

2.	      Sri Lanka has made significant progress in its socioeconomic development. High growth has
         translated into shared prosperity, with the national poverty headcount ratio declining from 15.3
         percent in 2006–07 to 6.7 percent in 2012–13. However, despite the low levels of extreme
         poverty in the country, roughly one-quarter of Sri Lankans are nearly poor—defined as living
         above the official poverty line but below $2.50 per day in 2005 purchasing power parity (PPP)
         terms. Nonetheless, the country comfortably surpassed most of the Millennium Development
         Goals (MDGs) set for 2015 and ranked seventy-third in the 2014 Human Development Index
         (UNDP, 2015).

Objectives and Methodology
3.	      This Multisectoral Nutrition Assessment was carried out in 2014–15 to assess the status and
         determinants of maternal and child nutrition among the estate sector population. The focus
         on the estate sector is based on the recommendation of an earlier World Bank report on


1.	 Stunting (low-height-for-age) reflects the cumulative effects of undernutrition since and even before birth. This measure can
    therefore be interpreted as an indication of poor environmental conditions or long-term restriction of a child’s growth potential.
    The percentage of children who have low-weight-for-height (underweight) can reflect ‘wasting’ (i.e. low weight for height),
    indicating acute weight loss, ‘stunting’, or both.
2.	 Urban areas also stand out; in 2006-07 the highest (17.4 percent ) wasting rate, measure of acute undernutrition, was in
    Colombo- the capital city of Sri Lanka.



                                                                                                                                    1
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                         malnutrition in Sri Lanka.3 The estate sector is comprised of tea or rubber plantations managed
                         or owned by the state, Regional Plantation Companies or individuals/families and constitutes
                         4.3 percent of Sri Lanka’s population (approximately 0.9 million people). The analysis aims to
                         provide policymakers with an assessment of the current context, nutrition capacity, and gaps at
                         different administrative levels. The findings are intended to help enable a constructive dialogue
                         and coordination across multiple sectors and present an opportunity to integrate new and
                         existing effective actions to improve the nutrition status in the estate sector.

                 4.	     The objectives of this study were to:
                         i)	 Assess the size, severity, and key determinants of undernutrition in Sri Lanka’s estate
                             sector.

                         ii)	 Examine residents’ access to—and utilization of—nutrition related services and identify the
                              gaps, if any, in institutional and implementation arrangements.

                 5.	     To achieve these objectives, a mixed-methods approach, pooling two types of data, was used:
                         i)	 Cross-sectional household survey data, representative of the three different types of
                             estate sector management: regional plantation companies (RPC)-managed, government-
                             managed, and privately managed, from a sample of children (0–59 months old) and
                             pregnant women.

                         ii)	 Qualitative data for gap analysis of the health sector’s nutrition service delivery, access to
                              and utilization of the nutrition specific interventions and nutrition-sensitive interventions by
                              other stakeholders.

                 6.	     The assessment was carried out in tea and rubber plantation populations in 12 districts spread
                         across the Western, Central, Uva, Sabaragamuwa, and Southern provinces. The targeted
                         provinces are representative of the estate sector population.

                 7.	     The methodology and sampling followed by this study was different from that for the DHS
                         2006-07, and therefore, comparison of estimates between the two for trend analysis should
                         be taken with caution. Notwithstanding this, given that both samples are representative of the
                         estate sector population and the fact that no other reliable data source is available, a trend
                         analysis could be meaningful particularly when the difference is not marginal. This study, as
                         described above, utilized both quantitative and qualitative data to meet its specific objectives,
                         as compared to the DHS data which is for the entire country, and has objectives, not limited to
                         malnutrition.

                 Nutrition Status in the Estates
                 8.	     Malnutrition in the estates is an issue of concern among both children and pregnant women.
                         The rate of stunting among under-five children was 36.4 percent, showing a decline of about
                         14 percent from the 42.2 percent reported in the last DHS (2006-07)4. While the recent trend
                         in the decline of stunting rates is encouraging, progress in improving wasting, underweight,
                         birthweight and anemia is negligible or reversing. Almost 16 percent of the estate sector
                         children were wasted. Compared to the 13.5 percent wasting rate reported in the DHS 2006–
                         07, the study showed an increase rather than a decline in this measure of malnutrition. The
                         reversing trend is also evident with underweight prevalence which stands at 35.9 percent, 6
                         percentage points higher than what was reported in the DHS survey 2006-07 (30.1%). 53.1

                 3.	 World Bank (2007). “Malnutrition in Sri Lanka: Scale, Scope, Causes and Potential Responses”
                 4.	 DHS 2006–07 Department of Census and Statistics.




2
          percent of children 6–23 months old and 38.4 percent of children under-five were anemic.
          Compared to the DHS (2006-07) which reported under-five anemia prevalence rate of 39.3
          percent, this shows negligible progress.

9.	       Based on the WHO classification of public health significance of malnutrition rates, the stunting
          rate shows a ‘high’ public health significance while the wasting and underweight rates show
          a ‘very high’ public health significance. The latter two particularly require attention since they
          show a reversing trend in the past 8 years. In the case of anemia, the estate sector has a
          ‘severe’ public health problem among younger children (6-23 months) and a ‘moderate’ public
          health problem in older children (24-56 months). The findings corroborate the need for an
          urgent action.

10.	      Estate sector mothers had lower pre-pregnancy body mass index (BMI) and shorter heights
          compared to national averages. Anemia prevalence among pregnant women is also substantial
          and progress in reducing prevalence is insufficient. The prevalence of low birthweight (< 2,500
          grams and a key predictor of stunting) was 27.8 percent, substantially higher than the national
          rate of 16.6 percent, and only 3 percentage points less than the 31 percent reported in DHS
          2006–07. The magnitude of low birthweight and anemia among pregnant women reflects a
          poor maternal nutrition status.

Determinants of Undernutrition5 : A Multivariate Analysis
11.	      Low birthweight significantly and substantially increases the chances of being stunted, wasted
          and underweight. The effect ranged from about 13 percentage points in the case of wasting
          to 26 percentage points in the case of underweight. This result suggests that addressing child
          malnutrition requires a greater focus on ensuring the health and nutrition of mothers both
          before and during pregnancy.

12.	      Children of working mothers are more likely to be undernourished. In the estate sector, 47.5
          percent of mothers worked.6 Children of these mothers were 11 and 4 percentage points
          more likely to be stunted and underweight, respectively than children whose mothers stayed
          at home. This suggests that the reduced child care effect outweighs the income effect of
          employment. Exclusive breastfeeding rates were significantly lower for working mothers than
          for non-working mothers, given that the average age of the child (in the sample) by the time the
          mother returned to work was only seven weeks, much sooner than the government mandate of
          84-day period of maternity leave. Moreover, being a child of a working mother was significantly
          associated with having lower dietary diversity and lower minimum acceptable diet compared
          to children of non-working mothers.

13.	      Children of short-stature (<145 cm) mothers have higher probability of being stunted and
          underweight. For these children the probability of being stunted and underweight increased by
          18 and 12 percentage points, respectively. This, and the finding that low birthweight predicts
          child undernutrition, indicate the need for health and nutrition interventions targeting adolescent
          girls and young (married) women even before they become pregnant.


5.	 The term “malnutrition” refers to a deviation from optimal nutritional status, and includes both undernutrition and over nutrition.
    Undernutrition refers to a state of nutritional deficiency and presents the most serious risks to health and development when
    experienced by women during pre-pregnancy/pregnancy/lactation and young children. Undernutrition is the focus of this study.
    The term “malnutrition” refers to a deviation from optimal nutritional status, and includes both undernutrition and over nutrition.
    Undernutrition refers to a state of nutritional deficiency and presents the most serious risks to health and development when
    experienced by women during pre-pregnancy/pregnancy/lactation and young children. Undernutrition is the focus of this study.
6.	 44 percent of those worked away from the home. 28.4 percent work as tea pluckers; 0.9 percent as rubber tappers; 12.2
    percent work in the estate factory or did sundry work in the estates; 5.8 percent work in other occupations outside the estates.



                                                                                                                                     3
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                           14.	   Prevalence of child undernutrition is higher in less educated parents but the difference is
                                  primarily due to its effect on household wealth rather than awareness. Controlling for wealth,
                                  parental schooling (i.e. whether or not father/mother had secondary or vocational training)
                                  did not significantly predict undernutrition, suggesting that differences in nutrition information
                                  between these groups was negligible. A possible explanation is that outreach awareness
                                  creation by Public Health Midwives has diluted the nutrition information advantage that better
                                  educated parents would otherwise have.

                           15.	   Ownership of livestock and cultivation of home gardens did not seem to reduce the likelihood
                                  of undernutrition; ownership needs to be complemented by utilization of the produce. While
                                  owning livestock and keeping home gardens could be important sources of nutritious foods, the
                                  extent to which they could affect undernutrition depends on whether or not they are consumed
                                  and the frequency of consumption. The study found home gardens were cultivated by about 26
                                  percent of households however, close to one-fifth did not consume their home garden produce
                                  and only about 12 percent consumed it on a daily basis. Perhaps due to this low consumption,
                                  the study did not find a statistically significant association with undernutrition.

                           16.	   Undernutrition is a behavioral and cultural problem as well as an economic one. Relying on
                                  wealth quintiles to assess the relevance of purchasing power to nutritional outcomes, the
                                  analysis found that children from the richest 20 percent of households were 8 percentage
                                  points less likely to be stunted compared to the poorest. Although there was no clear gradient
                                  across the wealth quintiles, children from the second and fourth quintile were statistically
                                  significantly less likely to be anemic than the poorest. However, even in the richest quintile
                                  prevalence of stunting (29%), wasting (14%), underweight (31%) and anemia (38%) was very
                                  high (below).
                                                                                                                                     45
Figure ES .1                                       45%
                                                         42
Prevalence of                                                 40
                                                                   39
                                                                                                           41
                                                                                                                     39                        39
                                                   40%                                                                                    38             38
Undernutrition by Wealth                                                                                        37                                  37

                                                                        34
Quintiles                                          35%                                                                    33
                                                                                                                               31
                                                   30%                       29
                                  Prevalence (%)




                                                   25%

                                                   20%                            19
                                                                                       16        16
                                                                                            15        14
                                                   15%

                                                   10%

                                                   5%

                                                   0%
                                                              Stunting                 Wasting             Underweight                    Anemia

                                                                    Poorest       Poor            Middle        Rich           Richest



                           Service Delivery and Utilization: Gaps in Nutrition Specific and
                           Nutrition-Sensitive Programs
                           17.	   Despite overall good breastfeeding practices, complementary feeding practices were far from
                                  satisfactory. The exclusive breastfeeding rate was 78 percent, with 85.4 percent of children
                                  being breastfed within an hour of birth. However, about two-fifth of children aged 6-23 months
                                  did not get the Minimum Meal Frequency as per UNICEF standards. Only about half met the
                                  Minimum Dietary Diversity, and even worse, less than one-third got the Minimum Acceptable
                                  Diet. Eight percent of children were not given soft or semisolid food until after eight months of
                                  age, while 12.5 percent were given before they turned 6 months.


4
18.	     The poor dietary practices do not seem to stem from lack of knowledge of the nutritional value
         of different foods. 76 percent of caregivers were able to identify an energy-rich food from a
         selection of items listed out to them, and 83 percent were able to identify a common protein-
         rich food item. Focus group discussions revealed three possible reasons why this knowledge
         is not translated to practice: an inability to afford or access nutritious foods; mothers were
         either unsure about the manner in which to introduce complementary foods or did not know the
         importance of introducing them at six-months of age; and the influence of traditional beliefs,
         e.g., eggs, which are affordable and available in the estates, were believed to cause “phlegm”
         in children, and a strong belief that fresh milk causes allergies (skin rashes and shortness of
         breath). Targeted behavior change communication could address these practice gaps.

19.	     The bacteriological assessment of water in the estate sector indicates fecal contamination
         of almost all the sources of water supply. 90 percent of the entire estate sector population
         reported that they had access to water sources, however, bacteriological analysis of the
         source of the water revealed that more than 92 percent of the estate sector water supplies was
         contaminated with fecal E. coli. This points to a development challenge in the estate sector
         that needs to be addressed. Meanwhile, as a positive observation from the study, satisfactory
         hygiene and sanitation practices were reported by a majority of households.7 It is noteworthy
         that almost all households reported that they treated the water adequately prior to drinking by
         boiling, or chlorinating and filtering, however, no bacteriological assessments were carried out
         to verify if the water was free of contamination at the point of consumption.

20.	     There is significant space for improving nutrition service delivery for women both before and
         during pregnancy. Only about half of women received advice on nutrition and family planning
         before pregnancy. A little more than forty percent had their weight checked and received vitamin
         supplements while more than half received de-worming treatment before pregnancy. Although
         Thriposha8 is meant to be provided on a regular basis to all pregnant women, 18 percent of
         women did not receive it regularly and 10 percent never received it. Moreover, compliance
         is an issue with about eighty percent of pregnant women always sharing the supplement
         with other household members. Provision of micronutrients to pregnant women was also not
         universal — iron (73.6%), folic acid (74.9%), vitamin C (69.3%), calcium (64.6%).

21.	     Gaps in quality of service provision were noted. Although almost all children in the estate
         sector (99.1%) were born in a government healthcare facility, and nearly all mothers (98%)
         could produce their children’s Child Health Development Record (CHDR) on request, only 28.4
         percent of mothers whose children had poor weight gain received special advice on how to
         address the problem. Significant deficiencies in children’s receipt of micronutrient supplements
         were also noted—54 percent had never received vitamin A supplements.

22.	     The estate sector has several nutrition specific and nutrition-sensitive programs implemented
         by the Ministry of Health or other ministries (Ministry of Education, Ministry of Economic
         Development, Ministry of Agriculture, and Ministry of Livestock) (Table 5.3). Analyses of these
         nutrition specific and nutrition-sensitive programs shows a number of gaps:

         i)	 Uneven targeting/coverage: inability to cover the whole targeted population, poorly targeted
             or benefits provided on an irregular basis (supply disruption). There is a need to prioritize
             and target the coverage of programs, so that every beneficiary receives the full package of
             essential interventions.

7.	 Almost all households had improved toilets.
8.	 The Thriposha program is an island wide supplementary feeding scheme that provides a combination of energy, protein and
    micronutrients as a “ready-to-eat” cereal based food given to nutritionally-at-risk infants, pre-schoolers and pregnant and
    lactating women.


                                                                                                                             5
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                        ii)	 Implementation impediments to the Ministry of Health’s (MoH) pre-pregnancy health and
                             nutrition package include: difficulties in trying to reach newly married couples because
                             some of them work outside the estates and are unavailable during the day; lack of suitable
                             settings to discuss sensitive matters such as postponing pregnancy and contraceptive use;
                             and an absence of estate-level nutrition-related data on pre-pregnant women.

                        iii)	 Ineffective communication: for the illiterate and Tamil-speaking population, communication
                              materials need to be made more appropriate, and practical actions need to be suggested
                              in the messages to circumvent undernutrition.

                        iv)	 Inadequate monitoring mechanisms.

                        v)	 Lack of coordination, not only among different nutrition programs of the health ministry but
                            also among other ministries with different nutrition-sensitive programs.

                 The Way Forward and Recommendations
                 23.	   Recommendations based on the study findings and analyses are outlined below. These
                        recommendations could benefit from further stakeholder discussions led by the Government
                        of Sri Lanka (GoSL) to plan the responsibility of different ministries/institutions, including short
                        and medium-long term actions:

                        i)	 Design an estate-specific Behavior Change Communication (BCC) strategy and
                            ensure it is an integral part of every nutrition intervention.
                        	   Given the high levels of undernutrition and the significant gaps in knowledge and feeding
                            and caring practices among the estate sector population, it is recommended that the
                            MoH, in consultation with relevant stakeholders, design and implement an estate sector-
                            specific, multipronged comprehensive BCC strategy. The strategy could target mothers
                            and other child care providers, the community, and policymakers. The key focus areas
                            could include: (i) importance of introducing complementary feeding at six months of age,
                            and appropriate foods; (ii) more Tamil-based communication material, and material that
                            would be appropriate for the illiterate population; (iii) hygiene promotion activities such as
                            hand-washing with soap for all household members before preparation of food and feeding
                            of the infant/young child, and after use of the toilet; (iv) encouragement to mothers to utilize
                            the full maternity leave; and (v) awareness of the long-term impact of stunting during the
                            first two years of life.

                        ii)	 Institutionalize capacity building of frontline nutrition workers.
                        	   To address some of the gaps identified the MoH with stakeholders could strengthen the
                            capacity of frontline workers (e.g., Public Health Midwives (PHMs)) to promote good
                            nutrition during the pre-pregnancy phase and for children and prevent, identify, and manage
                            malnutrition among adolescents, pregnant women and children. MoH could also review
                            whether the number of frontline workers, including at the Child Development Centers
                            (CDCs), are sufficient to deal with the population and workload, and develop a human
                            resource strategy if required. Similarly, the Ministry of Agriculture with stakeholders could
                            strengthen the capacity of agricultural extension workers serving the estate population
                            to enable them to facilitate and integrate nutrition promotion messages with activities to
                            improve household food security and child dietary diversity.




6
iii)	 Employ complementary and innovative platforms to better target and reach the
      underserved.
	   The study findings indicate that low birthweight (LBW) significantly and substantially
    increased the chances of the child being stunted, wasted or underweight. In addition,
    children of short-stature mothers had a higher probability of being stunted and
    underweight. This suggests that addressing child malnutrition requires a greater focus
    on ensuring the health and nutrition of girls/women both before and during pregnancy.
    The MoH and relevant stakeholders should consider exploring, developing and testing
    new complementary models of nutrition service delivery that reaches working women
    who are not available at home during visits by the frontline workers, and adolescent girls,
    particularly for teenage pregnancies, which have the likelihood to be reported late.

iv)	 Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the existing programs.
	   GoSL with relevant stakeholders could focus on addressing supply and demand-side
    bottlenecks to make the existing nutrition-specific and sensitive programs more effective.
    This could include: (i) improve the regularity and increase the coverage of Thriposha
    supplementation to children and pregnant women in the estates by identifying causes
    of its supply disruption; (ii) explore the possibility of changing the packaging of the food
    supplementation into small single-serving “doses” so that families would treat it more
    like medicine; (iii) review the existing guidelines for CDCs, and establish, if required,
    Standard Operating Procedures for optimal child feeding and child care practices; (iv)
    strengthen monitoring and evaluation practices for school based interventions, including
    relevant classroom curriculum and school garden programs; (v) assess and plan
    for improved water and sanitation facilities at schools and CDCs; (vi) the Ministry of
    Agriculture to take the lead to re-orient their approach to food security beyond the focus
    on the staple diet (rice and wheat flour) by initiating and/or scaling up programs that
    focus on the production and consumption of livestock, fruits and vegetables, poultry and
    poultry products especially by infants and young children; (vii) working with the Ministry
    of Education (MoE), the National Nutrition Steering Committee could submit appropriate
    recommendations to include in the Basic Teacher Curriculum which is due to be revised
    in 2017, focusing on the importance and means to improve undernutrition; and (viii)
    better targeting, particularly for low income households in the estates, of Divineguma,
    the safety net program.

v)	 Strengthen leadership, coordination and performance monitoring for stronger
    accountability.
	   The 2011 Multi-sector Action Plan for Nutrition (MsAPN) is the guiding instrument to
    implement nutrition interventions across 17 ministries. The GoSL could consolidate
    and strengthen the estate multisectoral coordination mechanisms comprising of key
    stakeholders at the provincial, district, and divisional levels, and make them accountable
    for results at each level. Although strong awareness exists among stakeholders that
    effective coordination is necessary at the district and divisional levels, currently, different
    stakeholders work independently of each other. Further discussions and consensus
    would be required as to who would be best placed to lead this coordination effort. To
    facilitate this effort, there needs to be an improvement and institutionalization of the
    estate sector maternal and child nutrition reporting systems to generate and collect
    timely data for better nutrition program monitoring. This should include a mechanism for
    sharing data and analysis across sectors.




                                                                                                 7
Multisectoral
Nutrition

                 CHAPTER 1
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector




8
                           INTRODUCTION
                           1.1	          Sri Lanka: The Country Context
                           1.	           Sri Lanka is a lower middle-income country with a population of 20.7 million. Following the end
                                         of the 30-year civil war in 2009, Sri Lanka’s economy grew an average of 6.7 percent from 2010
                                         to 2014, reflecting a peace dividend and a determined government policy of reconstruction
                                         and growth. The economy is also transitioning from a predominantly rural-based economy
                                         towards a more urbanized economy oriented around manufacturing and services. In 2014,
                                         the service sector accounted for 63.1 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), followed
                                         by manufacturing at 28.9 percent, and agriculture at 8 percent. Per capita GDP reached
                                         US$3,811 in 2014. The government envisions a globally competitive, export-led economy with
                                         an emphasis on inclusion.

                           2.	           Sri Lanka has made significant progress in its socioeconomic development. High growth and
                                         shared prosperity has resulted in the national poverty headcount ratio declining from 15.3
                                         percent in 2006–07 to 6.7 percent in 2012–13. This poverty reduction was felt across the
                                         country although poverty in the estate sector and some concentrated urban areas remains
                                         relatively high. Despite the low levels of extreme poverty, roughly one-quarter of Sri Lankans
                                         are nearly poor, defined as living above the official poverty line, but below US$2.50 per day in
                                         2005 purchasing power parity.9

                           3.	           Although the country has comfortably surpassed most of the MDG targets set for 2015, recent
                                         progress in nutrition indicators is far from promising. The 2006–07 Demographic Health Survey
                                         (DHS) found that 21.0, 17.3 and 14.7 percent of Sri Lankan under-five children continue to
                                         be underweight (low weight for their age), stunted (short for their age, reflecting chronic
                                         undernutrition), and wasted (low weight for height from acute malnutrition) respectively. The
                                         prevalence of low birthweight (16.6%) and maternal malnutrition (16% of women aged 15–49
                                         years) are also of concern.10 While Sri Lanka has done well on the global platform, there
                                         are a few other countries at similar levels of income as Sri Lanka with a lower stunting rate,
                                         suggesting a potential for improvement (Figure 1.1).


Figure 1.1                                                         70
Stunting among Children
Under-Five Years, Global                                           60
(2015)
                                   Stunting among children <5y %




                                                                   50


                                                                   40


                                                                   30


                                                                   20
                                                                                     SRI LANKA
                                                                   10


                                                                   0
                                                                       100   1,000                     10,000    100,000
                                                                             GIN per capita, US$, log scale



                           9.	 It ranked seventy-third in the 2014 Human Development Index.
                           8.	 Maternal undernourishment defined as having Body Mass Index < 18.5.




                                                                                                                                       9
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 4.	     Micronutrient malnutrition is also a problem across Sri Lanka. The 2012 National Micronutrient
                         Survey indicates that about four million Sri Lankans (20% of the population) are affected by
                         anemia. Though little countrywide information is available on other micronutrient deficiencies,
                         data from small studies indicate that vitamin A, folate, and zinc are significant deficiencies as
                         well (de Lanerolle Dias 2012).

                 5.	     A 2007 World Bank study on “Malnutrition in Sri Lanka – Scale, Scope Causes and Potential
                         Response” found that undernutrition in Sri Lanka seems to be rooted in household poverty-
                         even though undernutrition also existed among the non-poor. Poor households were energy
                         deficient, lacked dietary diversity, and had limited access to safe water and sanitation. Maternal
                         nutrition and household wealth status were important predictors of low birthweight, which in
                         turn is one of the key predictors of child stunting and underweight. These effects are amplified
                         by poor child care and feeding practices during the first two years of life, practices that are
                         even worse among the poor. The report recommended additional studies to better understand
                         the scale and causes of undernutrition in high-risk populations, especially in the estates sector.
                         This report attempts to address this recommendation.

                 1.2	    The Estate Sector- a Disadvantaged Group
                 6.	     In Sri Lanka, the estate sector is comprised of tea or rubber plantations managed or owned
                         by the state, Regional Plantation Companies, and individuals or families. Approximately 0.9
                         million people, or 4.3 percent of the Sri Lankan population, live on estates. The Department
                         of Census and Statistics defines the estate sector as including land that is over 20 acres, with
                         10 or more resident workers. Although large coconut estates exist, the majority of them do
                         not fall into the estate sector category since the resident labor force is small. Approximately
                         0.69 million (77%) of the estimated 0.9 million of the estate population live in large tea or
                         rubber estates that are managed by Regional Plantation Companies (RPCs) concentrated in
                         the Central and Uva provinces of Sri Lanka. There are also some large government-owned
                         estates. The rest of the estate population is scattered across individually owned large and
                         small private estates, which are mostly in remote areas in the hill country. In addition, there are
                         also smaller family-owned and managed estates ranging from 0.5 to 20 acres. Most family-
                         owned estates are scattered across the low-country districts in the Southern province districts
                         of Galle and Matara.

                 7.	     While poverty rates improved significantly in the past decade across the country, residents
                         of the estate sector are still among the poorest in the country. The poverty headcount ratio,
                         measured by the national poverty line, declined in all sectors between 2006–07 and 2012–13:
                         urban 6.7 percent to 2.1 percent; rural 15.7 percent to 7.6 percent; and estate 32 percent to
                         10.9 percent.11 Despite their higher rates of poverty, the estates have the lowest percentage of
                         recipients of social safety net benefits compared to the rest of the country (World Bank 2015).
                          Poverty Headcount




                                               ESTATE                             RURAL                             URBAN

                                             21.1%                               8.1%                             4.6%
                 11.	 16.5 percent of the plantation population belongs to the poorest 40 percent of the country’s population, with food expenditure
                      at 50 percent of their income (Household and Expenditure Survey 2012, Department of Census and Statistics).


10
                          8.	     Although income poverty in the estates has improved, non-income poverty (material and
                                  human deprivation, including vulnerability, low achievement in education and health, lack of
                                  empowerment and skills, and exposure to risk) remains high (Samaraweera 2009). Almost 44
                                  percent of estate residents live in one-room dwellings, in units of less than 500 square feet.12
                                  The residents are among the country’s most disadvantaged and disempowered groups, with
                                  average life expectancy and literacy below the national average, and an infant mortality rate
                                  higher than the national average (Department of Census and Statistics 2012). Gaps also exist
                                  in access to productive assets (land and safe water), physical infrastructure (power, transport,
                                  communications, and markets) and technology. As a result, the estate population lives in
                                  isolation and has traditionally been treated as a marginalized group.

                          9.	     The estate sector population has the worst nutrition outcomes in Sri Lanka. DHS 2006-7 data
                                  indicate large variations in child and maternal undernutrition rates in the rural, urban, and
                                  estate populations (Figure 1.2). The rate of stunted children (40%) and underweight adult
                                  women (33%) in the estate sector was 2.9 and 3.4 times higher than urban areas, respectively.
                                  Similarly, low birthweight incidence in the estate sector was 2.4 times higher than in the urban
                                  sector. The poor nutrition status in the estate sector appears to be a key driver of the national
                                  malnutrition levels.


Figure 1.2                        45%
Nutrition Indicators by                            40.20%
                                  40%
Sectors and Ages in
Sri Lanka                         35%                                                                             33.30%
                                                                                   31%
                                  30%

                                  25%

                                  20%
                                          17.30%
                                                        16.20%           16.60%          16.40%          16.20%        16.30%
                                  15%                           13.80%
                                                                                              12.80%

                                                                                                                                9.70%
                                  10%

                                   5%

                                   0%
                                          Stunting in children            Low Birth Weight              Underweight Women
                                             up to Age 5                                                    Ages 15-49

                                                            National     Estates          Rural        Urban



                          10.	    In summary, the estate sector still lags behind in maternal and child nutritional outcomes
                                  compared to the rest of the country. Disaggregated data indicates that the worst nutrition
                                  outcomes are among the 0.9 million residents of the estates, followed by the approximately
                                  1.5 million residents of the North and East regions affected by conflict, and smaller rural and
                                  urban pockets across all districts (UNICEF 2011).




                          12.	http://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/summary_jme_2013.pdf?ua=.




                                                                                                                                        11
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 1.3	   Objectives of the Study
                 11.	   This Multisectoral Nutrition Assessment assessed the nutrition situation amongst residents of
                        the estate sector, identified the main causes of nutritional deficiencies, as well as gaps in the
                        provision of key nutrition-related services. The findings and recommendations can be used to
                        inform policymakers and planners who are preparing the Estate Health Strategic Policy and
                        Plan, and thereby implement effective multisectoral nutrition and health interventions. To this
                        end, the two main objectives of the study were to:
                        i)	 Assess the size, severity, and key determinants of undernutrition in Sri Lanka’s estate
                            sector.

                        ii)	 Examine residents’ access to—and utilization of—nutrition related services and identify the
                             gaps, if any, in institutional and implementation arrangements.

                 1.4	   Structure of the Report
                 12.	   The report is organized into six chapters. Chapter 2 presents the methodology employed (data
                        and framework), Chapter 3 gives an overview of nutritional status in the estate sector, focusing
                        particularly on maternal and child nutrition. Using a modified UNICEF conceptual framework,
                        Chapter 4 explores the key immediate as well as underlying and basic determinants of
                        undernutrition. Chapter 5 reviews the degree to which nutrition is positioned in the national
                        development agenda and discusses gaps in current nutrition specific and nutrition-sensitive
                        programs, and the last chapter outlines recommendations for the way forward.




12
CHAPTER 2




        13
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector
                 METHODOLOGY
                 2.1	   Conceptual Framework for the Determinants of Malnutrition
                 1.	    The conceptual framework employed to evaluate the causes that result in malnutrition in the
                        estate sector is based on a framework developed by UNICEF (1990). The UNICEF framework
                        identifies three levels for causes of malnutrition: (i) immediate causes operating at the individual
                        level, (ii) underlying causes influencing households and communities, and (iii) basic causes
                        that center on the structures and processes of societies.

                 2.	    The immediate causes of malnutrition are the result of poor dietary intake or disease. Those
                        outcomes can be prompted by consuming inadequate nutrients or by repeated infections that
                        increase nutrient requirements and/or reduce absorption.

                 3.	    The adequacy of food or the risk of infections that an individual is subjected to is a result
                        of the underlying factors operating at the household and community level. Caring practices
                        such as breastfeeding and appropriate complementary infant and young child feeding, as well
                        as hygiene and health-seeking behaviors, are vital to health and nutrition, and to support
                        adequate growth. These factors are grouped into three broad categories: household food
                        insecurity, inadequate care practices, and unhealthy household environment (including a lack
                        of or inadequate health services).

                 4.	    Basic causes of malnutrition are the deeper causes that govern the amount, control, and
                        use of human, economic, and organizational resources that are available to households and
                        communities. These center on the structure and processes of societies and include factors
                        such as poverty, political and economic insecurity, lack of resources, or empowerment of
                        women.

                 5.	    The adapted framework used for this analysis takes into account the specific issues faced by
                        estate populations, is shown as Figure 2.1. The framework served as a reference point for
                        the questionnaire and qualitative data collection. A set of characteristics from those depicted
                        in Figure 2.1 were selected for the multivariate regression analysis of the determinants of
                        undernutrition for this study.




14
             Figure 2.1 Conceptual Framework to Assess the Determinants of Malnutrition in the Estate Sector (adapted from the UNICEF Framework)


                                                                              NUTRITION STATUS OF CHILDREN < 5 YEARS IN THE ESTATE SECTOR


                                                                                                 MATERNAL AND CHILD CHARACTERISTICS




       IMMEDIATE
                                                MOTHER : HEIGHT, AGE, PRE-PREGNANCY BMI, PREGNANCY WEIGHT GAIN, ANEMIA, DISEASE, PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS




     DETERMINANTS
                                                              CHILD : BIRTHWEIGHT, DIET, AGE, SEX, DISEASES, ILLNESS, PSYCHOSOCIAL FACTORS



                                         ACCESS TO FOOD                               CARE PRACTICES                                                       HEALTH SERVICES AND HEALTHY
                                         •	    Household resources; food              •	   Care practices of adolescents/pre-pregnant girls                ENVIRONMENT
                                               security-purchasing power,                                                                                  •	   Availability/access to services for WRA;
                                               availability, access, utilization,     •	   Care practices for pregnant & lactating women                        antenatal, delivery, post-natal services, family
                                               alcohol quantity and quality of                                                                                  planning, health screen including nutrition
                                               food                                   •	   Practices related to feeding infants and young children              package
                                                                                           and older children—exclusive breast feeding, adequate
                                         •	Consumption                                     and timely complementary feeding, responsive feeding            •	   Special package for high-risk mothers
                                         •	    Home gardens, livestock                •	   Child care (hygiene, childhood stimulation, development)        •	   Availability/access to services to improve
                                                                                                                                                                child nutrition: breastfeeding, complementary
                                         •	    Family size, structure                 •	   Food and care-related behaviors in family (traditions and            feeding, growth monitoring & promotion,




                                CAUSES
                                                                                           cultural practices, support)                                         food, micronutrient supplements, & nutrition
                                         •	    Food fortification, food safety                                                                                  rehabilitation
                                                                                      •	   Organization of child care (crèches, family support)
                                                                                                                                                           •	   Other health and nutrition services for
                                                                                      •	   Maternal/caregiver occupation, workload; time availability
                                                                                                                                                                children, adolescents- health check
                                                                                           for child




     INTERMEDIATE /UNDERLYING
                                                                                                                                                           •	   Safe water and sanitation
                                                                                      •	   Utilization of healthcare interventions

                                                                                      •	   Utilization of other interventions, i.e social, welfare



                                          •	    Education: mother, child including classroom learning
                                          •	    Psychosocial: empowerment of population, women, goal orientation, health/education value, career options, happiness, gender issues
                                          •	    Economic: economic structure, income, assets, dependents, cash management, potential resources
                                          •	    Geography and environment: climate, altitude, terrain, roads, access to community, use of fertilizers, allergens
                                          •	    National and local-level policies: land ownership, services, advocacy for nutrition, commitment of organizations
                                          •	    Welfare: social protection availability, welfare inputs, labor laws, child protection
                                          •	    Development: agriculture and economic development initiatives, nutrition-sensitive interventions




     BASIC CAUSES
                                          •	    Media: influence of mass media
                                          •	    Politics and ideology




15
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 2.2	     Data and Sampling
                 6.	      The study utilized the following two types of data that were collected from tea and rubber
                          plantation populations in 12 districts spread across the Western, Central, Uva, Sabaragamuwa,
                          and Southern provinces.13,14

                          i)	 Cross-sectional household survey data from a sample of children (0–59 months old) and
                              pregnant women. This survey was representative of the three different types of estate
                              sector management: RPC-managed, government-managed, and privately managed.

                          ii)	 Qualitative data for gap analysis of the health sector’s nutrition service delivery, access to
                               and utilization of the nutrition specific interventions, and nutrition-sensitive interventions by
                               other stakeholders.

                 2.2.1	 The Household Survey Data
                 7.	      A cross-sectional, stratified, three-stage clustered survey of the estate sector was conducted
                          from September 2014 to April 2015. Stratification was performed by estate management
                          category since it had been hypothesized that service delivery and nutrition outcomes may
                          differ according to category. Three strata were defined based on the types of estates.

                 8.	      The sample size was determined separately for two age categories of children (i.e., 0–23 and
                          24–59 months) and pregnant mothers, considering the key indicators relevant for the respective
                          group. The estimated sample size was 3,400 children under-five years and 1,190 pregnant
                          women from 170 clusters, and the actual study sample was 3489 and 1105 respectively.

                 9.	      The questionnaire, designed according to the conceptual framework in Figure 2.1, covered
                          data pertaining to the immediate, underlying, and basic determinants of maternal and child
                          undernutrition, and included questions about: (i) household socioeconomic information, (ii)
                          caregivers’ knowledge and practices about infant and young child feeding, care and sanitation
                          practices, and (iii) diet and access to services. Furthermore, the surveyors gathered data on
                          anthropometry and hemoglobin status.

                 10.	     In addition to this data, three water samples from each of the 170 clusters were collected,
                          giving a total of 510 water samples. The three water samples in each cluster were taken from
                          the point of water distribution to the community (water tanks, spring, etc.), randomly selected
                          households, and the CDC of the estate or division.

                 11.	     Nutritional status of children was assessed using height and weight measured under standard
                          conditions with standard anthropometric equipment recommended by UNICEF.15 Stunting,
                          wasting, and underweight were defined as respectively height-for-age, weight-for-height and
                          weight-for-age of more than two standard deviations below the WHO Child Growth Standards
                          median.

                 12.	     Hemoglobin status was assessed by measuring hemoglobin using a hemocue.16,17 All sample
                          children aged six to 59 months, with parental consent for a finger prick blood sample, and
                          all pregnant women, had their hemoglobin status assessed through hemocue testing at the

                 13. 	This represents approximately 0.9 million residents of the estate sector.
                 14.	 Ethical approval was received from the Sri Lanka Medical Association Ethics Review Committee, that reviews the validity and
                      justification for the survey, minimization of harm, privacy and confidentiality, cultural and social responsibility, and informed
                      consent prior to carrying out the survey.
                 15. 	UNICEF. www.childinfo.org/files/MICS4_Manual-Anthropometry.doc.
                 16.	http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PNACW824.pdf.
                 17.	 How to assess iron deficiency anaemia and use the hemocue. HK International 2002.


16
        site. Children less than six-months old were not included in anemia surveys since standard
        cutoff values for hemoglobin concentration are not well established for infants younger than six
        months. Results of hemoglobin status were categorized using WHO guidelines with corrections
        made for altitude.18

13.	    A validation study was conducted to compare hemoglobin assessment by hemocue—the
        technique used in this survey—with venous blood assessment of hemoglobin, which is the
        gold standard for testing hemoglobin. In a subsample of women (n = 47), two milliliters of
        venous blood was collected concomitantly under aseptic conditions by medical personnel for
        comparison of hemoglobin from venous blood assessed by the Drabkins Method using a semi-
        automated analyzer.

2.2.2	 Data for Gap Analyses
14.	    The gap analysis reviewed the capacities of national and local level entities to identify gaps
        in policy, institutions, capacity, structures, programming and monitoring in health and other
        related sectors (for example, agriculture, education, WASH, etc.). This would enable the
        identification of interventions that would have the potential to improve nutrition outcomes in the
        estate sector. The study relied on the following four data sources for this.

        i)	 A literature review of national nutrition policies, systems, and structures used in service
            delivery to understand the current status of nutrition programming in Sri Lanka, especially
            in the estate sector. Data on important nutrition indicators for the urban, rural, and estate
            sectors, and a list of ongoing nutrition-related interventions in Sri Lanka was prepared to
            discuss with relevant experts.

        ii)	 Key informant discussions were held with policymakers and program planners from key
             ministries and relevant sectors including the ministries of health, estate infrastructure,
             education, social services, fisheries and economic development, Plantation Human
             Development Trust (PHDT), and other agencies and grass roots workers (Planters
             Association, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), district secretaries, estate
             management and workers, public health midwives, development officers, and hospital
             staff). These discussions served as sources of data on the policies, systems and structures,
             programs, capacity and tools available for planning, implementation and monitoring and
             evaluation of nutrition interventions in the estate sector.

        iii)	 Stakeholder consultations with experts from the central and provincial Ministry of Health
              (MoH) were held to validate the nutrition data findings and results, and discuss the strengths
              and weaknesses of nutrition-sensitive and nutrition-specific interventions.

        iv)	 Focus group discussions with high-level health and non-health sector government officials
             (at the central, regional, and local levels), as well as with the estate managers, program
             implementers in the health sector, mothers/caregivers, and crèche workers. Issues
             regarding Infant and Young Child Feeding (IYCF) practices, use of supplementation (diet
             and micronutrients), use and understanding of child health records, housing conditions,
             water and sanitation practices, food and alcohol habits were analyzed in these discussions.




18.	 Iron Deficiency Anaemia. Assessment, Prevention and Control. A guide for programme managers. WHO/NHD/01.3 WHO2001
     http://www.who.int/vmnis/indicators/haemoglobin.pdf.




                                                                                                                   17
Multisectoral
Nutrition

                 CHAPTER 3
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector




18
                          NUTRITION STATUS OF THE ESTATE POPULATION
                          3.1	     Sample features
                          1.	      The number of children and pregnant women in the study sample was 3489 and 1105
                                   respectively. These individuals belonged to a total of 4489 households. The average household
                                   size was 4.7. Nearly half (47.5%) of mothers were working.19 The average age of a child by
                                   the time the mother returned to work was only 49 days, much sooner than the government
                                   mandate of 84-day period of maternity leave. Children of working mothers were fed most
                                   commonly by Child Development Center (CDC) workers (46.6%).20 Only 13 percent of working
                                   mothers were able to return during the lunch break to feed their children. Besides, estate work
                                   starts as early as seven a.m., making it all the more difficult to provide the much needed care
                                   babies require.


Figure 3.1
Sample Distribution by
                                                                        11%
Estate Type                        Government Estates
                                                                        12%
Sample distribution (%)
                                                                                         29%
                                         Private Estates
                                                                                                  38%



                                                                                                                        59%
                                            RPC Estates
                                                                                                               50%


                                                        0%        10%         20%       30%      40%       50%       60%        70%

                                                                  Pregnant Women          Children Under 5



                          2.	      A vast majority of the sample of both children and pregnant women were from the RPC estates,
                                   followed by the private estates (Figure 3.1). Households in this type of estates were better off.
                                   42 percent of them were sole owners of the house they lived in while the corresponding figure
                                   for private and government estates was 28 and 21 percent, respectively. RPCs were also
                                   better with reference to electrification and sanitation facilities. Only a third of the households
                                   owned the house they lived in, and access to electricity was 87 percent. Nearly all households
                                   used firewood for cooking. Weighing posts, dispensaries and maternal and child health (MCH)
                                   clinics appeared to be accessible, located on average half an hour walk away from their home.
                                   The mean household income per month (Rs 20,911) was similar across estate types. Only
                                   two-fifths of the monthly consumption expenditure was spent on food.




                          19.	 44 percent of them work away from the home: 28.4 percent work as tea pluckers; 0.9 percent as rubber tappers; 12.2 percent
                               work in the estate factory or did sundry work in the estates; 5.8 percent work in other occupations outside the estates.
                          20.	 31 percent of them were fed by an adult family member.




                                                                                                                                                      19
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 3.	      A vast majority of households had improved water (>90%) and toilets (95%).21 Almost all
                          households reported that they treated the water adequately prior to drinking—boiling and
                          cooling it or chlorinating and filtering it.22 Satisfactory sanitation practices were reported by a
                          majority of households. Open defecation by children was practiced in only 3.4 percent of the
                          households.23 Children in a vast majority (84%) of households either used a toilet or had their
                          feces safely disposed into the toilet. Most households reported regularly washing their hands
                          with soap after using or cleaning the toilet, cleaning a child’s bottom or before preparing and
                          eating food. Observation by enumerators indicate that 65 percent of households had an area
                          for handwashing with running water within ten meters of the toilet; but water and soap were
                          not available in roughly two-fifth of the toilets. Garbage disposal practices were satisfactory,
                          with only nine percent (and five percent) reportedly throwing all garbage in the premises (by
                          the side of the road).


                            Household sanitation




                           95% 67%                              90% 95% 88%                                   65% 60%
                           IMPROVED        IMPROVED/NOT         IMPROVED          WITH      BOILED, COOLED   HANDWASHING   WATER AND
                             TOILET         SHARED TOILET         WATER          E.COLI     WATER TO DRINK      AREA         SOAP



                 4.	      About 25 percent of the sample households had livestock and home gardens. These are
                          important factors for diversifying diets but their presence was not widespread in any of the
                          estates, although RPC estates had a slightly higher proportion of home gardens. Home
                          gardens were cultivated by about 26 percent of households. Of those, nearly half grew roots
                          and tubers, while 29 percent grew dark green leafy vegetables. However, 18.3 percent did not
                          consume their home garden produce and only about 12 percent consumed it on a daily basis.




                 21.	 Two-third had improved toilets that was not shared with other families.
                 22.	 Nearly 88 percent reported using boiled cooled water to drink.
                 23.	 Open defecation at work-site was minimal (3.1 percent of households).




20
Table 3.1
                                                                                                RPC      Private   Government     Total
Household characteristics    Characteristic                                                   Estates    Estates       Estates
by category of estate

                             Sole owner of house (%)                                              41.9     28.4           20.7     34.5
                             Households with electricity (%)                                      88.2     84.9           82.7     86.4
                             Cooking with firewood (%)                                            96.5     98.1           98.0     97.3
                             Household has no method of smoke elimination                         30.3     27.8           29.6     29.3
                             Improved and non-shared toilet (%)                                   71.3     64.6           56.5     67.1
                             Ownership of agricultural land (%)                                   15.7     10.3            7.5     12.8
                             Ownership of livestock (%)                                           24.2     24.4           25.0     24.4
                             Cultivation of a home garden (%)                                     29.6     21.7           20.2     25.7
                             Mean household income per month (LKR)                            20,812     21,152         20,611   20,912
                             Total expenditure per month (%)
                              Medical and health needs                                             9.3     10.1            9.4      9.6
                              Food                                                                38.7     37.6           39.0     38.4
                              Alcohol and tobacco                                                  6.5       6.6           6.8      6.6
                             Have savings (%)                                                     64.9     66.0           50.1     63.6
                             Taken loans (%)                                                      63.6     71.5           73.7     67.6
                             Covered by any insurance (%)                                         22.2     19.4           16.3     20.5
                             Time from home to nearest…(minutes)
                              Public access road                                                   19        18            17       18
                              Dispensary                                                           30        38            37       34
                              MCH clinic                                                           26        32            32       29
                              Weighing post                                                        17        18            16       17
                              Preschool                                                            20        23            21       21


                            3.2	    Nutrition Status in the Estate Population

                            Stunting
                            5.	     The rate of stunting among under-five children was 36.4 percent, showing a decline from the
                                    40.2 percent reported in the last DHS (2006-07) of the estate sector.24 Larger improvement is
                                    evident for severe stunting (from 14.2% to 9.6%).

                            6.	     The prevalence of stunting was higher in the older age group, peaking at 36–47 months (Figure
                                    3.2). Stunting prevalence was similar across estate types (ranging between 35.2% in private
                                    estates to 37.5% in government estates).25 Stunting was significantly lower among girls at all
                                    ages, possibly reflecting a biological variation (Wamani et al. 2007). This difference has also
                                    been reported in previous surveys in Sri Lanka,26 and in some African countries (Espo et al.
                                    2002; Zere et al. 2003).




                            24.	 DHS 2006–07 Department of Census and Statistics.
                            25.	 See annex Table A1 for disaggregation by estate type.
                            26.	 Nutrition and Food Security Survey MRI, UNICEF Sri Lanka 2009.




                                                                                                                                      21
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                            7.	       Children from the poorest quintile had the highest burden of stunting (42%). Although the
                                      prevalence declined with higher quintiles, it was still very high in the richest quintile (29%)
                                      (Figure 3.3). The high level of stunting in the better off population suggests that the problem of
                                      undernutrition is more than a question of affordability of food. The next chapter examines this.


Figure 3.2                                           60
Prevalence of Stunting In                                                                                                                51.0
                                                                                                                   48.8
Children 0–59 Months                                 50


Stunting by Age and                                  40                                          38.6
                                                                                                                          37.3                  38.3
                                    Prevalence (%)




                                                                                                                                                        36.6
Gender                                                                                                                                                         33.0
                                                                              30.7                      30.5
                                                     30    26.8
                                                                                     24.2
                                                                  19.9
                                                     20


                                                     10


                                                      0
                                                             0-5               6-11               12-23             24-35                 36-47            48-59
                                                            months            months             months            months                months           months

                                                                                             Male           Female
                                                          *P<0.05 in age categories 12–23 months, 24–35 months, and 36–47 months




Figure 3.3
                                                     50
Prevalence of                                                                                                                                     45
                                                     45    42
Undernutrition by Wealth                                        40 39
                                                                                                                    41
                                                                                                                               39
Quintiles                                            40                                                                   37                           38 39 37 38
                                                                         34                                                         33
                                                     35
                                  Prevalence (%)




                                                                                                                                         31
                                                                              29
                                                     30

                                                     25
                                                                                      19
                                                     20
                                                                                            16        16
                                                                                                 15        14
                                                     15

                                                     10

                                                      5

                                                      0
                                                                Stunting                    Wasting                 Underweight                        Anemia

                                                                          Poorest                Poor           Middle          Rich            Richest




22
                            Underweight
                            8.	   Underweight prevalence has, however, increased to 35.9 percent from 30.1 percent reported
                                  in the DHS 2006-07. While on average prevalence increased with age group (Figure 3.4),
                                  there was no significant difference between estate types. The burden is concentrated in the
                                  poorest quintile (41%), but is still alarmingly high in the top quintile (31%) (Figure 3.3).

Figure 3.4                                            60
Prevalence of Underweight
in Children 0–59 Months
                                                      50
                                                                                                                                      45     44.3
                                                                                                         41.9           41.9
Underweight by Age and
                                  Prevalence (%)




                                                      40                                                         37.8
Gender                                                      34.6
                                                                                                                               35.7
                                                                                        32.9
                                                                          29.6
                                                      30                         26.1
                                                                                                27.7



                                                      20           17.7



                                                      10


                                                       0
                                                             0-5           6-11           12-23           24-35          36-47         48-59
                                                            months        months         months          months         months        months

                                                                                        Male       Female
                                                           *P<0.05 Gender difference in the age category 0-5 months



                            Wasting
                            9.	   Almost 16 percent of the estate sector children were wasted and suffered from acute malnutrition
                                  (WHZ<-2SD); with 2.6 percent suffering from severe acute malnutrition (WHZ <-3SD). Wasting
                                  increased by 2.5 percentage point compared to the 13.5 percent reported in the DHS 2006–07.
                                  On average, wasting, like stunting, appears to be higher among older children but there was
                                  no statistically significant difference by gender in any of the age groups (Figure 3.5). Results
                                  were also similar across estate types and wealth quintiles (Figure 3.3).


Figure 3.5                                            25
Prevalence of Wasting in
Children 0–59 months                                                                                                                         20.5
                                                      20                                                                              19.3
                                                                                         18.2
                                                                                                          17.3          17.5
Wasting by Age and
                                     Prevalence (%)




                                                                                                 16.1
                                                            15.3
Gender                                                15                                                                       14.3
                                                                                                                 12.7
                                                                          11.4
                                                                   10.7          10.8
                                                      10



                                                       5



                                                       0
                                                              0-5           6-11          12-23            24-35          36-47        48-59
                                                             months        months        months           months         months       months

                                                                                        Male           Female




                                                                                                                                                    23
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                              10.	    Based on the WHO classification of public health significance of malnutrition rates (see
                                      Table 3.2), the stunting rate shows a ‘high’ public health significance while the wasting and
                                      underweight rates show a ‘very high’ public health significance. The latter two particularly
                                      require attention since they are showing a reversing trend in the past eight years.


Table 3.2
                                                              Levels of public health significance by prevalence (%) of undernutrition
Public Health Significance
of Child Undernutrition and                                        Low                  Medium                    High                    Very high
Anemia (Based on                       Stunting                    <20                   20–29                   30–39                      >=40
WHO 2010)
                                       Wasting                      <5                    5–9                    10–14                      >=15
                                       Underweight                 <10                   10–19                   20–29                      >=30
                                                                    Levels of public health problem by prevalence of Anemia (%)
                                                              No problem             Mild problem        Moderate problem          Severe problem
                                       Anemia                    <=4.9%                5.0–19.9                20.0–39.9                   >=40.0

                                       Note: The highlighted cells indicate the level of public health significance for the estate’s malnutrition
                                       levels. Two cells are highlighted in the case of Anemia which anemia is a severe public health problem
                                       for children under 2 and a moderate public health problem for children between 2 and 5 years.


                              3.3	    Anemia
                              11.	    38.4 percent of children were anemic and the prevalence was even higher among the younger
                                      age group of 6–23 months old (53.1% compared to 30.4% for 24-59 months old).27 The lower
                                      prevalence of anemia in the older age group was likely because the dietary diversity of children
                                      usually improves as they get older. This is also confirmed in the dietary recall of older children in
                                      the sample. While there was no substantial difference in anemia prevalence between the RPC
                                      estates (39.6%) and private estates (37.5%), it was much lower (23.6%) in the government
                                      estates.

                              12.	    Compared to anemia prevalence rate of 39.3 percent in DHS 2006-07, there was only a
                                      marginal reduction in anemia prevalence among children. Using the typology proposed by
                                      WHO, the estate sector has a ‘severe’ public health problem of anemia among younger
                                      children and a ‘moderate’ public health problem in older children (see Table 3.2), corroborating
                                      the need for urgent action. What is more striking is that the prevalence of anemia even among
                                      the richest quintile (38%) is alarmingly high and not substantially lower than the prevalence in
                                      the poorest quintile (45%) (Figure 3.3).

                              13.	    Anemia prevalence among pregnant women was also substantial, with a third of them being
                                      anemic (Table 3.3). Eight years ago this figure stood at 36.4 percent as reported by the DHS
                                      2006–07, further indicating insufficient improvement.




                              27.	 Similar findings were reported in the DHS 2006–07 (49.1 percent anaemia among children 6–23 months).




24
Table 3.3
                                                                                Prevalence (%)             95 % CI             N
Anemia in Children and
Pregnant Women           Age 6-23 months
                         Mild Anemia                                                       24.9         [22.4,27.5]        1467
                         Moderate Anemia                                                   26.6         [24.2,29.3]        1467
                         Severe Anemia                                                      1.6            [1.0,2.5]       1467
                                Anemia                                                     53.1         [50.2,56.0]        1467
                         Age 24–59 months
                         Mild Anemia                                                       18.7         [16.3,21.3]        1437
                         Moderate Anemia                                                   11.5          [9.7,13.5]        1437
                         Severe Anemia                                                     0.2*            [0.1,0.5]       1437
                                Anemia                                                     30.4         [27.6,33.3]        1437
                         All children 6–59 months
                         Mild Anemia                                                       20.8         [19.1,22.7]        2904
                         Moderate Anemia                                                   16.8         [15.3,18.4]        2904
                         Severe Anemia                                                      0.7            [0.5,1.1]       2904
                                Anemia                                                     38.4         [36.2,40.2]        2904
                         Pregnant Women
                         Mild Anemia                                                       14.6         [12.5,17.1]         1105
                         Moderate Anemia                                                   17.1         [14.7,19.7]         1105
                         Severe Anemia                                                      0.6            [0.3,1.3]        1105
                                Anemia                                                     32.3         [29.3,35.4]         1105
                         Note: While there was no substantial difference in anemia prevalence between the RPC estates and private
                         estates, in all age groups and among pregnant women, the prevalence rate in the government estate was much
                         smaller; *percentages are adjusted for age and weighted for population; ** adjusted for altitude


                         3.4	    Birthweight
                         14.	    A child’s weight at birth is a key biological variable that reflects maternal nutrition status, and
                                 determines perinatal and infant mortality, and is a significant predictor of nutrition status later
                                 in life. Birthweight is influenced by a range of factors, including intrauterine growth retardation
                                 due to maternal malnutrition, infections, a heavy workload, teenage pregnancy, short birth
                                 intervals, excessive tobacco or alcohol consumption, and possible exposure to smoke (Abu-
                                 Saad and Fraser 2010; Muthayya 2009).

                         15.	    The prevalence of low birthweight (< 2,500 grams) was 27.8 percent (Figure 3.6), and only
                                 3 percentage points less than the 31.0 percent reported in DHS 2006–07. Prevalence of low
                                 birthweight was higher among girls (30.3%) than boys (25.3%).




                                                                                                                                   25
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


Figure 3.6                                  30
                                                                                                            27.8
Prevalence of Low
Birthweight                                 25                                           22.6

Low Birth Weight                            20


                           Prevalence (%)   15


                                            10


                                             5                         3.7
                                                    1.1
                                             0
                                                 Severe low      Moderate low           Mild low            Low
                                  Note: Severe LBW (<1.5kg), Moderate LBW (1.5kg-2kg), Mild LBW (2kg-2.5kg), LBW (<2.5kg)



                    16.	    To summarize, malnutrition in the estates is widespread as well as significant among both
                            children and pregnant women. While there has been some reduction in stunting prevalence
                            among the estate children, the levels remain significantly high. Moreover, prevalence of
                            wasting, underweight, birthweight and anemia levels have either been stagnant or increasing.


                            Nutrition : Estate Sector Children Under-Five Years

                             42.2%                                           39.3%                                 31.0%

                                                 5.8%         POINTS
                                                 RATE OF STUNTING
                                                                                     0.9%          POINTS
                                                                                     ANEMIA PREVALENCE
                                                                                                                            3.2%    POINTS
                                                                                                                            LOW BIRTHWEIGHT

                               36.4%                                         38.4%                                 27.8%



                                                          16%                                      35.9%

                                                                2.5%
                                                                RATE OF WASTING
                                                                               POINTS                       5.6%       POINTS
                                                                                                            UNDERWEIGHT PREVALENCE

                                                      13.5%                                        30.1%




26
CHAPTER 4




        27
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector
                 DETERMINANTS OF UNDERNUTRITION IN THE ESTATE SECTOR
                 In this chapter, the report follows the conceptual framework presented in Chapter 2 to examine the
                 immediate, intermediate and basic causes of undernutrition in a bivariate and multivariate framework.
                 The immediate determinants include maternal and child characteristics such as the sex, age,
                 birthweight and any childhood illnesses, and the age and maternal height of the mother. Intermediate
                 determinants include access to food (e.g., whether or not household owns livestock or home gardens),
                 care practices (e.g. maternal and child care and feeding practices), utilization of health services
                 (whether or not the child received vitamin A and deworming treatment) and environmental health (e.g.,
                 water and sanitation amenities, etc.). The basic causes include economic status (e.g., wealth), level
                 of education of the father and the mother, the area of residence (estate type) and access to media.


                 4.1	        Determinants of Child Undernutrition: Feeding Practices in the Estates and a
                             Bivariate Analysis
                 1.	         Good IYCF practices of early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding for the first six
                             months and appropriate complementary feeding along with the continued breastfeeding during
                             the first 23 months are considered some of the most important determinants of child nutrition.

                 2.	         Breastfeeding within the first hour of life significantly reduces newborn mortality as colostrum
                             (i.e., first breast milk) is highly nutritious and has antibodies that protect the newborn from
                             diseases. Proper breastfeeding also confers advantages in later life including higher IQ scores,
                             reduced risk of childhood obesity and adult non-communicable diseases (NCD). Figure 4.1
                             provides breastfeeding rates in the sample. 85.4 percent of mothers initiated breastfeeding
                             within an hour of birth, and 77.6 percent exclusively breastfed their infants, and almost all
                             breastfed at some point. These figures are similar to the corresponding national averages
                             (85% and 98.9% for initiation within one hour and ever breastfed (DHS 2006–07). Nearly
                             82 percent of mothers stated that, prior to giving birth, they had received advice from health
                             workers on the importance of breastfeeding.


Figure 4.1                               100
                                                98.8

IYCF Practices                                                            87.6
                                          90                 85.4

                                                                                            77.6
                                          80

                                          70
                        Prevalence (%)




                                                                                                                         61.5
                                          60
                                                                                                                                        51.7
                                          50

                                          40
                                                                                                            31.4                                         31.8
                                          30

                                          20

                                          10

                                           0
                                               breastfed




                                                                         breastfeeding




                                                                                          breastfeeding




                                                                                                                        frequency:
                                                           Breastfed
                                                           within 1 hr
                                                              of birth


                                                                                Current




                                                                                               Exclusive

                                                                                            (<6 months)


                                                                                                             Bottle-
                                                                                                           feeding


                                                                                                                          Minimum
                                                                                                                              meal

                                                                                                                       6-23 months

                                                                                                                                        Minimum
                                                                                                                                          dietary
                                                                                                                                         diversity:
                                                                                                                                     6-23 months

                                                                                                                                                         Minimum
                                                                                                                                                      acceptable
                                                                                                                                                             diet:
                                                                                                                                                      6-23 months
                                                   Ever




28
Figure 4.2                    100%
Age at Introduction of
Complementary Feeding
                               80%
(0–23 Months)

Infant feeding practices by    60%
age

                               40%



                               20%



                                0%
                                        0-1         2-3           4-5      6-7      8-9 10-11 12-13 14-15 16-17 18-19 20-21 22-23
                                                                                       Age in Months

                                                   Not breastfed                                               Breastfed with other milk/formula
                                                   Breastfed with semisolids/solids                            Breastfed and plain water only
                                                   Breastfed with other liquids                                Exclusively breastfed




Figure 4.3                    100           98.6
                                                                                                                                               96.6
                                     92.2
Children Dietary Intake by
                               90
Food Type                                                                                                                               79.7
                               80
                                                                                                                                                             72.4

% of children                  70
                                                           62.1                                                      61.5
                                                                                                                                                      58.8
                               60                                                       55.7
                                                                                                              52.2                 53
                                                    49.5
                               50                                                                                           47.3
                                                                          41.6   41.7                 41.6
                               40                                                              37.4
                                                                   33.5

                               30

                               20

                               10

                                0
                                       Grains,      Legumes          Dairy        Flesh          Eggs         Vit.A rich   Other         Usually  Usually
                                      roots &        & nuts        products       food                         fruits &   fruits &         fed   fed Iron
                                       tubers                                                                vegetables vegetables       animal rich food
                                                                                                                                        products



                                                                    Age 6-23 months                          Age 24-59 months




                                                                                                                                                                    29
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 3.	     In addition to breastfeeding, adequate complementary feeding in terms of timing, quantity and
                         quality is a vital aspect of nutrition that affects the nutritional status of children. In the study
                         sample, 8.1 percent of children were not given semisolid food until after eight months while
                         about 12.5 percent were introduced before they turned six months, even as young as 0-1
                         month old (Figure 4.2). Less than one-third of children aged 6-23 months got a variety of foods
                         for the desired number of times to meet the minimum acceptable diet even though about half
                         of children got a variety of foods (i.e., minimum dietary diversity) and about two-thirds got the
                         foods a desired number of times during the day (i.e., minimum frequency) needed (Figure 4.1).


                          Nutrition Delivery




                               61.5%                                     51.7%                     31.8%
                              MINIMUM                                    MINIMUM                   MINIMUM
                           MEAL FREQUENCY                            DIETARY DIVERSITY           ACCEPTABLE DIET


                 4.	     Dietary diversity was lower in younger children compared to older children (Figure 4.3),
                         especially animal sources of foods that are associated with linear growth (Marquis 1997).
                         Vitamin A-rich fruits and vegetables were consumed by 52 percent of the younger cohort and
                         62 percent of the older cohort. Consumption of proteins from flesh food was low (42-56%)
                         and even less expensive sources of protein such as eggs were consumed by only 37 percent
                         of children aged 6-23 months and 42 percent of children 24-59 months. Legumes and nuts,
                         which are good sources of plant proteins, were consumed by only half of the younger cohort
                         and three-fifths of the older cohort.28

                 5.	     While owning livestock and keeping home gardens could be important sources of nutritious
                         foods, to what extent they could affect undernutrition depends on whether or not they are
                         consumed and the frequency of consumption. Due to low consumption even when there was a
                         home garden in the study sample, the analysis did not find a statistically significant association
                         with undernutrition (see Table 4.2).

                 6.	     The poor dietary practice did not seem to stem from lack of knowledge of the nutritional value
                         of different foods. For example, 76 percent of caregivers were able to identify a food item rich in
                         energy from a selection of items listed, and 83 percent were able to identify a common protein-
                         rich food item. A similar proportion of mothers/caregivers were able to identify iron-rich foods,
                         and 68 percent could identify calcium-rich foods.29




                 29.	 Annex Table A3 provides corresponding figures by estate type.




30
        Identification of Food Items




                                           76%                                                        83%
                                        IDENTIFY                                                      PROTEIN
                                   ENERGY RICH FOODS                                                RICH FOODS


7.	     The focus group discussion identified at least three reasons why nutrition knowledge was
        not being translated in to practice. The first was the inability to afford or access a variety of
        nutritious foods.30 Residents of the estate sector often had to travel to a nearby town or village
        to purchase food items. Second, mothers were either unsure about the manner in which to
        introduce complementary foods or did not know the importance of introducing them (fish, meat
        and eggs) at six-months of age. Third, traditional beliefs played a role. For example, eggs,
        which are affordable and available in the estates, were believed to cause “phlegm” in children,
        and fresh milk to cause allergies (skin rashes and shortness of breath).

8.	     When comparing the prevalence of undernutrition in children born in the last 24 months by
        whether or not they were breastfed within an hour of birth and exclusively breastfed in the first
        six months; the study found a lower prevalence rate of stunting, wasting and underweight for
        those who were breastfed within the hour of birth, with a statistically significant difference for
        stunting for both early initiation of breastfeeding and exclusive breastfeeding.

9.	     A woman’s employment status is an important determinant of child nutrition. While employment
        could reduce undernutrition via the income effect, it could increase it via a substitution effect
        - reduced care for the child, as time for child care competes with time for work. Children of
        the 47.5 percent working mothers in the study were 16.5 and 9.2 percentage points more
        likely to be stunted and underweight, respectively than children whose mothers stayed at
        home. Exclusive breastfeeding rates were significantly lower for working mothers than for non-
        working mothers (P <0.05). Additionally, being a child of a working mother was significantly
        associated with having lower dietary diversity and lower minimum acceptable diet compared
        to the children of non-working mothers (P <0.01).

10.	    Table 4.1 compares the prevalence of stunting, wasting, and underweight in children (0–59
        months) across different groups. This bivariate analysis shows prevalence of stunting was
        higher among children who were male, older, and born with low birthweight. It was also higher
        among children of less educated parents, of mothers whose maternal height was less than 145
        cm, of poorer households and those with working mothers. Wasting was higher among low
        birthweight children, and those of older and short-stature mothers.




30.	 Given the relative poverty levels of households in the estate sector, receipt of food rations was very low - only 5.4 and
     6.7 percent of households were beneficiaries of the government social security program (Samurdhi) and the government
     preschool feeding program respectively.




                                                                                                                          31
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                             Determinants of Undernutrition




                                         <2500gm



                                                               CHILDREN OF                MOTHERS WITH                POORER
                                LOW BIRTH WEIGHT
                                                             WORKING MOTHERS              SHORT STATURE


Table 4.1                                                                                                                           Under
Prevalence of                Characteristics                                                  Stunting         Wasting              weight
Undernutrition in Children   Sex                                            Male                  40.9   ***       17.1              38.6 **
(0–59 Months): a Bivariate                                                  Female                32.2             14.8              33.3
Analysis                     Age months                                     (0-5)                 23.2   ***       12.9 **           25.8 ***
                                                                            (6-11)                27.4             11.1              27.8
                                                                            (12-23)               34.4             17.1              30.2
                                                                            (24-35)               42.8             14.9              39.8
                                                                            (36-47)               44.8             15.9              39.9
                                                                            (48-59)               34.8             19.9              44.7
                             Birthweight                                    <2500gm               48.9   ***       24.5 ***          55.4 ***
                                                                            ≥2500gm                 32             12.7              28.7
                             Breastfed (BF) within 1hour                    Yes                   28.7     *       14.2              27.6
                                                                            No                    34.8             16.4              32.6
                             Exclusively BF                                 Yes                   27.7   ***       14.4              27.4
                                                                            No                    36.4             14.7              31.4
                             Diarrhea                                       Yes                   43.3    **       15.1              36.4
                                                                            No                    35.7               16              35.9
                             Mother has secondary or vocational
                              education                                     No                    40.5   ***       16.7              39.1     **
                                                                            Yes                   33.6             15.4              33.7
                             Currently working mother                       Yes                   43.4   ***       15.8              40.7    ***
                                                                            No                    26.9             16.2              31.5
                             Maternal height cm                             ≤145                    52   ***       19.8 *            49.8    ***
                                                                            >145                  33.9             15.3              33.7
                             Maternal BMI kg/m2                             <18.5                 41.5    **       21.1 ***          45.2    ***
                                                                            18.5-24.9             35.5             14.2              33.9
                                                                            ≥25.0                 33.5             14.2                31
                             Father has secondary or vocational
                               education                                    No                    41.7 ***         15.8              37.9
                                                                            Yes                   32.9             15.9              34.5
                             Household Wealth Index                         Poorest               41.7 ***         19.4              40.8 **
                                                                            2nd poorest           39.7             15.6                37
                                                                            Middle                38.7             14.5                39
                                                                            2nd richest           33.7             15.9              33.1
                                                                            Richest                 29             14.3              30.5
                             Note: ***, **, and * indicate p<0.01, p<0.05 and p<0.1 respectively for differences in means of each
                             category.




32
4.2	     Determinants of Child Undernutrition: A Multivariate Analysis
11.	     This section examines the determinants of undernutrition in a multivariate context.31 The
         objective was to test which variables continued to predict undernutrition after controlling for
         several relevant characteristics. Marginal effects from a multivariate probit regression are
         reported in Table 4.2.

12.	     Boys were ten percentage points more likely to be stunted and five percentage points more
         likely to be underweight than girls, perhaps indicating a biological factor. This difference was,
         however, not statistically significant in the case of wasting and anemia. As children got older,
         their probability of being stunted and underweight increased, and the likelihood of being anemic
         declined. The analysis found that receiving deworming treatment decreased the chances of
         being anemic by about 9 percentage points. However, there was no statistically significant
         association between receipt of vitamin A and being undernourished.

13.	     Even after controlling for several relevant characteristics, low birthweight significantly and
         substantially increases the chances of being stunted, wasted and underweight. The effect
         ranges from about 13 percentage points in the case of wasting to 26 percentage points in the
         case of underweight. Children of short-stature mothers (<145 cm) had a higher probability
         of being stunted and underweight by 18 and 12 percentage points, respectively. This result
         suggests that addressing child malnutrition requires a greater focus on ensuring the health and
         nutrition of mothers both before and during pregnancy.

14.	     A growing body of literature also indicates an association between stunting and environmental
         enteropathy (EE)—a disorder thought to be caused by repeated exposures to enteric
         pathogens. EE is a poorly defined state of intestinal inflammation without overt diarrhea that
         occurs in individuals exposed over time to poor sanitation and hygiene. It is characterized
         pathologically by small intestine villous blunting and inflammation, causing reduced absorption
         of nutrients, further affecting nutrition status. The measure of sanitation and hygiene for this
         analysis was whether the households had improved toilets and sources of water, and it did
         not find any association of these factors with the measures of undernutrition. Further analysis
         may be required to conclude that the habit of boiling household water amongst the estate
         population is fully protective.




31. These regressions are meant to explore factors associated with undernutrition in a multivariate setting and caution is necessary
     for causal interpretation.




                                                                                                                                33
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


Table 4.2                Variables                           Stunting              Wasting         Underweight              Anemia
Determinants of Child
Undernutrition (Probit   Low birthweight                          0.143   ***          0.127 ***           0.256   ***      0.00700
Marginal Effects)
                                                               (0.0273)             (0.0222)           (0.0270)             (0.0284)
                         Male                                    0.0984   ***         0.0209             0.0503     **      0.00147
                                                               (0.0234)             (0.0172)           (0.0238)             (0.0247)
                         Age (in months)                       0.00183    **      0.000836              0.00335    ***     -0.00698 ***
                                                           (0.000915)           (0.000664)          (0.000924)           (0.000990)
                         Had acute respiratory illness           0.0166               0.0136             0.0299               0.0223
                                                               (0.0244)             (0.0181)           (0.0248)             (0.0255)
                         Had diarrhoea                           0.0985    **    -0.000625               0.0394            -0.00509
                                                               (0.0392)             (0.0304)           (0.0384)             (0.0398)
                         Maternal height <145 cm                  0.178   ***         0.0257               0.120   ***      0.00701
                                                               (0.0359)             (0.0260)           (0.0365)             (0.0365)
                         Mother is currently working              0.107   ***        -0.0175             0.0442      *        0.0319
                                                               (0.0240)             (0.0174)           (0.0245)             (0.0253)
                         Mother’s age                            0.0255          -0.000343               0.0185            -0.00933
                                                               (0.0168)             (0.0117)           (0.0170)             (0.0183)
                         Mother’s age squared               -0.000447      *       1.69e-05          -0.000273             3.82e-05
                                                           (0.000271)           (0.000188)          (0.000274)           (0.000294)
                         Household size                          0.0119             0.00344              0.0103             0.00574
                                                             (0.00826)            (0.00593)           (0.00844)           (0.00878)
                         Unimproved water                        0.0174              -0.0133             0.0120              -0.0567
                                                               (0.0433)             (0.0291)           (0.0443)             (0.0442)
                         Unimproved toilet                      -0.0391          -0.000108              -0.0268              -0.0321
                                                               (0.0462)             (0.0339)           (0.0460)             (0.0485)
                         Have livestock                          0.0364              -0.0125             0.0136               0.0720 **
                                                               (0.0270)             (0.0213)           (0.0274)             (0.0280)
                         Have home garden                       -0.0252               0.0285             0.0125            -0.00306
                                                               (0.0277)             (0.0190)           (0.0276)             (0.0285)
                         Had vitamin A past 6 months          -0.00810             -0.00756             -0.0156              -0.0359
                                                               (0.0257)             (0.0189)           (0.0259)             (0.0262)
                         Received worm treatment past 6
                                                               0.0445               0.0143              0.0293              -0.0857 ***
                           months
                                                             (0.0279)             (0.0199)            (0.0278)             (0.0282)
                         Have frequent access to media        -0.0137              -0.0138             -0.0522 **           -0.0484   *
                                                             (0.0258)             (0.0185)            (0.0256)             (0.0267)
                         Father has secondary/vocational
                                                              -0.0481               0.0287              0.0243              -0.0567
                           education
                                                             (0.0323)             (0.0235)            (0.0327)             (0.0346)
                         Mother has secondary/vocational
                                                              -0.0223              -0.0220             -0.0471              0.0485
                          education
                                                             (0.0327)             (0.0249)            (0.0333)             (0.0341)
                         Second poorest (Ref. poorest)        -0.0265              -0.0348             -0.0257              -0.0868 **
                                                             (0.0349)             (0.0234)            (0.0356)             (0.0363)
                         Third quintile                       -0.0360              -0.0269            0.00375               -0.0516
                                                             (0.0368)             (0.0250)            (0.0382)             (0.0399)



34
Variables                                         Stunting              Wasting          Underweight                Anemia

Second richest                                     -0.0332              -0.0121                -0.0385              -0.0807 **
                                                  (0.0364)             (0.0260)               (0.0368)             (0.0368)
Richest                                            -0.0809 **           -0.0325                -0.0594              -0.0529
                                                  (0.0373)             (0.0258)               (0.0380)             (0.0402)
Government estate (ref. RPC
                                                    0.0339              -0.0169               -0.0156                -0.177 ***
 estate)
                                                  (0.0381)             (0.0248)               (0.0376)             (0.0315)
Private estate                                     -0.0163             0.00328                 -0.0241              -0.0361
                                                  (0.0237)             (0.0175)               (0.0238)             (0.0248)
Observations                                         2,721                2,721                  2,721                2,468
Probit marginal effects reported.


15.	     Parental schooling, and especially maternal education, influences child nutrition in different
         ways. First, educated mothers have more access to information about diets and are better able
         to assimilate information and influence child care practices in their homes. Second, they are
         more likely to be in jobs with better pay, which in turn improves socioeconomic status and the
         household’s diet. Third, girls who stay in school longer are less likely to marry early and become
         pregnant at early ages—a relevant factor for undernutrition. Casanovas et al. (2013) reports
         that children of less-educated mothers have a lower chance of survival and a higher risk of
         undernutrition compared with children of educated mothers. The bivariate analysis (Table 4.1)
         confirms this claim. However, controlling for wealth and other factors, parental schooling (i.e.
         whether or not father/mother had secondary or vocational training) did not significantly predict
         undernutrition, suggesting that differences in nutrition information between these groups was
         negligible.

16.	     Another important factor determining nutrition is the economic status of the household. The
         estate sector population was relatively poorer compared to the national average. 76.8 percent
         fell below the 40th percentile of income at the national level, and only 2.5 percent of estate
         sector households belonged to the highest national income quintile.32 Based on the World
         Food Program (WFP) criteria, prevalence of food insecurity in the estates is very low. Less
         than one percent of households in the sample reported being severely food insecure.33 The
         study relied on wealth quintiles to assess the relevance of purchasing power to nutritional
         outcomes. Results showed that children from the richest 20 percent of households were 8
         percentage points less likely to be stunted. Although there was no clear gradient with wealth
         quintiles, children from the second and fourth quintile are statistically significantly less likely to
         be anemic. However, even in the richest quintile, prevalence of stunting (29%), wasting (14%),
         underweight (31%) and anemia (38%) was very high. Clearly, undernutrition is a behavioral
         and cultural problem as well as an economic one.

 




32.	 The cut-off point for the highest quintile is LKR 57,495. The upper range for the second poorest quintile is LKR 25,903.
33.	 About 94 percent of households in the sample reported they were food secure; 5.3 percent moderately food insecure; 0.8
     percent severely food insecure). On a different measure, 11 percent did not have enough food in the past 30 days to meet
     family needs. About a third of these (31.4 percent) reduced frequency of meals per day while about two-fifth (38.5 percent)
     reduced meal size and relied on less expensive food (coping responses are not mutually exclusive).




                                                                                                                                35
Multisectoral
Nutrition

                 CHAPTER 5
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector




36
POLICIES, INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS FOR NUTRITION
PROGRAMMING AND GAPS IN CURRENT NUTRITION-
SPECIFIC, NUTRITION-SENSITIVE PROGRAMS
1.	    This chapter highlights the policies and institutional arrangements for nutrition service delivery
       by reviewing relevant policies, strategies and stakeholders; followed by a review of current
       nutrition-specific, nutrition-sensitive programs and the gaps therein.

5.1	   Policies and Legislation
2.	    Nutrition is recognized as central to Sri Lanka’s development as stated in ‘The Development
       Strategy Paper of the Government of Sri Lanka’. The paper identifies the need to reduce
       undernutrition rates of under-five children from 33 percent to 12–15 percent, and underscores
       that a balanced diet is still an unmet need for many children, particularly in the estate sector.

3.	    The country has a National Nutrition Policy (NNP) that was developed in 1986 and revised
       in 2010 along with the National Nutrition Strategy. The vision of the NNP is to ensure that
       every Sri Lankan has access to appropriate and adequate food and nutrition irrespective of
       their geographical location and socioeconomic status. The 2011 Multi-sector Action Plan for
       Nutrition (MsAPN) is the guiding instrument to implement nutrition interventions across 17
       ministries. The MsAPN targets the core determinants of malnutrition in the country. These are
       the overarching policy documents, which detail the national level commitment and multisectoral
       guide to scale up nutrition interventions in Sri Lanka.

4.	    There are a few legislations that directly or indirectly relate to nutrition. For example, the
       legislation on maternity benefits has been passed for women employed in different sectors.
       Table 5.1 shows that the maternity benefits package available to mothers in the estate sector is
       a little less favorable than the package available to mothers in other sectors. Another legislation
       that indirectly affects nutrition is the legislation on government-resourced free education policy
       that was introduced in 1943 and reconfirmed in the 1972 Constitution of Sri Lanka. Moreover,
       compulsory school education is required for all children through 14-years old, and national
       child labor laws prohibit children from working during school hours. Although these laws apply
       to the estate population, this study indicated that some children either receive no education or
       drop out before completing primary school.

       Current Nutrition Programs and Gaps in the Estate Sector

         Children/Adolescent                   Women/HH                         Pre-School Children
         • School Health Promotion             • Pre-conception                 • Family Health
           Program (School Medical               Services Package                 Program including
           Inspection/ Nutrition                 (42-54%)                         IYCF (sub-optimal
           Month; (poor sanitary                                                  practice)
           facilities in schools)              • Integrated
                                                 Pregnancy Care
         • School Garden Program;                Package                        • BFHI
           WASH) (G1-13;81%)
                                               • Poshana Malla
         • Mid-day Meal Program for              Program (not                   • Glass of Milk
           the vulnerable (G1-9;76%)             recieved regularly)              Program (2-5 yrs)
         • Glass of Milk Program               • Divineguma/
           (G1-5); Production/                   Samurdhi Safety                • CDC (84%)
           Consumption of milk, eggs,            Net Program
           & meat                                (poorly targeted)
                                                                                • Micronutient
         • Classroom Health/Nutrition          • Home garden                      Program
           Education (G1-11)                     promotion (26%)                  (less coverage)
           (Scarcity of materials with           (less training)
           Tamil language)
                                               • PHI visits for
                                                 environmental
                                                 sanitation (60%)




                                                                                                       37
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


Table 5.1             Legislation/
Sri Lanka Maternity                                                                                   Cash Benefits and
                      Regulation              Eligibility                Provisions
Benefits Package                                                                                      Nursing Intervals
                      Coverage
                      Shop and Office         All females employed       84 working days (which       Payment of salary
                      Employees’              in or related to the       could be taken as            based on full pay.
                      Remuneration Act        business of a shop or      maximum 14 days prenatal     No nursing intervals
                                              office.                    and 70 days postnatal) for   provided.
                                                                         the first two children and
                                                                         thereafter from the third
                                                                         child it is reduced to 42
                                                                         days.
                      Maternity Benefits      All females employed       84 calendar days (which      Six–sevenths of
                      Ordinance               on a wage in any           could be taken as            weekly wage to be
                                              trade, industry,           maximum 14 days prenatal     paid. If crèche is
                                              business undertaking,      and 70 days postnatal) for   provided, two intervals
                                              occupation, profession,    the first two children and   of breastfeeding of
                                              or calling except, a)      thereafter from the third    30 minutes each are
                                              females covered by         child, it is reduced to 42   provided. If crèche
                                              the Shop and Office        days.                        is not provided, 60
                                              Employees’ Act or, b)                                   minutes each of two
                                              whose employment                                        intervals are provided.
                                              is of casual nature, c)
                                              home workers, and d)
                                              domestic workers in
                                              private households.
                      Establishment Code All females employed            84 working days (which       Payment of salary
                                         in the public sector or         could be taken as 14 days    is based on full pay.
                                         in Statutory Boards or          prenatal and 70 days         Sixty minute nursing
                                         covered by provisions           postnatal) and 84 calendar   breaks are provided
                                         of the Establishment            days half pay and another    until the infant is six
                                         Code (Chapter XII)              84 calendar days no pay      months old.
                                         or Administrative               leave. This benefit is
                                         Circular (No. 4/22005,          available for all births.
                                         February 2005).

                      Source: IHP Maternity Benefits Report Sep 2014, Abeykoon et al.




38
5.2	    Stakeholders in Nutrition Service Delivery
5.	     The MoH has the lead responsibility for the national response to nutrition in Sri Lanka. Multiple
        central level divisions of the MoH, including the Estate and Urban Health Unit, are involved in
        the work to improve: (i) the nutritional status of the targeted population, including pregnant and
        lactating mothers, children under-five, school-age children, and out-of-school adolescents;
        and (ii) healthcare services, especially those targeting vulnerable groups such as the estate
        sector population.


       Stakeholders in Nutrition Services

                     Ministry of Health                Prov Directors of Health Services
                 Estate/Urban Health; FHB                   Med Office/PHNS/PHM
                 Development of Estate                   Provision of Nutrition Services
                    Nutrition Policy/Plan                  Development of District
                  (under development)                        Nutrition Action Plan


                                        NUTRiTiON
                                        SERviCES
                Plantation Human Dev Trust
               Coordination of Social Services                 Trade Unions/
            with Government & other programs                Planters’ Association
                Child Development Centers




6.	     The Estate and Urban Health Unit of the MoH was established in 1997. Its goal is to advance
        the quality of life of the estate and urban population by improving their overall health and
        access to health services. It aims to reduce the disparities in basic healthcare service delivery
        between the plantation sector and other sectors by improving the nutrition status of the estate
        population, developing resources, improving maternal and child health service delivery, and
        developing the health sector infrastructure. The Unit is in the process of finalizing a policy
        addressing nutrition of the estate sector. After finalizing the policy, it plans to develop an Estate
        Health Strategic Plan that is meant to identify gaps in MoH nutrition interventions and guide the
        work of the Unit in moving forward with more targeted planning, monitoring, implementation,
        and evaluation, and in fostering partnerships to advance the multisectoral nutrition response.

7.	     Nine Provincial Directors of Health Services (PDHS) supported by 26 Regional Directors of
        Health Services (RDHS) oversee the medical officers of health and the public health teams
        that implement the health and nutrition-related interventions.34 Nutrition-related interventions
        are managed by the Family Health Bureau and are delivered by the RDHS-led Medical Officer
        of Health and the primary health care teams at the regional level. The Medical Officer of Health
        together with the Public Health Nursing Sister (PHNS) and the Public Health Midwife (PHM)
        conduct antenatal clinics. During antenatal assessments, they screen for nutrition problems,
        provide nutrition education, and identify nutritionally disadvantaged mothers for appropriate
        management. Additionally, the pregnant woman’s BMI is assessed and she would be screened
        for anemia and monitored for pregnancy weight gain. Micronutrient and nutrition supplements
        are provided during the assessments. Nutrition-specific interventions for the estate sector are
        part of the respective district nutrition action plans prepared by the RDHS.


34.	 The RDHS serving the estate population are Badulla, Kandy, Matale, Nuwara Eliya, Colombo, Kalutara, Galle, Matara,
     Monaragala, Kegalle, and Ratnapura.



                                                                                                                    39
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 8.	    The Plantation Human Development Trust (PHDT) was established in 1992 by a Cabinet
                        decision to provide social and health welfare to the population living in RPC estates. Prior to
                        its establishment, health services were provided by the estate management. The PHDT was
                        established to coordinate services with government programs with the objective of promoting
                        productive and self-reliant plantation communities. There are seven regional PHDT officers,
                        headed by a regional director, who are mandated to work with the 23 RPC estates. The regional
                        PHDT director coordinates with the RDHS, the Medical Officer of Health, and the district and
                        divisional secretary for social, health, and nutrition-related activities affecting the estate sector.
                        The PHDT develops an annual plan that includes nutrition interventions. It also participates in
                        the planning process of the Regional Directors of Health Services’ (RDHS) nutrition action plan
                        for the district.

                 9.	    The PHDT healthcare providers are supervised by the estate superintendent of their respective
                        estates and are under the oversight of the regional PHDT director. The estate superintendent
                        is responsible for coordinating the social and health activities of the estate population and
                        coordinates with the Medical Officer of Health and the PHDT regional director for health-
                        related activities.

                 10.	   The PHDT supports the respective area Medical Officers of Health, and the Primary Health
                        Care Team in their provision of basic health promotion, prevention, and curative services to
                        the estate population. The PHDT also partners with a network of other strategic partners to
                        improve, among other things, sanitation, child care and development, safe drinking water,
                        nutrition and education. Unlike the RPC estate population, the government and privately
                        managed estates are served by the Public Health Midwives and the primary healthcare team
                        of the MoH Unit only.

                 11.	   The PHMs are the grassroots level primary healthcare workers carrying out most of the
                        healthcare activities. Two types of PHMs serve the estate sector: the government-resourced
                        PHMs under the Medical Officer of Health, and the estate-resourced PHMs from the PHDT.
                        Government PHMs must follow the central authorities’ rules and regulations and adhere to
                        circulars and guidelines issued by the Ministry of Health. The PHDT provides additional inputs
                        to their PHMs with respect to maternal and child care. However, in 2007–08 the government
                        made a policy decision to gradually absorb the estate PHMs into the government sector if they
                        fulfilled the government’s recruitment criteria. As a result, the majority of the PHMs serving the
                        estates have become government-resourced but there are some estates where PHMs are still
                        managed by the government and by the PHDT. With the change in management of the PHMs
                        from the PHDT to the MoH, some estates no longer provide accommodation to PHMs, and this
                        could become a disincentive, which the government would need to assess further.

                 12.	   The PHDT, under the policy guidance of the Child Development Ministry, supports the
                        establishment and maintenance of the Child Development Centers (CDCs). It is mandatory
                        for estate management to provide CDC facilities because the majority of the mothers are
                        employed. The CDCs in RPC estates are provided and managed by the PHDT, while the CDCs
                        in other estates are directly under the Child Development Ministry. Currently, there are 936
                        upgraded CDCs established in the estate sector, representing 60 percent of all CDCs. In the
                        Nuwara Eliya district, where the maximum number of estates exist, there are 272 crèches and
                        about 19,000 infants and children attend them. Although only infants and children from RPC
                        estate employees are eligible to attend estate crèches, the children of other families living on
                        the estate also use the crèches, especially when their mothers work daily.




40
13.	     Other stakeholders involved in providing nutrition-sensitive interventions include trade unions
         (such as The Ceylon Workers Congress, The Lanka Jathika Estate Workers Union and
         Democratic Workers Congress)35 and The Planters’ Association of Ceylon. The trade unions
         support the government and PHDT in uplifting the social and health status of estate workers
         by participating in planning interventions. The Planters’ Association of Ceylon, which has wide
         representation in the RPC and privately-owned estates, is a strong stakeholder in its efforts to
         improve the social and physical wellbeing of the estate population. It works towards goals that
         include: zero anemia for a healthy life; clean, tidy homes and working places; and a healthy
         lifestyle and nutritious food for a better quality of life.

5.3	     Current Nutrition Programs and Gaps in the Estate Sector
14.	     The health sector provides a countrywide comprehensive package of nutrition-specific
         interventions for women at every age. This and the subsequent section outline these current
         nutrition-specific, nutrition-sensitive interventions in the estate sector and highlight their
         implementation and coverage gaps (see Table 5.3 for a summary).

5.3.1	 Interventions to Address Adolescent Health and Nutrition
15.	     The School Health Promotion Program (SHPP), introduced in 2009, is a comprehensive
         national program that includes nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions in schools.
         The program is jointly developed and implemented by the Ministry of Education (MoE) and the
         MoH together with relevant stakeholders. By 2013, the SHPP had been initiated in 81 percent
         of the estate schools.

16.	     The School Medical Inspection (SMI) and School Nutrition Month are two important countrywide
         nutrition interventions led by the Medical Officer of Health and implemented through the primary
         healthcare system and the government school system. The Nutrition Month in schools is an
         important annual intervention where the primary healthcare team conducts an assessment of
         the nutrition status of children. The SMI’s nutrition interventions target students from grade
         1-13 and include assessment of nutrition status (including BMI), deworming treatment, weekly
         supplementation of micronutrients (i.e., iron, folic acid, and vitamin C tablets for six months),
         and rubella immunization. The globally recommended public health intervention of weekly
         iron folate supplementation was introduced in 2013–2014 to prevent iron-deficiency anemia,
         improve pre-pregnancy iron reserves, and increase the folate levels in adolescent and young
         women. According to data from FHB, SMI coverage of schools countrywide is 93.4 percent.
         The MoE reports that in 2013, SMI was conducted in 80 percent of estate schools. However,
         the SMI data from the RDHS areas is not presented separately in the FHB data, making it
         difficult to assess the nutritional status of these schoolchildren and impact of the intervention.

17.	     The Mid-Day Meal Program was launched by the government of Sri Lanka for one million
         children in grades 1-9 for schools with major nutrition problems, and for those situated in
         vulnerable and food insecure areas. Students in schools with fewer than 100 students are also
         eligible. Meal planning is the responsibility of the school authorities and the school development
         society. The school health promotion committee is involved in this program. Of the 827 estate
         schools, 75.8 percent (627) are implementing the mid-day meal program.




35.	 More than 50,000 plantation workers are enrolled with trade unions. The Ceylon Workers Congress is the largest trade union,
     with about 40 percent of workers.



                                                                                                                            41
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                         Nutrition Interventions for Women

                                     CARE BEFORE CONCEPTiON                    CARE DURiNG PREGNANCY




                                           53.6% 43.6%                      74.1% 93.7% 81.8%
                                                                            ANC <12 WKS      REGULAR ANC      BREASTFEEDING
                                          NUTRITION ADVICE   WEIGHT CHECK
                                                                                                                 ADVICE




                                           41.6% 51.8%
                                              VITAMINS       DEWORMING
                                                                                 73.6% 74.9%
                                                                                      IRON            FOLIC ACID




                                                                                                                 MENT
                                                                                                           SUPPLE




                                                  49.2%                          17.1% 72.6%
                                                                                  MULTIVITAMIN        THRIPOSHA
                                                 FAMILY PLANNING




                 5.3.2	 Nutrition Interventions for Women before Pregnancy
                 18.	   The pre-conception service package targets newly-married couples and is aimed at correcting
                        undernutrition and anemia among women before pregnancy. Initiatives are also targeted
                        at reducing teenage pregnancies as a strategy to reduce low birthweight and nutrition
                        deficiencies. The interventions included in the package are implemented nationwide through
                        the primary healthcare delivery system and include: (i) nutrition education and counseling,
                        (ii) BMI assessment, (iii) providing knowledge about the usefulness of folic acid for women
                        planning pregnancy, (iv) education about safe motherhood, (v) provision of family planning
                        services if needed, (vi) referral to the medical officer of health for health screening, and (vii)
                        immunization for rubella. All government-resourced PHMs working in the estate sector and the
                        estate-resourced PHMs have been trained in the implementation of these services. It is during
                        home visits that the PHM is expected to provide most of these services to the target population
                        of pre-pregnant women as identified by the ‘eligible family register’.

                 19.	   Data from the survey on the percentage of pregnant women who received these pre-pregnancy
                        services indicate that there is huge room for improving service delivery (Table 5.2). Nearly 30
                        percent of women in the survey had a pre-pregnancy BMI level below 18.5; about 50 percent
                        received advice on nutrition and family planning; 43.6 percent had their weight checked and
                        received vitamin supplements; and little more than half received deworming. Qualitative
                        data suggest that difficulties to access this population, PHM’s time constraints, and lack of
                        appropriate facilities (e.g., a place to discuss sensitive issues such as family planning) are
                        possible factors for the inadequate coverage.




42
Table 5.2                                                                                Percentage of pregnant women
Pre- and During
                           Care before conception
Pregnancy Care
                               Nutrition advice                                                           53.6
                               Weight check                                                               43.6
                               Vitamins                                                                   41.6
                               Deworming treatment                                                        51.8
                               Family planning                                                            49.2
                           Care during pregnancy
                               Registered before 12 weeks of gestation                                    74.1
                               Regular visits to antenatal clinic                                         93.7
                               Mother advised on breastfeeding                                            81.8


                  20.	    An additional limitation is that there is no official nutrition program for unmarried young men
                          and women. Only married couples are identified by the PHM through the register. The most
                          vulnerable group of unmarried teenagers, who may get pregnant prior to marriage, is excluded
                          in the current model. Even if such outreach services were available, key informant interviews
                          indicate that young people would not be comfortable discussing such issues in the home
                          environment. It was suggested that this be done in either schools or through other community-
                          based channels in the estates. Integrating sexual and reproductive health education in the
                          school curriculum was also suggested to avert teenage pregnancy—an underlying factor of
                          undernutrition.

                  5.3.3	 Nutrition Interventions for Pregnant Women
                  21.	    Pregnant woman have access to the comprehensive integrated pregnancy care package from
                          the time they register with the PHM. A wide spectrum of nutrition-related services is included
                          in this package. These services include assessing nutrition, monitoring and providing advice
                          on weight gain, promoting breastfeeding (e.g., antenatal preparation to endure breastfeeding
                          practices) and providing dietary and micronutrient supplements. Weight gain is monitored at
                          monthly intervals. The government’s dietary and micronutrient program includes the provision
                          of micronutrients (folic acid, iron, calcium, and vitamin C), anti-helminthic therapy, and dietary
                          supplementation with two packets of Thriposha per month.36

                  22.	    The study data indicates that three-quarters of pregnant women registered their pregnancy
                          between 8–12 weeks. For 93.7 percent of women, the PHM made at least one home visit
                          during pregnancy. The average number of home visits by the PHM was good, with an average
                          of 2.6 home visits during the first 12 weeks, 2.7 visits during the next 12–27 weeks, and 3.9
                          visits during 27–39 weeks. About 81.8 percent of mothers received advice on breastfeeding
                          and its importance during their pregnancy.

                  23.	    About one quarter of women interviewed during the study did not consume iron and folic acid
                          supplements respectively, with an even higher proportion of them not consuming vitamin C and
                          calcium (Figure 5.1).




                  36.	 Thriposha is a government food supplement (ready-to-eat cereal legume-based food consisting of calories, proteins, and
                       micronutrients) that is supposed to benefit all pregnant and lactating women up to six months after childbirth.



                                                                                                                                          43
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                          24.	     Although Thriposha is meant to be provided on a regular basis to all pregnant women, 18
                                   percent of women did not receive it regularly and 10 percent never received it.37 This supply
                                   constraint is confirmed by estate superintendents, officials of the RPCs, and workers who
                                   stated that the supply is very often disrupted (no supplies for as long as 2-3 months). Moreover,
                                   there is a compliance problem, with about 80 percent of pregnant women always sharing the
                                   supplement with other household members.

                          25.	     In addition to the Thriposha supplementation program, in 2015 the MoH introduced the Poshana
                                   Malla program for all pregnant women. However, the focus group discussions indicated that
                                   women in the estates did not receive the Poshana Malla regularly.


Figure 5.1                              80                    74.9
                                               73.6                                                                     72.6
Percent of Pregnant                                                         69.3
Women who Received                                                                         64.6
Micronutrients and Food
                                        60
Supplements During
Pregnancy
                                  (%)




                                        40




                                        20                                                                17.1




                                         0
                                                Iron       Folic Acid    Vitamin C       Calcium     Multivitamin    Receives
                                                                                                      combined       Thriposha
                                                                                                                     regularly



                          5.3.4	 Nutrition Interventions and Health Services for Children
                          26.	     The MoH implements IYCF activities countrywide. The IYCF interventions are integrated into
                                   the maternal and child health component of the Family Health Program. The intervention
                                   calls for early initiation of breastfeeding, exclusive breastfeeding up to six months, and the
                                   continuation of breastfeeding for two years and beyond, while introducing safe and nutritious
                                   complementary feeding at six months of age. The DHS 2006–07 and subsequent surveys show
                                   that a majority of women in the estate sector have good breastfeeding practices. In the urban
                                   sector, 78.1 percent of mothers initiate breastfeeding within the first hour. The corresponding
                                   figures for the rural and estate sectors are 79.8 percent and 85.0 percent, respectively.

                          27.	     The Baby Friendly Hospital Initiative (BFHI) was introduced in Sri Lanka in 1985. The FHB is
                                   responsible for training healthcare providers to implement the ten steps of BFHI. The BFHI
                                   is established in all specialist hospitals in the country, including those covering the estate
                                   sector. The FHB also promotes Kangaroo mother care centers, lactation management centers,
                                   breastfeeding corners and rooms, and mother-baby centers in hospitals to encourage mothers
                                   to start skin-to-skin contact with the baby as soon as possible to facilitate the initiation of
                                   breastfeeding. Unfortunately, there are no data to assess the quality of the initiative.




                          37.	 Pregnant women living in the government estates are less likely to receive Thriposha on a regular basis than women living in
                               the RPCs or the private estates.



44
28.	     The Glass of Milk Program is a government program that provides a glass of milk to children
         aged two to five years who are attending preschools, and to students in grades one to five if the
         school does not have the Mid-day Meal Program. In the plantation sector, 38 schools without
         the Mid-day Meal Program have the Glass of Milk Program.

29.	     Amongst the study sample there was relatively high utilization of health and nutrition services:
         86.5 percent of households reported regular visits by the PHM;38 99 percent of the children
         were born in a hospital, and nearly as many had a Child Health Development Record (CHDR).
         Furthermore, a majority of the mothers were reported to have attended the regular growth-
         monitoring sessions, evidenced by the knowledge they displayed about their child’s growth.
         While more than 80 percent understood their child’s growth trajectory (weight gain, height,
         nutritional status, and early childhood development), it was apparent from the focus group
         discussions that their understanding of stunting and its consequences remained poor.



          Healthcare for Children




                                                                                           2500gm




          99.1%                                  98%                                28.4%
          BORN IN A                           CAN PRODUCE                             RECEIVED
         GOVERNMENT                           CHILD HEALTH                         SPECIAL ADVICE
         HEALTHCARE                           DEVELOPMENT                           FOR CHILDREN
           FACILITY                             RECORD




38.	 The highest proportion of regular visits (95.3 percent) was recorded in the RPC estates, while the lowest (60 percent) in the
     government estates.



                                                                                                                              45
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                             30.	    Although utilization of health and nutrition services was high, gaps in quality of service
                                     provision were noted. Only 28.4 percent of mothers whose children had poor weight gain
                                     received specific advice on how to address the problem.39 Among other inquiries, mothers
                                     were asked if they were advised to increase the quantity and quality of food they fed their
                                     child (Figure 5.2). Less than two-thirds (62%) were advised to increase the amount of feeding
                                     and 55.7 percent to increase the variety of food. One of the responsibilities of the PHM, who
                                     is the primary source of nutrition advice, is to refer a malnourished child to hospitals to meet a
                                     pediatrician; however, only 19.5 percent of children were referred to a hospital/a specialist.40



Figure 5.2                                                                                     62

Advice Provided for                       60                                   55.7
Children With Poor Weight
                                          50                                                                47.8
Gain                                                43.7

                                          40
                                    (%)




                                          30                       27.8


                                                                                                                          19.5
                                          20


                                          10


                                            0
                                                   Add oil/       Feed       Increase        Increase      Increase      Meet
                                                   butter/       when ill     variety        quantity   supplementary pediatrician/
                                                  margarine                                                  food       doctor


                             The study also showed deficiencies in children’s receipt of micronutrient supplements (Figure 5.3).
                             Only 33.6 percent of children had received vitamin A supplement within the last six months of the
                             survey, and 54 percent of the children had never received it.41

Figure 5.3
Health and Nutrition                                80
                                                                                      73.5
Services Given to Children
                                                    70
(Percent of Children)
                                                    60
                                                                50.0
                                                    50
                                            (%)




                                                    40
                                                                                                           33.6
                                                                                                                                 27.6
                                                    30

                                                    20

                                                    10

                                                     0
                                                                 Worm            Thriposha              Vitamin A        Ever received
                                                              treatment         (6 months)              (6 months)     MMN (3 districts only)
                                                              (6 months)    underweight children)




                             39.	 Sixty-seven percent of mothers reported the PHM as the main source of nutrition advice.
                             40.	 See annex Table A4 for disaggregation by estate type.
                             41.	 Annex Table A5 provides corresponding figures by estate type.



46
                             31.	   Multiple Micronutrient (MMN) supplementation is another intervention to improve the nutrition
                                    status of children. It contains iron and zinc, which are important for cognitive development. For
                                    children at 6, 12, and 18 months of age, the government recommends one sachet per day of
                                    MMN supplementation for two consecutive months. At the time of the study, this intervention
                                    was implemented in three of the sample districts: Nuwara Eliya, Badulla and Monaragala. The
                                    receipt of the MMN supplement in these districts was very poor: only 28 percent of children
                                    surveyed had ever received it; and of them, only 45 percent consumed the entire sachet.

                             32.	   Only 50 percent of children received deworming treatment in the six months period prior to the
                                    survey, and 43.7 percent had never received it.


                                              MMN Supplement

                                                                          MENT
                                                                    SUPPLE




                                                                                      28%        OF CHILDREN RECEIVE IT




                                                                                 45%           CONSUMES THE FULL PACKET




Table 5.3                    Interventions/Activities      Sector      Target group          Gap in system/coverage
Current Nutrition-Specific   School Health Promotion       MoH/        School children       -	 initiated in 81% of estate schools
and Nutrition-Sensitive      Program (SHPP)                MoE                                  by 2013
                                                                       (grade 1-13)
Interventions and Gaps in                                                                  - 	School Medical Inspection data
the Estate Sector                                                                             from the RDHS areas are not
                                                                                              presented separately in the FHB
                                                                                              data
                             The Mid-day Meal              MoH         Students (grade1-9) -	 implemented in about 76% of
                             Program                                   in targeted schools    estate schools
                             The pre-conception            MoH         Newly-married       - 	poor coverage (e.g. only 53.6% of
                             service package                           couples                pregnant women received nutrition
                                                                                              advice before pregnancy);
                                                                                             - 	difficulties in trying to reach newly-
                                                                                                married couples because some of
                                                                                                them work outside the estates and
                                                                                                are unavailable during the day
                                                                                             - 	lack of suitable settings to
                                                                                                discuss sensitive matters such
                                                                                                contraceptive use; unmarried
                                                                                                women are not targeted
                                                                                             - absence of estate-level nutrition-
                                                                                               related data on pre-pregnant
                                                                                               women; PHMs report time
                                                                                               constraint to effectively deliver
                                                                                               services


                                                                                                                                     47
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 Interventions/Activities      Sector      Target group       Gap in system/coverage
                 Dietary and micronutrient     MoH         Pregnant women     - 	coverage can be improved; about
                 programs                                  and children          25% didn’t register their pregnancy
                                                                                 between 8-12 weeks
                 The Poshana Malla             MoED        All pregnant women -	 not received regularly
                 Program
                 Thriposha food                MoH         All pregnant and      -	 sub-optimal practice (e.g. less than
                 supplementation                           lactating mothers        a third of children 6-23 months old
                                                           and undernourished       get the Minimum Acceptable Diet);
                                                           children between the     a lack of knowledge about the
                                                           ages of six months       consequences of stunting
                                                           and five years of
                                                           age (In the Estate
                                                           Sector, all children
                                                           attending CDC/
                                                           Creche are provided
                                                           Thriposha)
                 Promoting Infant and          MoH         Infants and young     - 	sub-optimal practice (e.g. less than
                 Young Child Feeding                       children                 a third of children 6-23 months old
                 (IYCF) activities                                                  get the Minimum Acceptable Diet);
                                                                                    a lack of knowledge about the
                                                                                    consequences of stunting
                 The Baby Friendly Hospital MoH            All specialist        - 	absence of data to evaluate quality
                 Initiative (BFHI)                         hospitals
                 The Glass of Milk Program MoE             Children 2-5 years
                                                           attending preschools
                                                           and students in
                                                           grades 1-5, if school
                                                           doesn’t have Mid-
                                                           day Meal Program
                 Classroom health and          MoE         Students from         -	 needs to be evaluated and updated
                 nutrition education                       grade 1-11 (in the       with practical approaches
                                                           school curriculum of -	 communication material should be
                                                           different courses)       made available in Tamil language
                 Improving water and         MoE           School children         -	 poor water and sanitation facilities
                 sanitation in schools under                                          (lack tap water connections and
                 the SHPP package                                                     enough latrines or adequate
                                                                                      number of latrines)
                 The Divineguma/Samurdhi                   Pregnant and            - 	poorly targeted (excluding
                 safety net program (cash                  lactating women of         deserving families )
                 transfer)                                 low-income families
                 Home gardening               MoA                                  - 	only few received training
                 promotion under the                                               - 	seeds provided to some didn’t
                 National Agricultural Policy                                         germinate
                                                                                   - 	cultivation and consumption is rare
                 School Garden Programs        MoE         School children
                 under the SHPP
                 Promoting the production      MoL                                 - 	need to link with the Glass of Milk
                 and consumption of milk,                                             program to enable distribution at a
                 eggs, and meat                                                       reasonable cost
                 Note: MoA = Ministry of Agriculture; MoE = Ministry of Education;
                 MoED = Ministry of Economic Development; MoH = Ministry of Health; MoL = Ministry of Livestock



48
         Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions




        73.5%
          THRIPOSHA
                                        33.6%
                                           VITAMIN A
                                                                      50%
                                                                 WORM TREATMENT
          6 MONTHS                         6 MONTHS                6 MONTHS


5.4	    Nutrition-Sensitive Interventions and Gaps
33.	    Several nutrition-sensitive programs are carried out by non-health ministries with the support
        of NGOs and civil-based organizations. These include nutrition education at schools, improved
        care at CDCs, provision of safe drinking water and sanitation, social safety nets, home and
        school gardens, livestock development and dairy use.

5.4.1	 Education and Early Childhood Development
34.	    Classroom health and nutrition education is included in the national school curriculum. It is
        taught under ‘Environment Studies’ in grades 1-5, under ‘Health and Physical Education’ in
        grades 6-9, and under varying subjects in grades 10 and 11. Classroom nutrition education
        is aimed at promoting healthy eating habits and physical education, using safe drinking water
        and proper sanitation, creating a healthy school environment, and empowering students to
        monitor their BMI and to change behavior as necessary.

35.	    The key informant interviews indicated that nutrition education in schools needed to be
        evaluated and the curriculum needed revision, including practical approaches, such as
        how to measure BMI and what actions are necessary for underweight or obese children.
        Communication material for students, parents, and teachers should be made available in the
        Tamil language.

36.	    Consultations are in progress to include ‘Food and Nutrition’ as a subject in the basic curriculum
        of the College of Education and the in-service teacher education programs of the Teacher
        Training College. Plantation sector schools could potentially benefit from this national strategy.

37.	    Since most children of working estate mothers are cared for at the estate–run CDCs/crèche,
        and in almost half the cases, fed at the CDC, nutrition status is also a possible reflection of
        inadequate feeding and care at these centers. For working mothers, the availability of CDCs
        in the estates is crucial as it allows easy access for breastfeeding. Table 5.4 shows CDCs are
        available in 83.6 percent of the estates, but there are far fewer CDCs in the private estates
        (65.2%) compared to government (90%) and RPC estates (96.5%).42




42. In the RPC estates where working mothers—especially those involved in tea plucking—work close to the CDC, exclusive
     breastfeeding rate (79.6) is higher compared to private estates (74%) and government estates (63%).




                                                                                                                    49
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                           Availability of Facilities




                                                 CHiLD DEvELOPMENT CENTERS
                                                                   84%

                                            PRIVATE ESTATES    GOVERNMENT ESTATES            RPC

                                            65.2%                   90%                 96.5%
                 38.	     The quality of facility such as cleanliness and availability of amenities is equally crucial.43 More
                          than 15 percent of the crèches were found to be either ‘not clean’ or ‘extremely not clean’ (Table
                          5.4). There were substantial differences by estate types, with the government estates being
                          the most unclean (38.9%) and the RPC estates being the least unclean (7.3%). This difference
                          is also visible in toilet availability. Less than a third (30%) of the crèches either did not have any
                          toilet or lacked a proper toilet. RPC estates were comparatively better, corroborating the fact
                          that they had upgraded most of the CDCs.44


                          Cleanliness of Facilities




                                                CHiLD DEvELOPMENT CENTERS
                                                                   15%
                                                              Below standards



                                             GOVERNMENT ESTATES             REGIONAL PLANTATION COMPANY
                                              BELOW STANDARDS                     BELOW STANDARDS

                                                38.9%                                 7.3%



                 43.	 Cleanliness was measured on a scale (very clean, somewhat clean, not clean and extremely unclean) based on the observers’
                      judgment of the following aspects: presence of smells and garbage, upswept floors, ventilation, and the cleanliness of utensils
                      used for feeding.
                 44.	 Water sealed toilet availability in RPC, private and government estate CDCs was 79.3 percent, 64.3 percent and 38.9 percent
                      respectively. The rest did not have toilet or had no ‘proper toilet’.



50
Table 5.4                                                                 RPC estates      Private estates     Government estates   All estates
Availability and Sanitary                                                   (n=82)             (n=42)                (n=18)          (n=142)
Facilities in Estates                Crèche available in estate*             96.5               65.2                  90.0              83.6
(Percent)                            Crèche not clean/extremely               7.3               21.4                  38.9              15.5
                                       unclean
                                     No proper toilet/no toilet in             20.7              35.7                 61.2             30.3
                                       Crèche

                            39.	     The CDCs were often found to be crowded and the ratio of children to caregivers was high.
                                     In the clusters studied, the CDCs in the RPC estates had, on average, 26 children per trained
                                     staff member: a child development officer (CDO) and one non-trained staff member. In private
                                     estates, this was lower—on average, 15 children per CDO trained in child care and early
                                     childhood development and one non-trained staff. The corresponding figure for government
                                     estates was 21. The ideal ratio of staff to children to maintain good child care practices may
                                     need further analysis.

                            5.4.2	 Water and Sanitation
                            40.	     Providing safe drinking water and sanitation in schools is included in the School Health
                                     Promotion Program package facilitated by the MoE, and is promoted as a supportive service to
                                     increase the nutrition status of children. Under this program, an annual school sanitation survey
                                     is carried out in all schools. However, the study visit to the schools revealed that water and
                                     sanitation facilities in the estate sector was poor. Most schools lacked tap water connections
                                     and had very few latrines.

                            41.	     Although 90 percent of the entire estate sector population had access to improved water
                                     sources, the quality of water at different sources varied. Water is usually supplied through
                                     a common “stand post” installed close to the housing units, allowing some houses to get
                                     temporary connections. Some estates have built water storage tanks and the water is pumped
                                     into it from a close-by spring. Ideally, estate authorities make efforts to protect the spring from
                                     contamination. The water that is collected in the tank is purified based on the instructions of the
                                     Public Health Inspector (PHI).45 The main responsibility of the PHI is to supervise and disinfect
                                     the water supply and carry out bacteriological analysis of the water supply. Sixty percent of
                                     estates reported regular PHI visits, with RPC estates reporting the highest proportion of regular
                                     visits (74%) and government estates reporting the lowest (35%).

                            42.	     More than 92 percent of the estate sector water supplies at source were contaminated with E.
                                     coli.46 (Table 5.5). Only five percent of the water samples at household level and crèches were
                                     clear of E. coli. The focus group discussions revealed that some houses got water directly
                                     from springs, bypassing the stock tank that is supposed to supply purified water because
                                     of frequent disruptions to the water supply. Respondents reported that sometimes even the
                                     water that was taken from the stock tank was discolored, especially when there were water
                                     shortages. A significant majority of households reported that they drank cooled boiled water.




                            45.	 The estate management is responsible for this water supply and samples are tested.
                            46.	 Figures by estate type are provided on annex Table A6.




                                                                                                                                              51
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                                   Water and Sanitation




                                                                                        92%
                                                            90%
                                   HAVE ACCESS TO
                                      SOURCES OF                                        contaminated
                                     WATER SUPPLY                                         at sources




Table 5.5                                                                         Main source           Household       Crèche water
Water Quality Assessment                                                          water sample         water sample        sample
                                                                                    (n=143)              (n=161)          (n=138)
                                                                                            25                  25                25
                                   E.coli count, median [range]                        [0, 200]            [0, 200]           [0, 80]
                                                                                             11                 8                  7
                                   No (%) without E.coli                                 (7.7%)               (5%)             (5.1%)
                                                                                            95                  110               110
                                   Presumptive coliforms median [range]                [0, 550]            [0, 550]          [0, 550]
                                                                                             10                 6                  6
                                   No. (%) with coliforms count <10                      (7.0%)             (3.7%)             (4.3%)

                                   * The goal was to collect three samples from the main water source, one household, and the crèche
                                   from each of the 170 clusters. Water samples were not available for some clusters due to practical/
                                   logistic reasons.



                           5.4.3	 Social Protection
                           43.	   The safety net program Divineguma, which was formerly called Samurdhi, is the country’s
                                  main comprehensive cash-transfer program to alleviate chronic poverty. The prime objectives
                                  of the program include empowering household economies and ensuring nutrition security,
                                  especially of pregnant and lactating women of low-income families. Interviews with some field-
                                  level officers indicated that the Divineguma program was poorly targeted—many deserving
                                  families did not receive the benefits. At the focus group discussions, estate workers explained
                                  that officers rarely visited the estates and, as a result, households that could easily meet the
                                  criteria rarely received the program benefits. Although the program distributed cows, goats,
                                  chicks, and pigs to some estates, the focus groups indicated that this was not done in an
                                  organized manner.




52
5.4.4	Agriculture
44.	     The National Agriculture Policy promotes home gardening to supplement household nutrition
         and income and to promote female participation in ensuring healthy nutrition in the family.
         However, only a few of the privately owned and government estate workers have received
         training in home gardening. As discussed in the previous chapter, only a quarter of estate
         households are cultivating home gardens and fewer (18.3%) of them consumed the produce.
         Discussions with estate workers revealed that men were not interested in gardening, and
         working women either had no time for home gardening or were unaware of the nutritious value
         of foods.

45.	     School Garden Programs are included in the School Health Promotion Program implemented
         by the Ministry of Education. The main objective of this program is to enhance the nutrition status
         of school children, their families, and the community by introducing the concept of consuming
         low cost, nutritious, chemical free, fresh garden produce, and creating a model school garden.
         Children are provided with knowledge and skills to create their own garden plots at school or at
         home to meet their daily food requirement and are increasingly getting involved.47 Principals,
         teachers, and students are the stakeholders in this program. Government ministries support
         the program by providing plants, seeds, organic fertilizers, and garden tools.

46.	     The Ministry of Livestock supports the national nutrition strategy by promoting the production
         and consumption of milk, eggs, and meat, and providing coolers in three-wheeler vehicles
         to dairy farmers and collectors to transport perishable products. The discussion with key
         informants underscored the need to link ‘The Glass of Milk’ program to the Ministry of
         Livestock in order to enable distribution at a reasonable cost. The ministry is also promoting
         the consumption of rice-based products among vulnerable populations and implementing
         household cash management programs in the estate sector.

47.	     To conclude, while there are several nutrition-specific and nutrition-sensitive programs, certain
         gaps in program implementation were identified and are described below:

         i)	 Uneven targeting/coverage: some programs did not cover the entire targeted population,
             were ill-targeted or benefits were provided on an irregular basis (supply disruption). For
             example, children in some estate schools did not get the Mid-day Meal; pregnant women in
             the estates were not included in the Poshana Malla Program; mothers received Thriposha
             on an irregular basis; and some deserving pregnant and lactating women were excluded
             from receiving Samurdhi. There is a need to prioritize and target programs, so that
             beneficiaries receive the full package of essential interventions.

         ii)	 Implementation impediments to MoH’s pre-pregnancy health and nutrition package include:
              difficulties in trying to reach newly married couples because some of them work outside the
              estates and are unavailable during the day; lack of suitable settings to discuss sensitive
              matters such as contraceptive use and the absence of estate-level nutrition-related data on
              pre-pregnant women.




47.	 Children are taught to prepare organic fertilizer using refuse from school and home.




                                                                                                         53
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 iii)	Ineffective communication: Information handouts may not be the best means of
                      communicating health and nutrition messages to the estate population as some residents
                      are illiterate and others are reluctant to read messages due to time constraints. In addition,
                      nutrition-related education materials in schools (for students, parents and teachers) was
                      not available in the Tamil language, and lacked practical suggestions on how to circumvent
                      undernutrition.

                 iv)	 Inadequate monitoring mechanisms: the School Medical Inspection (SMI) data from the
                      RDHS areas is not presented separately in the FHB data. As a result, the nutrition status of
                      school children and the outcomes of those detected with poor indicators is not known.

                 v)	 Lack of coordination among the MoH’s different nutrition programs and among other
                     ministries with different nutrition-sensitive programs.




54
CHAPTER 6




        55
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector
                 RECOMMENDATIONS
                 1.	   Undernutrition in the estate population is high and requires strategic action. Except for
                       stunting that has declined by 5.8 percentage points since the 2006-07 DHS, both wasting
                       and underweight show an increasing trend (by 2.5 and 5.8 percentage points respectively).
                       Moreover, the estate sector still lags behind the rest of the country; the stunting rate, at 36
                       percent, is almost three times the national average. The prevalence of underweight (36%) and
                       wasting (16%) in the estate sector constitutes a serious public health emergency, according to
                       the WHO classification. In addition, the persisting prevalence of anemia both amongst children
                       and pregnant women, and a 27.8 percent prevalence of low birthweight points to the need for
                       concerted action to adopt a life-cycle approach to improve and maintain the nutrition status of
                       adolescent girls, newly-married women, pregnant women, and infants and young children.

                 2.	   Achieving strides in improving nutrition outcomes would require investments in nutrition-
                       specific and nutrition-sensitive interventions. The GoSL is already committed to focusing on
                       the first 1,000 days (between conception and a child’s 2nd birthday) of maximum vulnerability.
                       A window of opportunity, this is the most critical period in which to make a positive impact on a
                       child's cognitive and physical development. While there is a multitude of both nutrition-specific
                       and nutrition-sensitive programs being implemented in the country, this report identifies specific
                       gaps in service delivery in the estates. The report also identifies the potential to substantially
                       increase efficiencies by improving coordination and joint implementation of different programs.
                       Finally, improved monitoring and reporting mechanisms could help inform evidence-based
                       policy.

                 3.	   The report’s recommendations are outlined below. While several of these recommendations
                       would need stewardship from the center, the RDHS which is mandated (with the PHDT for
                       RPC estates) to prepare annual district nutrition action plans, could include estate-specific
                       interventions, including regular monitoring and feedback mechanisms.

                       Design an estate-specific BCC strategy and ensure it is an integral part of every
                       nutrition intervention.

                 4.	   The study findings and analysis indicate high levels of undernutrition amongst all income
                       quintiles; significant gaps in knowledge and infant and child feeding and caring practices
                       among the estate sector population. It is therefore recommended that the MoH, in consultation
                       with relevant stakeholders, design and implement an estate sector-specific, multipronged
                       comprehensive BCC strategy as an integral part of all nutrition interventions/programs.
                       This strategy should also be informed by formative research including traditional beliefs and
                       practices affecting nutrition status, and target mothers as well as other child care providers
                       (such as caregivers at CDCs), the community, and policymakers. It could start with a limited
                       number of user-centric, short-term knowledge/behavior changes through multiple channels and
                       then phase into medium/long-term system changes. These could include: (i) the importance
                       of introducing complementary feeding at six months of age, and appropriate foods; (ii) more
                       Tamil-based communication material, and material that would be appropriate for the illiterate
                       population; (iii) hygiene promotion activities such as hand-washing with soap for all household
                       members before preparation of food, feeding of the infant/young child, and after use of the
                       toilet; while continuing to encourage and maintain the household habit of boiling water for
                       consumption; (iv) encouragement to mothers (while understanding constraints) of utilizing the
                       full maternity leave; and (v) awareness of the impact of stunting in children.




56
      Institutionalize capacity building of frontline nutrition workers.

5.	   This could be undertaken by both MoH and other relevant ministries as appropriate. Specific
      actions could include: (i) strengthen the capacity of front line workers (e.g., PHMs) to promote
      good nutrition during the pre-pregnancy phase and for children; and prevent, identify, and
      manage malnutrition among adolescents, pregnant women and children. (ii) Review whether
      the number of frontline workers, including at the CDCs, are sufficient to deal with the
      population and workload, and develop a human resource strategy in case increased workforce
      is required; and (iii) under the direction of the Ministry of Agriculture, strengthen the capacity
      of agricultural extension workers serving the estate population to enable them to facilitate and
      integrate nutrition promotion messages in to activities to improve household food security and
      child dietary diversity.

	     Employ a set of complementary and innovative platforms to target better and reach
      the underserved.

6.	   The study findings indicate that low birthweight (LBW) significantly and substantially increased
      the chances of the child being stunted, wasted or underweight. In addition, children of short-
      stature mothers had a higher probability of being stunted and underweight. This suggests that
      addressing child malnutrition requires a greater focus on ensuring the health and nutrition
      of girls/women both before and during pregnancy. However, there were gaps in the reach
      to this group, particularly for working women and adolescent girls. The MoH and relevant
      stakeholders should consider exploring, developing and testing new complementary models of
      nutrition service delivery that reaches (i) working women who are not available at home during
      visits by the frontline workers, and (ii) adolescent girls, particularly for teenage pregnancies,
      which which are likely to be reported late.

	     Improve the effectiveness and efficiency of existing programs.

7.	   While the GoSL has made efforts to improve the nutrition status of the population by
      implementing various programs in multiple sectors, these programs have not always been
      effective and efficient due to various reasons, some of which are described in Chapter 5. The
      GoSL, with relevant stakeholders, could focus on addressing the supply- and demand-side
      bottlenecks to make these programs fully functional. This could include:

      i)	 increasing the coverage of Thriposha supplementation to children and pregnant women in
          the estates by identifying causes of its supply disruption;

      ii)	 exploring the possibility of changing the packaging of the food supplementation into small
           single-serve “doses” so that families would treat it more like medicine. This will also reduce
           the chance they will share it with other family members;

      iii)	 reviewing the existing guidelines for CDCs, and establishing, if required, Standard
            Operating Procedures for optimal child feeding and child care practices;

      iv)	 strengthening monitoring and evaluation practices for school-based interventions, including
           relevant classroom curriculum and school garden programs;

      v)	 assessing and planning for improved water and sanitation facilities at schools and CDCs;




                                                                                                      57
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                       vi)	 the Ministry of Agriculture could take the lead to re-orient their approach to food security
                            beyond the focus on the staple diet (rice and wheat flour) by initiating and/ or scaling up
                            programs that focus on the production and consumption of livestock, fruits and vegetables,
                            poultry and poultry products, especially by infants and young children;

                       vii)	working with the MoE, the National Nutrition Steering Committee could submit appropriate
                            recommendations to include in the Basic Teacher Curriculum which is due to be revised in
                            2017, focusing on the importance and means to improve undernutrition; and

                            better targeting of Divineguma, the safety net program, particularly for low-income
                       viii)	
                            households in the estates.

                       Strengthen leadership, coordination and performance monitoring for stronger
                       accountability.

                 8.	   The 2011 Multi-sector Action Plan for Nutrition is the guiding instrument to implement nutrition
                       interventions across 17 ministries. The GoSL could consolidate and strengthen the estate
                       multisectoral coordination mechanisms comprising of key stakeholders (PHDT, MoH, Ministry
                       of Agriculture, Ministry of Plantation and Infrastructure, Ministry of Education, Development
                       Partners) at the provincial, district, and divisional levels, and make them accountable for
                       results at each level. This could be done at either the central or the regional level, as planning
                       and targeting estates in each district would ensure better implementation and monitoring.
                       Although strong awareness exists among stakeholders that effective coordination is necessary
                       at the district and divisional levels, currently, different stakeholders work independently of each
                       other. Further discussions and consensus would be required as to who would be best placed
                       to lead this coordination effort. To facilitate this effort, there needs to be an improvement
                       and institutionalization of the estate sector maternal and child nutrition reporting systems to
                       generate and collect timely data for better nutrition program monitoring. This should include a
                       mechanism for sharing data and analysis across sectors.




58
REFERENCES
Abeykoon, A.T.P.L, Rannan-Eliya, R.P., Wickremasinghe, R., Thowfeek, R., Anuranga, C. and
Siriwardena (2014). Study on the Establishment of Maternity protection Insurance in Sri Lanka. IHP.

Abu-Saad, K. and Fraser, D. (2010) Maternal nutrition and birth outcomes. Epidemiologic Reviews. 32
(1): 5-25. doi: 10.1093/epirev/mxq001

Anthropological survey of nutrition determinants in Sri Lanka (2007).

Auranga, C., R. Wickramasinghe, R.P. Rannan-Eliya, S.M.M. Hossain, and A.T.P.L Abeykoon. (2012).
Trends, inequalities and determinants of low birthweight in Sri Lanka. Cey Med J., 57: 2

Black, Robert E., Alderman, H., Bhutta, Z.A., and Gillespie, S. et al. (2013). Executive Summary of
The Lancet Maternal and Child Nutrition Series Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. Lancet.

Black, R.E., C.G. Victora, S.P. Walker, Z.A. Bhutta, P. Christian, M. de Onis, et al. (2013). Maternal
and child undernutrition and overweight in low-income and middle-income countries. Maternal and
Child Nutrition Study Group Lancet 382 (9890): 427–51, doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60937-X.

Bloom, D.E., Cafiero, E.T., Jané-Llopis, E., Abrahams-Gessel, S., Bloom, L.R., Fathima, S., Feigl,
A.B., Gaziano, T., Mowafi, M., Pandya, A., Prettner, K., Rosenberg, L., Seligman, B., Stein, A.Z., &
Weinstein, C. (2011). The Global Economic Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases. Geneva: World
Economic Forum.

Brown, J., K. Berdan, R. Splett, M. Robinson, and L. Harris. (1980). Prenatal weight gains related to
the birth of healthy-sized infants in low-income women. Journal of the American Dieticians’ Association
7: 662–667.

Casanovas, M.C., C.K. Lutter, N. Mangasaryan et al. (2013). Multi-sectoral interventions for healthy
growth. Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 46–57.

Case, A. and C. Paxson. (2008). Stature and status: height, ability, and labor market outcomes.
Journal of Political Economy 116: 499–532.

Colagiuri S, Lee CMY, Colagiuri R, Magliano D, Shaw JE, Zimmet PZ, Caterson ID. (2010). The cost
of overweight and obesity in Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 192: 260–64

de Lanerolle-Dias, M. et al., (2012). Micronutrient status of female adolescent school dropouts. Ceylon
Medical Journal. 57(2), pp.74–78. DOI: http://doi.org/10.4038/cmj.v57i2.4460

Department of Census and Statistics. (2009). Sri Lanka Demographic and Health Survey 2006–07.
Colombo, Sri Lanka.

Department of Census and Statistics. (2012). Sri Lanka Household and Expenditure Survey 2012.

Department of Census and Statistics. (2012). Census 2012 report




                                                                                                    59
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 De Silva, I. (2009). Micro level determinants of poverty reduction in Sri Lanka: Multivariate
                 approach. International Journal of Social Economics 35 (3): 140–158. http://dx.doi.
                 org/10.1108/03068290810847833.

                 Dileni, G. (2004). Poverty measurement: meanings, methods and requirements. Colombo: Centre for
                 Poverty Analysis.

                 Dobbs R, Sawers C, Thompson F, Manyika J, Woetzel J, Child P, Mckena S, Spatharou A. (2014).
                 Overcoming obesity: An initial economic analysis. London: Mckinsey Global Institute.

                 Espo, M., T. Kulmala, K. Maleta, T. Cullinan, M.L. Salin, and P. Ashorn. (2002). Determinants of linear
                 growth and predictors of severe stunting during infancy in rural Malawi. Acta Paediatr 91 (1): 364–
                 1,370.

                 Family Health Bureau, Ministry of Health. (2013). Annual Report.

                 Family Health Bureau, Ministry of Health. (2010). National Maternal and Child Health Policy.

                 FAO (2014). The State of Food Insecurity in the World.

                 Finkelstein, EA, Trogdon, JG, Cohen, JW, and Dietz, W. 2009. Annual medical spending attributable
                 to obesity: Payer- and service-specific estimates. Health Affairs 28(5)

                 Frost, M. B. Forste, R., and Haas, D.W. (2005). Maternal education and child nutritional status in
                 Bolivia: ﬁnding the links. Social Science and Medicine 60: 395–407.

                 Haddad, L., and H.E. Bouis. (1989). The impact of nutritional status on agricultural productivity:
                 wage evidence from the Philippines. Warwick, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland:
                 Development of Economics Research Centre. Papers, No.97.

                 HK International. (2002). How to assess iron deficiency anaemia and use the hemocue.

                 Hoddinott, J., H. Alderman, J.R. Behrman, L. Haddad and S. Horton. (2013). The economic rationale
                 for investing in stunting reduction. Maternal and Child Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 69–82.

                 Hoddinott, J., J.A. Maluccio, J.R. Behrman, R. Flores, and R. Martorell. (2008). Effect of a nutrition
                 intervention during early childhood on economic productivity in Guatemalan adults. Lancet 371: 411–
                 16. doi:10.1016/S0140- 6736(08)60205-6.

                 Lundborg P., P. Nystedt, and D. Rooth D. (2009). The height premium in earnings: the role of physical
                 capacity and cognitive and non-cognitive skills. IDA Discussion Paper 4, 266 IZA. Bonn, Germany.

                 Lutter C.K., L. Iannotti, H. Creed-Kanashiro, A. Guyon, B. Daelmans, Robert R. et al. (2013). Key
                 principles to Improve programmes and interventions in complementary feeding. Maternal and Child
                 Nutrition 9 (Suppl. 2): 101–115.

                 Marquis, G.S., J.P. Habicht, C.F. Lanata, R. E. Black, and K.M. Rasmussen. (1997). Breast milk
                 or animal-product foods improve linear growth of Peruvian toddlers consuming marginal diets. The
                 American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 66 (1): 102–09.




60
Medical Research Institute. Nutrition and Food Security Assessment in Sri Lanka. (2009). Ministry of
Health, WFP, UNICEF. Sri Lanka.

Ministry of Education. (2009). Sri Lanka School Health Promotion Program.

Ministry of Education Services. (2014). Report of the Director Health and Nutrition.

Ministry of Health. (2013). National Strategic Plan on Adolescent Health 2013–17.

Ministry of Health. (2012). Adolescent Health Policy.

Ministry of Healthcare and Nutrition (2010). National Nutrition Policy of Sri Lanka

Ministry of Healthcare and Nutrition, Sri Lanka. (2012). Annual Health Bulletin.

Ministry of Healthcare and Nutrition (2014). Infant and Young Children Feeding Strategy. Family
Health Bureau Sri Lanka

Muthayya, S. (2009). Maternal nutrition & low birthweight - what is really important? Indian Journal of
Medical Research 130 (5): 600-608.

National Micro-Nutrient Survey. (2012).

Piwoz E, Sundberg S, Rooke J (2012): Promoting healthy growth: what are the priorities for research
and action? Advances in Nutrition 3: 234 - 241.

Prendergast, A.J., S. Rukobo, B. Chasekwa, K. Mutasa, R. Ntozini, M.N.N. Mbuya et al. (2014).
Stunting is characterized by chronic inflammation in Zimbabwean infants. PLoS One. 9 (2): e86928.
doi:10.1371/ journal.pone.0086928.

Ruel, R.M., H. Alderman, and the Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. (2013). Nutrition-sensitive
interventions and programmes: how can they help to accelerate progress in improving maternal and
child nutrition? http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60843-0.

Samaraweera, G. R. (2009). The relationship between poverty and population characteristics in the
estate sector of Sri Lanka. Sri Lanka Journal of Humanities and Social Sciences 1 (1): 31–37.

Shekar, M. Somanathan, A. Du, L. (2007). Malnutrition in Sri Lanka: Scale, Scope Causes and
Potential Response. Health, Nutrition and Population, Report No. 40906-LK

Stein AD, Wang M, Martorell R, Norris SA, Adair LS, Bas I, et al. (2010). Growth patterns in early
childhood and final attained stature: data from five birth cohorts from low- and middle-income
countries. American Journal of Human Biology, 22(3): 353–9.

Strauss J. and D. Thomas D. (1996). Wages, schooling and background: investments in men and
women in urban Brazil in Opportunity Foregone: Education in Brazil, eds. N. Birdsall and R. Sabot
147–191. The Johns Hopkins University Press for the Inter-American Development Bank: Baltimore,
MD.




                                                                                                    61
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


                 Thomas, D and Strauss, J. (1997). Health and wages: Evidence on men and women in urban Brazil,
                 Journal of Econometrics, 77 (1), 159-185

                 UNICEF (1990) Strategy for Improved Nutrition of Children and Women in Developing Countries,
                 Policy Review paper E/ICEF/1990/1.6, UNICEF, New York

                 UNICEF Sri Lanka. (2011). Nutritional status in Sri Lanka, determinants and interventions: a desk
                 review, 2006–11.

                 UNICEF (2015). The state of the World Children: Reimagine the future.

                 UNICEF, and WHO. (2009). Diarrhoea: why children are still dying and what can be done. New York,
                 NY: UNICEF. [Available at] www.unicef.org/media/files/Final_Diarrhoea_Report_October_2009_final.
                 pdf.

                 Medical Research Institute Sri Lanka. (2009). Nutrition and food security assessment in Sri Lanka.
                 [Available at] http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/ena/wfp245807.pdf?iframe

                 UNDP (2015). Human Development Report 2015: Work for Human Development. [Available at] http://
                 hdr.undp.org/sites/default/files/hdr_2015_statistical_annex.pdf accessed 01st June 2016

                 Victora, C.G., M. de Onis M., P. C. Hallal, M. Blössner M. and Shrimpton R. (2010). Worldwide timing
                 of growth faltering: revisiting implications for interventions. Pediatrics 125 (3): e473–e480.

                 Victora, C.G., Adair, L., Fall, C., Hallal, P.C., Martorell, R., Richter, L. and, Sachdev, H.S. (2008).
                 Maternal and child undernutrition: consequences for adult health and human capital. The Lancet 371
                 (9609): 340-357.

                 Wamani, H., A. Nordrehaug, S. Peterson, J.K. Tumwine and T. Tylleskär. (2007). Boys are more
                 stunted than girls in Sub-Saharan Africa: a meta-analysis of 16 demographic and health surveys.
                 BMC Pediatrics 7(17). doi:10.1186/1471-2431-7-17.

                 WHO (1995). Physical Status: The Use and Interpretation of Anthropometry. Geneva: WHO.

                 WHO. (2001). Iron Deficiency Anaemia. Assessment, Prevention and Control. A guide for programme
                 managers. WHO/NHD/01.3.

                 WHO. (2009). Acute respiratory infections. [Available at] www.who.int/vaccine_research/diseases/ari/
                 en/.

                 WHO (2009). Child growth standards and the identification of severe acute malnutrition in infants and
                 children. A Joint Statement by the World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund.

                 WHO (2010). Coordinated approach to prevention and control of acute diarrhoea and respiratory
                 infections.

                 WHO (2010). Nutrition Landscape Information System: Country Profile Indicators Information Guide.
                 [Available at] http://www.who.int/nutrition/nlis_interpretation_guide.pdf




62
WHO SEARO (2010). [Available at] www.searo.who.int/LinkFiles/RC_63_a-11-SEA-RC63-10.pdf.

WHO. (2012). Comprehensive implementation plan on maternal, infant and young child nutrition.

WHO. (2012). Proposed Global Targets for Maternal, Infant and Young Child Nutrition. [Available at] http://
www.who.int/nutrition/events/2012_proposed_globaltargets_summary_mainissuesandresponses.
pdf.

World Bank. (2006). Repositioning Nutrition as Central to Development–A Strategy for Large-Scale
Action. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2007). Malnutrition in Sri Lanka: Scale, Scope, Causes and Potential Responses. Report
No. 40906-LK. Washington, DC: World Bank

World Bank (2015). A Systematic Country Diagnostic. Sri Lanka. Report Number 103246. Washington,
DC: World Bank

Zere, E. and D. Mclnyre. (2003). Inequities in under-five child malnutrition in South Africa. International
Journal for Equity in Health 2 (7).




                                                                                                        63
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s          ANNEX
Estate Sector


Table A1                                                                                RPC            Private     Government          All estates
Nutritional Status by   Stunting                                                        36.7             35.2            37.5                36.4
Estate Type                 Sample size                                                1673             1247              374               3294
                        Wasting                                                         16.2             15.1            14.2                  16
                            Sample size                                                1673             1247              374               3294
                        Underweight                                                     36.6               34            32.4                35.9
                            Sample size                                                1673             1247              374               3294
                        Anemia children 6-23                                           54.1              53.1            38.7                53.1
                            Sample size                                                 776              518              173               1467
                        Anemia 24-59                                                   31.4             30.4             15.1                30.4
                            Sample size                                                 704              573             160                1437
                        Severe Low Birthweight
                        <1500 g (%)                                                      1.2               0.9               1.2               1.1
                        Moderate Low Birthweight 1500-1999 g (%)                         3.6               4.8               2.8               3.7
                        Mild Low Birthweight
                        2000-2499 g (%)                                                 23.4             20.2              18.1              22.6
                        Low Birthweight
                        <2500 (%)                                                      28.6              26.1              22.9              27.8
                        Mean Birthweight (SD)                                         2.678             2.717             2.744             2.688
                                                                                     (0.433)           (0.452)           (0.438)           (0.437)
                             Sample size                                              1758              1292                395             3445


Table A2                                                                               RPC            Private     Government           All estates
Nutritional Status by   Grains, roots and tubers                                       98.8              98.0           98.2                  98.6
Estate Type             Legumes and nuts                                               60.3              67.5           69.4                  62.1
                        Dairy products                                                 41.4              42.6           40.4                  41.6
                        Flesh food                                                     56.0              55.2           53.8                  55.7
                        Eggs                                                           42.4              38.7           40.5                  41.6
                        Vit A rich fruits and vegetables                               62.8              57.1           57.7                  61.5
                        Other fruits and vegetables                                    50.6              60.1           63.2                  53.0
                        Iron-rich food*                                                74.2              66.5           67.1                  72.4
                        Usually given foods of animal source                           95.5              96.5           98.3                  96.6
                        (fish, meat, egg)
                        Note: Except the last row, figures are based on reports about feeding on the previous day. Iron-rich food comprising one of
                        these: dark green leafy vegetables, organ meats (liver, kidney, heart, others), fish, seafood or any meat.




64
Table A3                                                                                   RPC             Private    Government          All estates
Maternal Knowledge           Ability to identify a single food item rich in:
Regarding Foods and Their          Energy                                                   76.3             77.4              75.8              76.5
Main Nutrient Component            Protein                                                  83.1             83.9              82.4              83.2
                                   Iron                                                     82.5             81.6              84.6              82.5
                                   Calcium                                                  67.3             70.4              77.5              68.4
                             Source of knowledge for food choices *
                                    Family                                                 56.3              53.6              61.1              56.1
                                    PHM                                                    84.1              82.4              70.4              83.1
                                    Health worker                                          11.7               7.4               3.3              10.5
                                     Doctor                                                30.6              18.8              22.4             28.1
                                     EMA                                                   13.9               6.7               9.6             12.4
                                     Media                                                 14.0              11.3               6.1             13.1
                                     Other                                                  1.0               1.1               0.5               1.0
                             Sample size of mothers                                       1781              1305               403             3,489
                             Note: * Multiple responses allowed for source of knowledge for food choices; Sample is on mothers of children less than 5
                             years of age


Table A4                                                                                   RPC             Private    Government          All estates
Institutional Delivery and   Place of birth
Advice on Child Growth (%    Govt. hospital                                                 99.3              98.4             98.4              99.1
of Children Under 5 Years)   Estate hospital/maternity home                                  0.6               0.6              1.2               0.6
                             At home                                                         0.6               0.8              0.3               0.3
                             On the way to hospital                                            0               0.1                0                 0
                             Growth monitoring and advice
                             Having CHDR                                                    98.3              97.9             95.9              98.1
                             Mother was informed that child had adequate                    64.6               65              65.6              64.7
                             weight gain by health worker
                             Special advise given due to child’s poor weight                28.9              27.2             25.8              28.4
                             gain by a health worker
                             Type of health worker who advised mother*
                                  Doctor                                                    41.4              22.6               30              37.7
                                  Estate Medical Assistant                                  31.8              10.5             12.9              27.3
                                  Nurse                                                     14.9               8.3                6              13.4
                                  Public health Midwife                                     63.8              81.9             82.6              67.7
                                  Health volunteer                                           0.6               0.8              3.6               0.8
                                  Other                                                      0.6               0.2                0               0.5
                             Type of advice for poor weight gain in child
                                 Add oil, butter or margarine to food                      41.6              54.6                42              43.7
                                 Feeding during illness                                    27.7              26.8              32.3              27.8
                                 Increasing variety of food                                55.3              56.9              59.2              55.7
                                 Increasing quantity of food                                 61              63.7                72                 62
                                 Increasing supplementary food                             48.1              48.6              40.6              47.8
                                 Meet Pediatrician/doctor in hospital                      19.4              17.7              26.1              19.5
                                 Other                                                        1                2.2              3.5                1.3
                             Sample size                                                  1,781             1,305              403              3,489




                                                                                                                                                     65
Multisectoral
Nutrition
Assessment
in Sri Lanka’s
Estate Sector


Table A5                                                                            RPC           Private   Government        All estates
Health and Nutrition         Worm treatment received during past 6                  49.6            52.3          50.2               50.0
Services for Children        months
(Percentage of Children)
                             Thriposha received during past 6 months
                             (Among underweight children)                           70.2            88.2            75.6            73.5
                             Vitamin A received during past 6 months                  31            43.6            36.9            33.6

Table A6                                                                            RPC           Private   Government        All estates
Water Quality at Different   Main water source
Sources by Estate Type       Sample size                                           N=78            N=17           N=48           N=143
                             E.coli count, median [range]                              25             35              25              25
                                                                                  [0,200]         [0, 80]       [0, 200]        [0, 200]
                             No (%) without E.coli                                      4              2               5              11
                                                                                   (5.1%)        (11.8%)         (10.4%)          (7.7%)
                             Presumptive coliforms                                     80            170             110              95
                             median [range]                                      [2, 550]       [0, 550]        [0, 550]        [0, 550]
                             No (%) with coliforms count <10                            2               2              6              10
                                                                                   (2.6%)        (11.8%)         (12.5%)          (7.0%)
                             Household source
                             Sample size                                               80             19           62               161
                             E.coli count, median [range]                              25             35           20                 25
                                                                                  [0, 95]       [13, 80]     [0, 200]           [0, 200]
                             No (%) without E.coli                                      4              0            4                  8
                                                                                     (5%)           (0%) (6.5%)                     (5%)
                             Presumptive coliforms                                     80           130            88                110
                             median [range]                                      [2, 550]    [25, 550]       [0, 550]           [0, 550]
                             No (%) with coliforms count <10                            3              0            3                  6
                                                                                   (3.8%)           (0%)       (4.8%)             (3.7%)
                             Crèche source
                             Sample size                                               77             17              44             138
                             E.coli count, median [range]                              24             27              20               25
                                                                                  [0, 80]       [13, 80]         [0, 80]          [0, 80]
                             No (%) without E.coli                                      3              0               4                7
                                                                                   (3.9%)           (0%)          (9.1%)           (5.1%)
                             Presumptive coliforms                                     80           130              110             110
                             median [range]                                      [0, 550]      [25, 550]        [0, 550]        [0, 550]
                             No (%) with coliforms count <10                            2              0               4                6
                                                                                   (2.6%)           (0%)          (9.1%)           (4.3%)
                             * 3 samples (the main water source, one household, and the Crèche) were collected from each cluster (number
                             of clusters in RPC (85), government (20) and private estates (65)). Water samples were not available for some
                             clusters due to logistical constraints.
                             Reference: Sri Lanka Standards




66
