First Global Conference of the
Platform for Collaboration on Tax -
Taxation and the Sustainable
Development Goals


Concept Note and Agenda


DRAFT March 31, 2017




International Monetary Fund (IMF)

                                      1
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
United Nations (UN)
World Bank Group (WBG)




                                                                2
CONCEPT NOTE
1. Introduction

The members of the Platform for Collaboration on Tax will hold their first Global Conference on
February 14-16, 2018 at the UN Headquarters in New York, under the theme “Taxation and the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)?. The conference will use as an input the work developed by
Platform members, both jointly and separately, in connection with the themes covered in the
conference.

2. Objectives

This first Global Conference of the Platform aims to: (a) take forward the global dialogue on the role
of tax in achieving the SDGs among senior policy makers and tax administrators from developing
and advanced countries; (b) obtain country insights and viewpoints on the challenges and
opportunities countries see in using their tax systems to help achieve the SDGs. This would inform
the future work of the members of the Platform, and possibly others active in the area, on how best
to design support for countries to improve their tax systems.

3. Audience

The target audience consists of senior tax policy makers and tax administrators (at the Director level)
and other key tax partners, including regional institutions. Leading academics with recent
contributions relevant to the Conference agenda, private sector representatives, and members of civil
society actively involved in the global tax dialogue will also be invited. As with the global
conferences of the International Tax Dialogue. we expect to have around 200 participants to travel to
New York to participate face-to-face.

4. Outcomes

Following the Conference, and building on its discussions, the Platform will issue a note summarising
the discussions, issues and challenges raised, and reflecting on the role of the Platform in helping
countries address them.

5. Format

The conference will consist of plenary and parallel sessions. There will be five plenary sessions,
including an opening and closing session on the link between taxation and SDGs. At least 8 parallel
sessions will explore more in detail the linkages between taxation and the SDG.

The sessions will be structured around five thematic areas: i) domestic resource mobilization and the
state; ii) the role of tax in supporting sustainable economic growth, investment and trade; iii) tax and
the social dimension-addressing poverty, inequality and health; iv) capacity development, and v) tax
cooperation the SDGs.


                                                                                                      3
For each session, there will be a session chair, who will summarize the main points, in particular, the
challenges and issues identified during the discussions, recommendations to overcome them, as well
as, opportunities and possible ways to move forward. The session chairs will play a key role in
preparing the technical record of the conference.

Throughout the conference representatives from developing countries (governments, civil society
and businesses) will give their views on the challenges to be faced and how they can best be
addressed.




AGENDA
The proposed sessions are as follows:



Overall Theme: Taxation and SDGs

Opening Session (Plenary)- The Role of Taxation in Achieving the SDGs by 2030
This first session will focus on how taxation1- can be used as policy instrument to achieve the SDGs. It
should cover the different dimensions of taxation as it relates to the SDGs, highlighting domestic
resource mobilization and including inclusive growth, sustainability, gender equality, good
governance, private sector efficiency and human development, among others. It will draw on the
overall follow-up and review process of the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development and the Addis Ababa Action Agenda on Financing for Development, and will
emphasize the universal agenda of the SDGs.

It should take stock of the situation end 2017 with taxation reforms and efforts to support such
reforms and discuss possible interrelated actions in order to achieve the SDGs by 2030.

Speakers: High level representatives of the UN (host), IMF, OECD and WB.




Session I - Setting the stage (Plenary): Countries’ perspectives on taxation's role in
achieving the SDGs
This session will allow different countries to express their views on how taxation may help them
achieve the SDGs and what obstacles need to be removed. The session should discuss the taxation
challenges faced by different low and middle income countries, depending on their intrinsic issues,
and distill lessons on what could be done to enhance the performance of their tax policy and
administration, as they work towards achieving the SDGs.



1
    For brevity, this term is to be read here as including nontax sources of government revenue.

                                                                                                      4
Panel: high level representatives of developing countries, including a fragile or post-conflict country, a
resource rich country, a small island, and a middle income economy.




Theme A. Domestic Resource Mobilization (DRM) and the State

Session II-A (Parallel) – DRM, fiscal sustainability and growth: evidence to date
This session will focus on the role of tax policy to mobilize domestic revenue in order to expand fiscal
space and ensure fiscal sustainability, drawing a clear link to SDG17. The session should consider
DRM strategies in comparison with other forms of financing such as borrowing (internal and
external), expansive monetary policy, and foreign grants, and their effects on macroeconomic
stability and growth. It should also examine the evidence to test whether policy and administrative
approaches currently adopted by lower income countries are delivering strengthened DRM and
imposing macro and growth prospects.

Panel: policy makers from lower income countries that have substantially improved domestic resource
mobilization by conducting responsible fiscal policy, as well as representatives of the private sector.



Session II-B (Parallel): DRM and state building: taxation for better governance
This session will be dedicated to the role of DRM in state building by enforcing a social contract
between citizens and the state, highlighting the links with SDG16. It should discuss different
approaches to building a government’s credibility to be more effective in raising fiscal revenues, as
well as strategies to motivate citizens and companies to comply with their tax obligations.

Panel: top academics who have undertaken research in this area, as well as government and civil
society representatives who can present concrete country experiences and new cutting edge techniques
(e.g., information, IT, behavioral) to strengthen the social contract between citizens and the state to
improve taxation.



Session II-C (Plenary): Tax Administration: how reforms can increase revenues
Effective tax administration institutions can play a significant role not just in SDG 16, but also in
raising revenues. This session will look at the range of experiences in tax administration reform from
a range of developing countries, and will highlight best practices in improving administrative
performance along several dimensions such: human resources, audits, dispute settlement, IT, and
others.

Panel: revenue authorities with interesting case studies (e.g. Mexico, Rwanda), TADAT leads, FTA,
taxpayer representative, representatives from the partners that have been working on tax
administration



                                                                                                        5
Theme B: The role of tax in supporting sustainable economic growth,
investment and trade.

Session III (Plenary): BEPS and developing countries
This session will be focused on the challenges of implementing business taxation globally, from the
perspective of developing countries. In particular, it should analyze how the design and
implementation of business taxation can minimize distortions to economic decisions while, at the
same time, ensure that businesses comply with their tax obligations globally. It should discuss the
challenges of taxing corporate income in a globalized world where transactions are often digital, not
bound to territories, and many inputs along the value chain are intangible. In particular, different
proposals to tax multinational companies should be discussed, with a particular focus on formulating
solutions to reduce tax avoidance in developing countries. Relevant work carried out by international
and regional organizations should also be presented and discussed.

Panel: leading academics, international taxation experts, representatives from/experts involved in the
work of relevant international and regional organizations, representatives of the private business sector,
policy makers from developing countries and tax civil society representatives2.



Session IV-A (Parallel): Resource abundance and taxation: reversing the curse
This session will attempt to capture the complexity of taxing natural resources by analyzing current
challenges and concrete examples of tax reform, particularly in the oil and mining sectors. It should
cover important dimensions such as government sharing of profits, progressivity of the tax
instruments chosen, effects of the taxation regime on the local population, political economy of
reforms, management transparency, social and environmental effects, and economic diversification
issues.

Panel: policy makers, thematic experts, representatives from international and regional organizations
doing work in this area, private sector businesses CEOs, and civil society representatives from resource
rich countries.



Session IV-B (Parallel): Resource leakages: Illicit Financial Flows
Tackling illicit financial flows is a priority for most countries and is reflected in SDG 16. This session
will focus on the impact that illicit financial flows (IFFs), in particular those caused by tax evasion and
corruption, may have on sustainable development. It will discuss measures, both at the national and
international level, which may help to reduce IFFs and identify opportunities to increase cooperation
among the range of actors tackling IFFs. It should also cover policies and actions that may address
the underlying behaviors that give raise to IFFs, as well as the challenges limiting progress.

2
  In addition, we could consider discussing some specific sectors such as agribusiness and/or
telecommunications.

                                                                                                         6
Panel: Representative from Mbeki panel on IFF, policy makers from different income countries (and
possibly offshore financial centers), private sector (B-Team), civil society, as well as representatives from
international organizations that have been working on initiatives to combat IFFs.



Session IV-C (Parallel): Fiscal policy for sustainable development: environmental
taxes
This session will be dedicated to discussing options for environmental taxation, analyzing current
experiences based on COP21 and subsequent agreements, as well as remaining challenges, it will link
to SDGs 7, 12 and 13. It should discuss country solutions with carbon taxes and cap-and-trade
schemes, as well as other environmental taxes which have been applied in advanced and developing
economies, and the lessons learned so far. The session should also elaborate on the political
economy of environmental taxation as it relates to climate change risks and perceptions, with the
goal to distill useful lessons for developing countries.

Panel: policy makers who have implemented environmental taxes in different contexts, as well as
experts who have studied environmental taxation in connection with climate change, and private sector
and civil society representatives.




Theme C: Tax and the social dimension: addressing poverty, inequality and
health.

Session V (Plenary): Remaining equity challenges: taxation for better income
distribution
This session will address existing and growing equity challenges worldwide from the perspective of
taxation, linking to SDG 1 on poverty and 10 on inequality. It will discuss specifically how different
tax instruments on, for example, personal income, corporate income, capital gains and wealth assets,
could be instrumental to reducing disparities at the country level and globally.

Panel: top academics who have written on the subject as well as government and civil society
representatives from developing countries.



Session VI-A (Parallel): Transformational development: taxing to improve health
and human development
This session will approach health related taxes from the perspective of behavior correction which can
curb the consumption of health damaging products and lead to better public health outcomes, and
as such link to SDG 3. It should further elaborate on the risks and consequences associated with
consumption of those unhealthy products (such as alcohol, tobacco or sugar) as affordability
increases in developing countries and young populations, the future of the labor force, consume
them. The session should assess recent experiences from developed and developing countries in


                                                                                                           7
curbing consumption of health damaging goods and their effects on the well-being of the poorer
segments of the population.

Panel: policy makers (knowledgeable of both taxes and public health issues) who have led country-level
reforms in this area, as well as academics and partners such as WHO and other institutions working on
health related taxes.



Session VI-B (Parallel): Smarter taxation for better gender equality
This session will assess the gender implications of tax systems in developing countries, providing
concrete examples of reforms that can lead to eliminating gender biases in taxation, in reference to,
for example, property, family income, or MSMEs owned by women, among others. The links with
SDG 5 will be made and explored.

Panel: thematic experts who have conducted research on the gender implications of taxation as well as
policy makers and representatives of the civil society from developing countries who can provide a
perspective of how taxation affects them.



Theme D: Tax Capacity Development

Session VII (Plenary): Tax Capacity Development
This session will highlight successful capacity development initiatives in tax policy and administration,
gathering lessons learned and good practices, as well as exploring its links to SDG 17 (and especially
17.1). It will also discuss what the Platform could do to further support developing countries, taking
into account main directions from the four IOs at the highest level as well as the views expressed by
Conference participants.

Panel: representatives from international and regional organizations doing work in this area, thematic
experts, academics.



Theme E: Tax Cooperation and the SDGs

Session VIII (Plenary): The way forward: role of international tax cooperation in
supporting the SDGs
This session will close the Conference with a discussion on how possible tax reforms can contribute
to accomplishing the SDGs and on the complementary role that international tax cooperation may
play. It should cover the work of international and regional organizations, as well as other relevant
international initiatives. The session will cover Automatic Exchange of Information (AEOI), regional
agreements, among others.

Panel: representatives from international and regional organizations doing work in this area, policy
makers, thematic experts.


                                                                                                       8
