INCLUSION MATTERS

THE FOUNDATION FOR SHARED PROSPERITY
Uganda, Lake Victoria Serena Resort, February 3 – 7, 2014
Inclusion Matters
A Training Event In Uganda, Lake Victoria Serena Resort, February 3 – 7, 2014



This training was prepared jointly by the Social Development Department at The World Bank and the Joint Budget Support
Framework (JSBF) in Uganda. The team that designed and facilitated the training was composed of Maria Beatriz Orlando, Juan
Carlos Parra, Mathan Ratinam and Lisa Schmidt. Clarence Tsimpo and Damalie Nyanja provided valuable comments to the design
and logistical support.




Inclusion Matters
Understanding Social Inclusion
Concepts, Trends, Policies, Methods And Measurement

Social inclusion is high up on the global policy agenda. It is a central tenet of the World Bank Group's new strategy with its twin
goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity. The recent publication of a new World Bank report “Inclusion
Matters – The Foundation for Shared Prosperity” emphasizes the relevance of this topic for the World Bank. Social inclusion is
also intrinsic to the post-Millennium Development Goals discussions. The rising attention to issues of social inclusion is based
on the realization that while great strides have been made in reducing extreme poverty, in country after country, entire groups
remain excluded from development gains. A rising tide does not necessarily lift all boats.

For Uganda, social inclusion is becoming more and more urgent as the country is poised to become a middle-income country.
Profound transitions like the changing population structure, urbanization, climate change, information revolution and natural
resource driven growth are creating new opportunities but also risks for inclusion. Uganda’s youth bulge, for instance, will
become a key policy issue just as the country moves into middle income status. Inﬂuencing change toward social inclusion will
be an important piece of Uganda’s vision for 2040. The World Bank Group is committed to supporting the government in its vision
by partnering on projects, sharing appropriate knowledge and through interface with partners.

As part of this commitment and in response to the increasing urgency to act on social inclusion in Uganda, the World Bank,
through the Joint Budget Framework Support Trust Fund, organized a one-week training on social inclusion at the Lake Victoria
Serena Resort in Uganda. 43 representatives from government agencies, parliament, civil society and academia attended the
training. The training had three main objectives: 1) to enhance the understanding of social inclusion and the opportunities and
challenges presented by its changing context; 2) to expand the sets of indicators and methods used to measure well-being and to
assess the impacts of policies, especially on groups of the population at risk of exclusion; and 3) to discuss how to use a social
inclusion lens in the design of policies and programs.



Inclusion Matters
Understanding Social Inclusion

To that end, the training was designed in two main parts and seven modules: Whereas the ﬁrst two days provided a conceptual
understanding of the social inclusion approach – why social inclusion is a relevant concept and how it can be achieved – the
remaining three days grounded the concepts in issues that are relevant to social inclusion and tools that can be used to achieve it
– gender, consultations, subjective well-being, qualitative methods and impact evaluation.




             A Social Inclusion Approach                                      Issues and Tools

                          Conceptual                                               Grounded




                                                            Gender and
                    Why                 How                                       Methodology             Impact Eval.
                                                           Consultations



                    Mon                  Tue                    Wed                    Thu                    Fri




Inclusion Matters
Understanding Social Inclusion

Module 1: Deﬁning and diagnosing social inclusion

This module illustrates the value of the concept of social inclusion and demonstrates the differences between social inclusion
and concepts like poverty, inequality, and equality of opportunities. Based on the World Bank’s recent report “Inclusion Matters –
The Foundation for Shared Prosperity”, the module proposes a framework to understand social inclusion. Transitions and
transformations that change the context for social inclusion and create new pressures for it are discussed as well as the
relevance of attitudes and perceptions for social inclusion.



Module 2: How to act on social inclusion

This module emphasizes that social inclusion can be inﬂuenced, planned and achieved – not by doing more but by doing things
differently. We can steer change towards social inclusion by intervening through markets, services and spaces. Case studies of
projects and other interventions in Uganda and other countries illustrate what that can mean concretely, how social inclusion
has been addressed and how such projects can be designed. Finally, the module suggests ways to measure progress and
achievements on social inclusion.




Click highlighted text to link to presentation.


Inclusion Matters
Understanding Social Inclusion

Module 3: Gender as a driver of exclusion

Gender can be a powerful driver of exclusion and can exacerbate the disadvantages of poor, migrant and other groups. This
module explains the importance of gender equality to fully realize the development impacts of interventions and the basic
principles and methods to undertake analysis along gender lines. The case study of the Empowerment and Livelihood for
Adolescents (ELA) Program in Uganda illustrates potential avenues for improving the terms on which young women take part in
society.



Module 4: Consultations

Consultations are the cornerstone of diagnosing problems and building support for interventions, and can also enhance dignity
and voice – crucial to social inclusion interventions. This module covers the how-to of good community consultations, based on a
range of examples, which are described in greater detail in an additional handout. It also presents Community Development
Agreements as a way to make extractive industries more inclusive by listening to local communities and making sure they
beneﬁt from operations.




Click highlighted text to link to presentation.


Inclusion Matters
Understanding Social Inclusion

Module 5: Subjective wellbeing

The main goal of most governments is to improve the well-being of the population and it is increasingly recognized that
measures like per capita GDP fall short of assessing progress in the achievement of that goal. This module presents the value that
measures of wellbeing add to policy design, the main principles and techniques to measure well-being, and examples of
applications in different sectors.



Module 6: Qualitative methods

Qualitative methods are especially useful to better understand many research questions related to social inclusion, and to unpack
the ‘why’ of quantitative results. This module discusses when and how to use qualitative methods, either as stand-alone
techniques or to complement quantitative analysis. A case study on recent analysis conducted on reasons for late enrollment and
drop out from primary education in Uganda emphasizes the relevance of qualitative methods.



Module 7: Impact evaluation

This module covers the basics of different experimental and non-experimental methods to assess the impact of interventions and
identiﬁes their beneﬁts and shortcomings. An example is presented to illustrate how interventions can be rigorously assessed,
even when they target seemingly fuzzy concepts like empowerment and quality of life.




Click highlighted text to link to presentation.


Inclusion Matters
MODULE 1

DEFINING AND DIAGNOSING SOCIAL INCLUSION
INCLUSION


 THE FOUNDATION FOR SHARED PROSPERITY




Inclusion    Maria Beatriz Orlando
Inclusion Matters: The Foundation For Shared Prosperity


•   To ending extreme poverty because some groups are over-represented
    among the extreme poor.

•   To creating shared prosperity because today’s growth can leave some
    people behind.

•   To today’s social churning, driven by changing demographic, spatial,
    economic and political forces.

•   For itself.

•   And because exclusion is too costly.




Inclusion                  Maria Beatriz Orlando                           2
Despite Strong Growth Groups Are Left-behind

 Poverty reduction across indigenous and non-indigenous populations




Source:	  Hall	  and	  Patrinos	  (2012):	  Indigenous	  Peoples,	  Poverty,	  and	  Development.	  Cambridge,	  U.K.:	  Cambridge	  University	  Press.	  	  
Note:	  Average	  yearly	  change	  in	  poverty	  headcount	  is	  based	  on	  compounding	  growth	  rates.

 Inclusion                                                                        Maria Beatriz Orlando                                                                          3
Exclusion Is Costly

• Exclusion of Romas costs Serbia 231 million Euros … 887 million Euros in
   Romania.

• Productivity loss e.g. agricultural productivity in Bolivia

• Instability/Conﬂict




Inclusion                 Maria Beatriz Orlando                              4
What Is Social Inclusion?




Inclusion       Maria Beatriz Orlando   5
What Is Social Inclusion?

The process of improving the terms for individuals and groups to take part
in society.

The process of improving the ability, opportunity and dignity of people
disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part in society.

Social inclusion is…

•   Speciﬁc to time, place and identities

•   Yet both a developing and developed country issue

•   Multidimensional

•   Related to poverty and inequality, but goes beyond these

•   Both an outcome and a process


Inclusion                   Maria Beatriz Orlando                            6
Differences / Similarities

•   Inequality : high inequality and low income mobility may be explained by
    exclusion

•   Poverty : exclusion exists in developed countries with low levels of
    poverty / exclusion is based on identity

•   Discrimination: individual vs. group based




Inclusion                   Maria Beatriz Orlando                              7
Inclusion In What? Markets, Services And Spaces




      Taking part in society




      Improving the terms



Inclusion                   Maria Beatriz Orlando   8
Ability And Identity

•   High performers cluster together (ethnic capital- Borjas)

•   Dalits perform worse when tests request self-identiﬁcation
    (experimental evidence Hoff)

•   Learned helplessness (Elmsie and Sedo )- Discrimination




Inclusion                  Maria Beatriz Orlando                 9
Opportunities: Jobs

 •    11 million youth are expected to enter Africa’s labor market every year for
      the next decade.

 •    Despite rapid growth in formal wage sector jobs, the majority of these
      youth are likely to work on family farms and in household enterprises,
      often with very low incomes.




Source:	  Full	  Report:	  Youth	  Employment	  in	  Sub-­‐Saharan	  Africa	  2014


 Inclusion                                                                       Maria Beatriz Orlando   10
Dignity
                                                                                                                                                  Feelings of ‘always being
                                                                                                                                                  looked down upon’ by locals
                                                                                                                                                  among urban migrants in
                                                                                                                                                  China, by age and education.




Source:	  Shi	  (2012):	  MigraTon	  and	  Social	  Inclusion:	  Analysis	  of	  the	  Well	  Being	  of	  Rural	  Migrants	  in	  China.	  Background	  paper	  draY,	  World	  Bank,	  Washington,	  DC.


 Inclusion                                                                            Maria Beatriz Orlando                                                                                                                         11
Identity Drives Exclusion, Which Is Highly Contextual

•   Ethnicity: Roma in Eastern Europe, Indigenous Peoples
•   Caste: in India and Nepal
•   Race: people of African descent
•   Religion: Muslims in the post-9/11 world
•   Gender and age: women, older people, widows
•   Nationality and migrant status: refugees, undocumented persons,
    unwelcome migrants
•   Disability
•   Sexual orientation
•   Social and economic status


•   Yet it’s the intersection of identities that heaps the disadvantage



Inclusion                   Maria Beatriz Orlando                         12
Inclusion Of Whom? Multiple Identities


                                                                                                                                                                 Intersecting identities
                                                                                                                                                                 transfer cumulative
                                                                                                                                                                 disadvantage: Secondary
                                                                                                                                                                 school completion in
                                                                                                                                                                 Bolivia




Source:	  World	  Bank	  team’s	  analysis	  based	  on	  the	  Minnesota	  PopulaTon	  Center,	  IPUMS	  database,	  2011	  and	  the	  Bolivian	  NaTonal	  InsTtute	  of	  StaTsTcs,	  2001.	  Note:	  Secondary	  
School	  CompleTon	  marginal	  eﬀects,	  using	  Male	  and	  Spanish	  Mother	  Tongue	  as	  the	  reference	  group.	  CalculaTons	  refer	  to	  secondary	  school	  compleTon	  rates	  for	  persons	  25	  years	  of	  
age	  or	  older,	  controlling	  for	  age,	  age-­‐squared,	  and	  urban/rural	  residence.	  All	  values	  are	  signiﬁcant	  at	  the	  1%	  level.	  	  	  


 Inclusion                                                                          Maria Beatriz Orlando                                                                                                                                             13
Measurement Is Challenging But Possible And Important


•   We need to know whether we are making progress, but the indicators we
    choose reﬂect what we value

•   Depends on context

•   Subjective indicators are as important as objective ones

•   Important to go beyond symptoms of exclusion to understand “WHY”




Inclusion                  Maria Beatriz Orlando                            14
Attitudes And Perceptions Are Linked To Outcomes
                                                                                                      Countries where people
                                                                                                      say men have more
                                                                                                      right to jobs also have
                                                                                                      lower labor force
                                                                                                      participation rates for
                                                                                                      women




Source:	  World	  Development	  Indicators	  and	  World	  Values	  Surveys	  (2005-­‐2008)


 Inclusion                                                                  Maria Beatriz Orlando                               15
TRANSITIONS AND
TRANSFORMATIONS
CHANGING CONTEXT AND NEW PRESSURES
FOR SOCIAL INCLUSION




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra
Transitions And Transformations

•   Major transitions and transformations of the past several decades as a
    frame of reference to prognosticate on the drivers of exclusion or the
    potential for inclusion in the coming years.


•   The cumulative impact of these large scale transitions has changed the
    context for inclusion, either by creating new groups that deserve
    attention or by changing the forms of, and opportunities for, both
    inclusion and exclusion.




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                          2
Demographic

•   Transitions of fertility and mortality underway in all except conﬂict
    countries
•   Volatile and more dramatic migration
•   Globally, the largest youth cohort in history now.
•   By 2050, the elderly be 20% in less developed countries, over 30% in
    developed countries
•   Doubling population in Sub-Saharan Africa and accounting for over 20%
    of the world population in 2050




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                         3
Other Transitions And Transformations

•   Economic
•   50 percent of the world population will be “middle class” by 2020
•    71 percent of the world’s population lives in countries where income
    inequality has been increasing since the 1990s
•   Spatial
•   Rapid urbanization and spatial inequalities
•   Climate change, disasters and periods of stress have become common
•   Knowledge
•   Global increase in educated population
•   Increased connectedness and mobilization
•    Increased political participation and citizen activism expressed in
    innovative forms

Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra
… Have Implications For Inclusion


  ••More and better jobs                                                                    ••Demand for infrastructure and
  ••Demand for care services                                                                  services
  ••Demand for marketable and non-                                                          ••Demand for protection against
    cognitive skills                          Demographic                                     vulnerability to disasters
                                                                   Spatial
  ••Demand for voice, representation and                                                    ••Demand for legal standing,
                                                         Youth     Slum residents
    dignity                                                                                   recognition, political
  ••Demand for equal access to jobs,                    Elderly    Indigenous people          representation
    credit, housing and fair treatment                 Migrants                             ••Claim on public spaces
                                                                   Left-behind families
                                                        Women                               ••Demand for safety
                                                                   IDPs, refugees
                                                Non-traditional
                                                       families



                                                  Economic         Knowledge and ICT
 ••Better public services and                             Poor     Youth
   infrastructure                                  Middle class    Politically active       •• Demand for access to information
 ••Demand for social security and                                  People left-out of       ••Demand for new skills and quality
                                                  Food insecure
   safety nets                                                     information revolution     of education
                                              People affected by                            ••Demand for greater accountability
 ••New aspirations and demands for                        crises   Disabled
   voice and decision-making                                                                ••Demand for functioning and fair
 ••Vulnerability to crime, drugs,                                                             justice systems
   prostitution




Transitions and Transformations            Juan Carlos Parra                                                                  5
Population Pyramids Are History!

                                                      •   In Uganda the fertility transition
                                                          has been slow and late. By 2050,
                                                          half of its population will be
                                                          below 20 years of age.



                                                      •   Poland will have a full-ﬂedged
                                                          aging crisis in 2050.



                                                      •   In Egypt, the youth will be
                                                          replaced by a much smaller
                                                          cohort of young people.


Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                                            6
Demographic


     •• More and better jobs
     •• Demand for care services
     •• Demand for marketable and non-
      cognitive skills
     •• Demand for voice, representation and
      dignity                                                           Youth
     •• Demand for equal access to jobs, credit,                       Elderly
      housing and fair treatment                                    Migrants
                                                                       Women
                                                      Non-traditional families




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                              7
Spatial


                                                      •• Demand for infrastructure and
                                                       services
                                                      •• Demand for protection against
                                                       vulnerability to disasters
                                                      •• Demand for legal standing,
 Slum residents                                        recognition, political representation
 Indigenous people                                    •• Claim on public spaces
 Left-behind families                                 •• Demand for safety
 IDPs, refugees




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                                            8
Economic Transitions And Transformations

Despite strong growth groups are left-behind




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra   9
Hunger Has Remained A Stark Axis Of Exclusion




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra   10
Economic


                                                                          Poor
    •• Better public services and                                 Middle class
     infrastructure                                              Food insecure
    •• Demand for social security and safety          People affected by crises
     nets
    •• New aspirations and demands for
     voice and decision-making
    •• Vulnerability to crime, drugs,
     prostitution




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                           11
Knowledge And ICT

                                                      •   Price of broadband access per
                                                          month (Source: Royal Pingdom).



                                                      •   The big variance across countries
                                                          and the fact that access is still very
                                                          expensive in relative terms gives
                                                          advantage to urban and richer
                                                          groups




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                                                12
Knowledge And ICT


 Youth
 Politically active
 People left-out of information                       •• Demand for access to information
 revolution                                           •• Demand for new skills and quality
 Disabled                                              of education
                                                      •• Demand for greater accountability
                                                      •• Demand for functioning and fair
                                                       justice systems




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                                          13
Reﬂecting On Transitions And Transformations

•   The historic developments of the last forty years have redeﬁned the
    context for the 21st century.

•   The fear of contagious movements has led many states to crack down on
    either actual or anticipated protest.

•   Yet, states also realize that they will need to put in place reforms that
    address the new demands which are essentially demands for social
    inclusion.

•   Global and national trends are important to track since they determine
    the challenges and opportunities for socially inclusive future.




Transitions and Transformations   Juan Carlos Parra                             14
WHY ATTITUDES AND
PERCEPTIONS MATTER
UNDERSTANDING THEM TO MAKE EFFECTIVE
INTERVENTIONS




Attitudes and Perceptions   Juan Carlos Parra
Why Do Perceptions And Attitudes Matter?

•People act on the basis of how they feel and feelings of being included are
central to opportunities people access.


•People’s attitudes about each other and themselves can shape who and on
what terms gets included and excluded.


•Attitudes and perceptions can determine behavior.

•Yet attitudes and perceptions do change.




                         Attitudes and Perceptions                             2
… Are Linked To Behavior




         Social norms
         Stereotypes                            Attitudes    Behavior
          Prejudices        Feelings
                                                Perception   Outcomes
          Experience




Attitudes and Perceptions   Juan Carlos Parra                           3
… And Many Times At Variance With Objective Indicators

                  Group                  Score            Life Satisfaction of Select Groups
     Forbes richest Americans              5.8
            Maasai (Kenya)                 5.4
        Amish (Pennsylvania)                5.1
  Inughuit (Northern Greenland)             5.1
  Cloistered nuns (United States)          4.8
             Illinois nurses               4.8
       Illinois college students           4.7
       Calcutta slum dwellers              4.4
                NEUTRAL                    4.0
         Calcutta sex workers              3.6
      Uganda college students              3.2
          Calcutta homeless                3.2
         California homeless               2.8
       New prisoners (Illinois)            2.4
           Mental inpatients               2.4
                                                        Source	  and	  notes:	  Diener	  and	  Diener	  (2005);	  Response	  scale:	  7=	  extremely	  
          Detroit sex workers               2.1         sa@sﬁed,	  4	  =	  neutral,	  1=	  extremely	  dissa@sﬁed



Attitudes and Perceptions           Juan Carlos Parra                                                                                                                4
Migrants And Attitudes Toward Them

                                                                                                    Changes in anti-migrant
                                                                                                    sentiment overlap with
                                                                                                    changes in the stock of
                                                                                                    migrant population.




Source:	  Report	  Team	  calcula@ons	  based	  on	  World	  Values	  Surveys	  


Attitudes and Perceptions                                                       Juan Carlos Parra                         5
Attitudes Towards Women’s Education



                                                                                                 Countries where people
                                                                                                 tend to say university
                                                                                                 education is more
                                                                                                 important for boys than
                                                                                                 girls also have lower
                                                                                                 female tertiary
                                                                                                 enrollment rates.




Source:	  Report	  Team	  calcula@ons	  based	  on	  World	  Values	  Surveys.


Attitudes and Perceptions                                                    Juan Carlos Parra                             6
Attitudes Towards Women’s Access To Jobs



                                                                                                    Relationship
                                                                                                    between female labor
                                                                                                    force participation
                                                                                                    rate and percentage
                                                                                                    of respondents who
                                                                                                    think men have more
                                                                                                    rights to jobs when
                                                                                                    jobs are scarce,
                                                                                                    2005-2008.




Source:	  Report	  Team	  calcula@ons	  based	  on	  World	  Values	  Surveys	  


Attitudes and Perceptions                                                       Juan Carlos Parra                          7
Attitudes Towards Women Leadership



                                                                                                    Countries where
                                                                                                    people tend to say
                                                                                                    men make better
                                                                                                    political leaders also
                                                                                                    have lower
                                                                                                    proportions of seats
                                                                                                    occupied by women
                                                                                                    in parliament.




Source:	  Report	  Team	  calcula@ons	  based	  on	  World	  Values	  Surveys	  


Attitudes and Perceptions                                                       Juan Carlos Parra                            8
But Attitudes Do Change


                                                                                                    Gender discriminatory
                                                                                                    attitudes pertaining to
                                                                                                    the labor market have
                                                                                                    lessened.
                                                                                                    Change in percentage
                                                                                                    of respondents who
                                                                                                    think men have more
                                                                                                    right to a job, if jobs
                                                                                                    are scarce (1989-2008).




Source:	  Report	  Team	  calcula@ons	  based	  on	  World	  Values	  Surveys	  


Attitudes and Perceptions                                                       Juan Carlos Parra                             9
People’s Feelings Of Being Excluded

                                                                                                      Percentage of
                                                                                                      respondents reporting
                                                                                                      they are treated
                                                                                                      unequally by their
                                                                                                      country.




Source:	  World	  Bank	  team’s	  es@mates	  based	  on	  the	  Afro	  barometer,	  2008.


Attitudes and Perceptions                                                      Juan Carlos Parra                              10
Concluding Thoughts

•Attitudes and perceptions can inﬂuence the terms on which some groups
are included and can affect the way these groups access opportunities.


•They are intrinsic to the dignity and respect accorded to many groups.

•But they change over time and can reﬂect country level and global trends
and changes.


•They are also responsive to new incentives and by understanding them
we can design effective interventions.




Attitudes and Perceptions                                                   11
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MODULE 2

HOW TO ACT ON SOCIAL INCLUSION
CHANGE TOWARDS SOCIAL
INCLUSION
CHANGE IS POSSIBLE




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt
What Is It That We Want To Achieve?




      Taking part in society




      Improving the terms



Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt   2
Change Happens Anyway!

•   Change is inevitable.
•   It happens by stealth or by design. Through discrete events or gradual
    processes.
•   It is a complex process, involving trade-offs.
•   It is political and takes place through the dialectic between different
    power groups.


    But: Change does not necessarily work towards inclusion. In fact, it may
    increase/create exclusion!




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                                 3
So…




           How can we intervene to steer change towards social inclusion?




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                              4
Through Markets, Services And Spaces!




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt   5
What Characterizes A Social Inclusion Intervention?




      Policies and programs for social inclusion don’t necessarily do more.
                                  They do things differently.




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                                6
Examples




                                          Here are a few...




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                7
Azerbaijan Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs)

Situation: Protracted displacement over 20 years after conﬂict with
Armenia in 1992 – 1994. One of the highest concentration of IDPs per
capita. IDPs are systematically disadvantaged. Youth and women
particularly affected.
Objective: Improve living conditions and increase economic self-reliance
of IDPs
How: Micro-projects, housing, livelihood support
•   Emphasis on community involvement in preparation and
    implementation of micro projects to increase empowerment and
    ownership (e.g. PRA, community design appraisal event)
•   Mobilization of self-help groups to identify income-generating activities
•   Including non-IDPs as beneﬁciaries and participants to increase
    cohesion


Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                                  8
Yemen Basic Education

Situation: 20 percentage points difference between boys and girls in grade
6 completion rate. Rural areas have less than 30 percent of girls’
enrollment rates. Mixed methods analysis showed that supply side was
not the issue but demand side.
Objective: Improving student learning and equitable access to basic
education
How: Interventions towards demand-side factors
•   Recruitment and training of rural female teachers
•   Conditional Cash Transfer program to incentivize girls’ education
•   Support to Fathers' and Mothers‘ Councils for community participation
    and awareness




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                               9
Indonesia Community Empowerment

Situation: Analysis concluded that Government of Indonesia’s National
Program for Community Empowerment did not reach the most
marginalized groups.
Objective: Strengthen the capacities of Indonesian CSOs to reach and
empower marginalized groups to improve their socio-economic conditions
How:
•   Activities that address speciﬁc and identiﬁed needs of a marginalized
    individual or community and directly provide for this need
•   Activities that empower individuals to participate in order to effectively
    advocate or articulate their individual needs to those who can inﬂuence
    outcomes




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                                   10
But...




        How do you design and implement such an inclusive intervention?
                                                 &
                                  What steps are involved?




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                            11
Stylized Steps To Social Inclusion




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt   12
1. Diagnose: ‘Ask Why’




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt   13
1. Diagnose: ‘Ask Why’

•   Why do a large majority of tribal women say they don’t think it’s
    necessary to give birth in health facilities?
•   If the reason is poverty, why are these women overrepresented among
    the poor?
•   If the reason is lack of knowledge, why are they not better informed?
•   If the reason is remoteness, why are they not connected?


Through:
•   Conducting innovative ex-ante analysis
•   Holding meaningful consultations




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                              14
2. Design Action




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt   15
2. Design Action

•   Provide vouchers, grants, and culturally appropriate incentives
•   Launch education/awareness campaigns in local language and idiom
•   Register births and deaths
•   Involve the community in health surveillance
•   Use tribal systems of knowledge
•   Establish links to other programs
•   Make innovative use of private providers, including private transport
    agencies, while regulating their quality
•   Hire more female staff from tribal communities
•   Require cultural competency training for service providers
•   Hold providers accountable for their behavior as well as technical skills
•   Create incentives to providers to reside in remote areas


Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                                  16
3. Monitor Progress

•   Establish a monitoring framework that can be accessed by tribal people
•   Create community monitoring mechanisms
•   Establish third-party monitoring mechanisms
•   Use social audits and hold public meetings
•   Conduct “verbal autopsies”
•   Mandate citizen report cards
•   Publicly disclose results of monitoring, including through electronic
    channels
•   Use ICT to solicit anonymous feedback




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                               17
4. Create Avenues For Recourse And Feedback Loop

•   Establish an empowered ombudsman-like institution that enforces tribal
    rights
•   Empower tribal women through legislation and provide them with legal
    assistance
•   Create independent help-lines
•   Establish local tribal health committees with access to district
    administration
•   Form empowered grievance redress committees
•   Establish systems to report back to communities on action taken




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                             18
Final Reﬂections

•   Social inclusion is a long term agenda.
•   “One stroke of the pen” changes are few – incremental changes are more
    common.
•   Change is often non-linear.
•   Policies may have unintended consequences.
•   Lasting change is built on inclusive settlements and institutions with
    appropriate incentives.
•   Social inclusion is usually “work in progress” – new challenges of
    inclusion may arise even as some are met.




Change Towards Social Inclusion   Lisa Schmidt                               19
REFRAMING THE DEBATE ON GROWTH
INCLUSIVENESS IN UGANDA

TRANSFORMING FARMS, HUMAN CAPITAL AND
ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde
What Is Inclusive Growth

It is deﬁned in various ways, but my preferred is:
•   Achieving a pace and pattern of growth that allows an increasing
    proportion of the population to contribute to and beneﬁt from economic
    growth.
•   A long term perspective that focuses on raising productivity of resources
    (in particular people) rather than income distribution, as a means of
    increasing incomes for excluded groups
Hence similar to economic transformation - a “condition in which an
increasing proportion of economic output and employment are generated
by raising productivity across sectors or areas”.




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                              2
Optimism About Uganda Abound Today

                                                                                                      Economic policies and
                                                                                                      institutions are improving
                                                                                                      •   Despite challenges faced
                                                                                                          recently, Uganda remains
                                                                                                          one of the best performers
                                                                                                          across Africa.
                                                                                                      •   Prudent macroeconomic
                                                                                                          policies, dividends from
                                                                                                          current investments,
                                                                                                          together with oil
                                                                                                          prospects favour a
                                                                                                          positive outlook for
                                                                                                          growth


Source:	  World	  Bank’s	  Country	  Assessment	  of	  Policies	  and	  Ins<tu<ons,	  2011


 Reframing the Debate on Growth                                                Rachel K. Sebudde                                       3
So Why The Concerns About Growth Inclusiveness?

•   Persistent inequality in incomes and living standards
•   impressive growth over the past two decades notwithstanding, inequality
    in incomes and welfare has persisted;
•   Transforming to higher productivity may come with further inequality
•   Inequality challenges may accompany the natural resource blessings
    that Uganda is embracing today.




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                         4
Questions To Address While Looking At Past/Prospective Growth


•   Where has or will growth come from?
•   Where did or will growth translate into poverty reduction?
•   What is the likely path of transformation?
•   Who has or will participate and/or beneﬁt as the African economies
    transform?




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                       5
Lessons From The 2012 Inclusive Growth Study

•   The facts
•   A summary of what really matters
•   The Policy agenda




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde   6
10 Key Facts

FACT 1: Uganda sustained strong growth and poverty reduction over the
past 2 decades

                                                •    Driven by strong private investment
                                                •    Underpinned by prudent macro
                                                     economic policies
                                                •    Households transformed economic
                                                     activity away from over-dependence on
                                                     agriculture
                                                •    Wage jobs grew fast - an average of 7.7%
                                                     per annum between 1992 and 2005
                                                •    Agricultural livelihood also increased;
                                                •    Country reaped from the peace
                                                     dividend

Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                                             7
10 Key Facts

FACT 2: Structural Transformation is underway.

                           Sectorally                       Spatially




Reframing the Debate on Growth          Rachel K. Sebudde               8
10 Key Facts

                                                     FACT 3: Sectorally,
                                                     agriculture is the
                                                     primary source of
                                                     livelihood for over
                                                     75 % of labor force,
                                                     even after the very
                                                     impressive
                                                     transformation.




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                      9
10 Key Facts

FACT 4: Spatially, there is increasing concentration of economic activity,
but 80% of labour is still in rural areas




        Firms locate where it is proﬁtable,             With the limited urban footprint, the
        drawn to markets, human capital                 bulk of the population is still rural
        and localization economies                      based.


Reframing the Debate on Growth      Rachel K. Sebudde                                           10
10 Key Facts

                                                     FACT 5: Income inequality
                                                     persists and recently
                                                     increased, with some areas
                                                     accumulating a
                                                     disproportionate share of the
                                                     poor. As is the case for other
                                                     conditions of living




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                                    11
10 Key Facts

                                                     FACT 6: Human capital -
                                                     only 28% of Uganda’s labour
                                                     force has attained training
                                                     beyond primary level and or
                                                     a form of technical training,
                                                     yet there variances in
                                                     completion, proﬁciency, and
                                                     gaps in skills development




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                               12
10 Key Facts

FACT 7: The bulk of labour is stuck in low productivity employment across
space and sectors




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                          13
10 Key Facts

FACT 8: The population factor – with population growth at 3.3 per annum




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                        14
10 Key Facts

FACT 9: The labour force to evolve much in size, but not in structure or
quality




2010                                                 2030
Non – 13% (21%)                                      Non – 4% (10%)
Prim - 59% (16%)                                     Prim - 49% (13%)
Sec- 22% (58%)                                       Sec- 37% (69%)
Ter – 6% (5%)                                        Ter – 9% (8%)
Comparator: Ghana in Red



Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                         15
10 Key Facts

FACT 10: People are mobile, contributing to urbanization rate (13% UN defn),
which is to accelerate




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                         16
Conclusion From These Facts

•   Promoting inclusive growth requires a multi-pronged approach because:
•   It is a sectoral issue – in particular agriculture, where the bulk of the
    labour force is stuck, and which is a bedrock for transformation of many
    African economies
•   It is a human capital transformation issue – the key in put in
    transformation, but also people participation in growth;
•   It is a spatial transformation issues - the new economic geography
    approach to growth
•   Hence, inclusive growth is about transforming farms, human capital and
    economic geography




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                              17
Inclusive Growth Will Be About Transforming Agriculture

•   Agriculture has been stuck at low productivity
•   Increased acreage and labour drove output growth while productivity
    remained static
•   Limited use of improved technologies




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                        18
What Really Matters Here?

•   Is it through large scale agriculture? Is size important?
•   Only to a limited extent – In Uganda, small farms (not more than 5 ha) are the
    backbone to agriculture, accounting for 94% of production, and are more
    efﬁcient in resource use.
•   Does marketization matter?
•   Yes, it allows households to operate their farms as ﬁrms. For Uganda, only 25%
    of all HHs can sell up to 4% of output, yet the most commercialized quintile sell
    no more than 50% of their output.
•   Does technological advancement matter?
•   Yes, improved technologies & inputs will advance agriculture. Uganda’s use of
    improved inputs, fertilizers, new technologies to farmers, etc are so low, no
    wonder farmer’s yields can only reach a small scale of those produced on
    demonstration/research stations.
•   In Uganda, farm yields are below 40% of those realized at the national research
    stations

Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                                      19
A Multi-pronged Approach

On the farm                        Beyond the farm                 Stronger institutions to
                                                                   deliver interventions

•   Existing and new               •   Connective infrastructure   •   Extension services
    technologies and inputs            from producing areas to
    need to reach the                  markets
                                                                   •   Regulation & inspection

    farmer;                                                        •   Technological
                                   •   The investment climate
                                                                       development & testing
•   Strengthen land                    for agro-processors, most
    security through better            of which operate below      •   Delivery to farmers
    laws and stronger                  capacity
    institutions to govern
    land transactions
•   Improve access to
    credit, targeting in
    particular the small
    farmer




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                                               20
The Process Of Inclusive Growth

Inclusive growth will be about transformation of human capital to enhance
productivity and support transformation, but also increase the likelihood
of getting a larger proportion of people to participate in the growth




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                      21
What Really Matters?

•   Is it tertiary education? This will be only to a small extent given the
    huger numbers being left out of school – the low completion rates and
    low transition to secondary level will hamper human capital formation –
    for Uganda only 50% of the labour force will have education attainment
    beyond primary by 2030 – same level as Ghana today, or Malaysia by
    1970.
•   Skills? What skills? Equipping the labor force with requisite skills to
    support transformation of the economy, while allowing a larger
    proportion of the labor force to participate in production.




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                            22
A Two-pronged Approach


•   Quality primary and stronger transition               •   Equipping the labor force with requisite
    to secondary                                              skills
                                                          •   A coordination mechanism for skills
                                                              developments
                                                          •   Strategic planning for skills
                                                              requirements for the economy, in
                                                              collaboration with ﬁrms
                                                          •   A mechanism of private sector
                                                              involvement in skills provision
                                                          •   Special attention to the informal sector,
                                                              which absorbs 20 % of new entrants into
                                                              the job market.




•   To Note: Government needs to make strategic decision on what the public sector can fund, while
    fostering alternative mechanisms for private sector participation to effectively educate and skill
    its labor force

Reframing the Debate on Growth      Rachel K. Sebudde                                                     23
Inclusive Growth

Inclusive growth will be about supporting the transformation across space




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                          24
What Really Matters?

•   Public policies need to be calibrated to generate the highest pay-off in efﬁciency (or growth) and
    welfare (equity).
•   Concentration/economic density?
    Probably not to disperse economic activity as that will slow down growth => support
    concentration to build more density.
•   Is it mobility?
    Probably not ﬂight mobility as it is territorial integration to support inclusiveness. Unfortunately,
    beyond the prosperity pull factor, most important cause of migration was the search for better
    social services, this has contributed to congestion costs.
•   Constraints to integration/mobility?
    Abound in Africa, eg inﬂexible land markets, lack of connective infrastructure between leading
    and lagging areas raise the cost of integration, etc.
•   Education?
    Those with higher education were more likely to migrate, to tap into the higher pay-off in denser
    areas.




Reframing the Debate on Growth     Rachel K. Sebudde                                                     25
A Three-pronged Approach

•   Better prioritization of           •   Ensuring equity in coverage,          •   Special interventions in the
    infrastructure to support              accessibility and quality of social       disadvantaged areas
    growth & mobility                      services
                                                                                 •   Accelerating education and
•   Social infrastructure, like        •   Education access and quality              health services, to allow the
    schools and health facilities                                                    Northern Uganda region to
                                       •   Health services coverage and
                                                                                     overcome the deep shock
•   Connective infrastructure that         quality
                                                                                     suffered on account of the
    reduces distances to these
    services, and connects the
                                       •   Water and sanitation                      conﬂict.

    lagging areas to markets                                                     •   Speciﬁc interventions to make
                                                                                     land more ﬂuid will be
•   Prioritize production
                                                                                     particularly important given the
    infrastructure development
                                                                                     land tenure system in the North
    where it earns the largest
                                                                                     as it is also one of the key
    return to get faster growth
                                                                                     drivers for agricultural
                                                                                     development in the region;

                                                                                 •   Connective infrastructure to
                                                                                     support market access for
                                                                                     regional trade with South Sudan
                                                                                     & RDC




Reframing the Debate on Growth       Rachel K. Sebudde                                                                  26
Major Implications

Major implications for urban areas imply a strategic focus on urbanization
•   Urbanization will be an inevitable outcome of integration of leading and
    urban areas, off transformation of agriculture , and of overall
    transformation of the economy to higher productivity levels
•   Faster growth will come from more efﬁcient urban areas
•   Yet, already, urban poverty has been increasing.
•   Rather than stop movement of people to urban areas, it is better that
    urbanization is planned more efﬁciently to absorb these people.
•   It is a multi-pronged challenge




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                             27
A Multi-pronged Approach

•   Broaden social services across     •   More ﬂexible markets and land      •   Transport infrastructure for
    rural and urban areas                  use for urban density and people       urban mobility, connectivity to
                                           mobility                               rural areas and across regional
•   Education – great progress on
                                                                                  markets
    enrolments, but outcomes very      •   Reforms to address unclear
    poor in rural areas                    rights                             •   Pay attention to user
                                                                                  preferences
•   Health care, sanitation and        •   Reforms to land rental markets
    water are concentrated in              especially where land is           •   Coordinate with land use
    urban areas (eg. urban access          communally owned                       planning
    to water was 45%, and 10% in
    rural areas)
                                       •   Registration and demarcation of    •   In the short term, enable the
                                           community lands                        availability of a wide range of
•   Institutional frame work for                                                  service levels / modes at
    delivering these services
                                       •   Tax on unused land?
                                                                                  different prices
    becoming weaker as the
    decentralization efforts also
                                                                              •   invest in sidewalks to reduce
                                                                                  pedestrian fatalities in trafﬁc
    seem to be loosing track
                                                                                  accidents.

                                                                              •   Longer term, policies for taxing
                                                                                  motor vehicle use (say with
                                                                                  gasoline taxes) and supply of
                                                                                  public transport choices will be
                                                                                  necessary components of a
                                                                                  functioning urban area.




Reframing the Debate on Growth       Rachel K. Sebudde                                                               28
What Will And Will Not Make Growth Inclusive?

Inclusive growth will NOT come from:
•   Spreading production, creating large industries everywhere, and promoting large-scale farming
    as a way to transform agriculture;
•   Providing tertiary education while a large majority of the labor force does not go beyond primary
•   Fighting against labor mobility and urbanization.


Instead, policy makers will make Uganda’s growth more inclusive by:
•   Ensuring that smaller farmers get the basics of infrastructure, ﬁnance, inputs, and institutions
    that will support transformation;
•   Allowing economic density to build for faster growth and jobs creation an planning for
    urbanization
•   Ensuring quality and universal access to primary and secondary education, while devising
    mechanisms to provide skills to support the transformation process to higher productivity
    economic activities,




Reframing the Debate on Growth     Rachel K. Sebudde                                                    29
Policies For Inclusive Growth

•   Infrastructure prioritization - to promote more economic density, tap
    agricultural potential through better connectivity in producing areas, and
    provide connectivity to support integration of leading and lagging areas;
•   Land reform – to improve land usage to accelerate transformation;
•   Social services – to ensure equitable and efﬁcient delivery of social
    services across locations and
•   Special interventions - to uplift the living standards of especially the
    most lagging areas, and other speciﬁc challenges of agricultural
    transformation, human capital transformation and urban congestion




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde                             30
Thank You

For more:

www.worlbank.org/Uganda: Uganda Promoting Inclusive Growth –
Transforming Farms, Human Capital and Economic Geography

rsebudde@worldbank.org




Reframing the Debate on Growth   Rachel K. Sebudde             31
IMPACT OF ERT (ENERGY FOR
RURAL TRANSFORMATION)
ACTIVITIES
IMPROVING SOCIAL STANDARDS OF THE GROUPS
AT RISK OF SOCIAL EXCLUSION




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi
Presentation Layout

•   Background to the Energy for Rural Transformation Project (ERT)
•   Overview of the ERT Programme
•   Introduction to social inclusion
•   Summary of achievements
•   Impact
•   Challenges
•   Interventions to address challenges




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                             2
Background

The current Rural Electriﬁcation Programme was established by the
Electricity Act 1999, Part III, which stipulated the following:
•   A programme implemented through a public-private partnership (PPP)
•   Preparation of a sustainable and coordinated rural Electriﬁcation
    Strategy and Plan (RESP) to guide the programme
•   Establishment of a Rural Electriﬁcation Fund (REF) by the Minister
    responsible for Energy
•   The Minister to make regulations for the management of the REF
    through a Statutory Instrument
•   Maintenance of a national rural electriﬁcation data base.




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                3
Background

The Electricity Act 1999 also;
•   Broke the monopoly of UEB in power generation, transmission,
    distribution and supply
•   Created an independent Regulator; the Electricity Regulatory Authority
    (ERA)
•   Created a licensing regime for projects




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                    4
Background

The Rural Electriﬁcation Strategy and Plan (RESP) 2001 – 2010 ; passed by Cabinet in February 2001
had the following primary objective:

•   To reduce inequalities in access to electricity and the associated opportunities for increased
    social welfare, education, health and income generating activities

•   Other objectives

•   Achieve equitable regional distribution access to electricity
•   Maximize the economic, social and environmental beneﬁts of rural electriﬁcation subsidies (or
    public ﬁnances)

•   Promote expansion of the grid and development of off-grid electriﬁcation

•   Stimulate innovations within suppliers (for services and equipment).




Impact of ERT Activities           Medard Muganzi                                                    5
Background

The Strategy was also to promote power generation from renewable energy sources for projects of
capacity of up to 20MW for both grid connection and off-grid supply.
The RESP prescribed a target of 10% rural electricity access by 2010 (later extended to 2012) from
around 1% in 2001.
Other major elements of the RESP included:

•   The development of a Master Plan to guide the choice and the planning of projects;
•   Provision of capital subsidies to private sector project developers who would inject their own
    funds through equity and debt;

•   Capacity building for private sector developers and relevant public institutions; and

•   Promotion of cross-sectoral linkages in the implementation of the programme




Impact of ERT Activities           Medard Muganzi                                                    6
Implementation Of The RESP

Institutional Set Up for Rural Electriﬁcation
The Rural Electriﬁcation Board was constituted in mid-2002 and the Agency in July 2003.
In line with the cross-sectoral approach prescribed by the RESP, other institutions were mandated
with implementing certain aspects of the programme, particularly with regard to the World Bank
ﬁnanced Energy for Rural Transformation (ERT) Project:

•   Ministry of Energy and Mineral Development for biomass and energy efﬁciency related projects
    (e.g. gasiﬁcation and energy savers)
•   Ministries responsible for Health, Education and Water for installation of solar PV packages in
    rural health centres, educational institutions and water supply points, respectively

•   Private sector Foundation for support to private sector project developers and solar PV providers

•   Bank of Uganda for reﬁnancing commercial loans to private sector project developers (under ERT
    I)




Impact of ERT Activities           Medard Muganzi                                                       7
Implementation Of The RESP

•   Uganda Energy Credit Capitalization Company (UECCC) for providing
    security to project developers for local borrowing (under ERT II); and
•   Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development for
    monitoring and evaluation of the ERT Project.




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                    8
General Overview Of ERT

•   The purpose of the ERT program is to develop Uganda’s energy and
    information/communication technologies (ICT) sectors, so that they
    make a signiﬁcant contribution to bringing about rural transformation.
    ERT was designed 10-year APL.

ERT Phase I                                         ERT Phase II

•   Phase 1 of the ERT Project started in 2002      •   ERT II was declared effective on
    & successfully ended in February 2009.              November 25, 2009 and was to run for a
                                                        period of four years, but has been
•   The aim of phase 1 was to develop the
                                                        extended to June 30, 2016.
    institutional framework and capacity for
    delivery of rural/renewable energy in a         •   The aim of ERT II To Increase regional
    sustainable manner.                                 coverage and building on institutional
                                                        framework developed in ERTI.

                                                    •   The implementation of ERTII has largely
                                                        retained the components of ERTI.
                                                    •   ERT III is now under preparation


Impact of ERT Activities           Medard Muganzi                                                 9
Social Inclusion

•   It is the process of improving the terms for individuals and groups to
    take part in society.
•   The process of improving the ability, opportunity, dignity of people
    disadvantaged on the basis of their identity to take part in society.
•   It is noted that social inclusion is speciﬁc to time, place and identities; is
    multidimensional.
•   it is also related to poverty and inequality but goes beyond these and it is
    both an outcome and a process.




Impact of ERT Activities     Medard Muganzi                                          10
Social Inclusion

Among the  groups at risk of social exclusion include;  
•   Rural communities in the hard to reach areas.
•   Schools, health centers, rural growth centres, etc
•   Agricultural enterprises that are usually located off the main load centres.




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                     11
ERT Activities

•   ERT was sought to realize the objectives of the Rural Electriﬁcation
    Strategy and Plan 2001-20010 (RESP 1).
•   RESP 1 prescribed a multi-technology approach to extending modern
    energy services to the rural communities including;.
•   Grid extension.
•   Independent grids and.
•   Solar PV, recognizing the sparse nature of settlements and the large task
    and length of time it would take to extend the grid to many parts of the
    country.




Impact of ERT Activities     Medard Muganzi                                     12
Achievements

Summary of general achievements on grid extension projects.
•   Increase in rural electriﬁcation rate from 1% in 2001 to 7% in 2013.
    National coverage is at 14% up from 4% in 2001 (UBOS 2013).
•   Development of the IREMP – 2009 that guides the selection of projects to
    package for funding.
•   Since 2006, a total of 502 grid extension projects have been implemented
    countrywide.
•   To date the programme has achieved the following on medium to large
    grid extension projects.
•   5,192 km of medium Voltage (MV) power lines and 2,790 km of Low
    Voltage (LV) reticulation networks.
•   A further 3,670 km of MV power lines and 1,240 km of LV are in advanced
    stages of construction, and are to be commissioned in the FY 2013/14.

Impact of ERT Activities    Medard Muganzi                                     13
Achievements

Summary of general achievements on grid extension projects (cont.)
•   1,239 km of medium Voltage (MV) power lines and 821 km of Low Voltage
    (LV) reticulation networks are under procurement;
•   A further 5,052 km of MV power lines and 2,266 km of LV with ﬁrm
    funding are at different stages of planning. Procurement of contractors
    will commence in 2013/14
•   On Community schemes
•   267 schemes have been implemented; 161 on cost sharing with the
    community and 106 implemented using consolidated fund and
    Transmission Levy;
•   307 km of MV lines and 450 km LV networks have been commissioned
•   65 km of MV lines and 109 km of LV networks are under construction


Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                     14
Achievements

Summary of general achievements on grid extension projects (cont.)
•   Connection of 26 district headquarters bringing the number to 98 out of
    112 (about 87.5%) ; Kween, Kyegegwa, Katakwi, Amuria, Kiruhura,
    Buhweju, Mitooma, Kibaale, Kanungu, Kyenjojo, Isingiro, Pader, Agago,
    Abim, Oyam, Bundibugyo, Lamwo, Nakapiripit, Amudat, Kaberamaido,
    Dokolo, Amolatar, Ntoroko, Alebtong, Moroto, and Napak.
•   Additional 5 districts of Bulisa, Adjumani, Moyo, Amuru and Otuke are to
    be electriﬁed by end of 2013/2014.
•   For 05 districts namely Zombo, Koboko, Maracha, Yumbe and Namayingo
    works will be completed in FY2014/15
•   03 districts of Kotido, Kaabong and Nwoya have been planned for
    connection to national grid by end of FY201/15



Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                      15
Achievements - Grid Extension Projects

Summary of general achievements on grid extension projects (cont.)
•   Kalangala and Buvuma islands to be connected through marine cable by
    end of FY2014/2015
•   Other local administrative headquarters, social centres, educational
    institutions, and many economic enterprises have been connected
•   Several projects have been constructed as interconnectors of renewable
    energy based power generation projects to the main grid;
     -Mpanga Mini Hydro Power Plant (18MW)
     -Kakira Sugar Works (22MW)
     -Buseruka Min Hydro Power Plant (9MW)
     -Kikagate Hydro Power Project (16MW) – yet to be constructed
     -Ishasha (6.5MW)
     -Nyagak (3.5MW)
     -Kisiizi (300kW)
Impact of ERT Activities          Medard Muganzi                             16
Achievements - Independent Grids

Most part considered an interim measure and established in areas where it would not be
economically feasible to extend the national grid in the short or medium term
Under this categorization;

•   West Nile Independent grid ( Arua, Nebbi and Paidha) connected to a 3.5 MW Nyakag Mini Hydro
    Plant commissioned by H.E. in September 2012

•   Kisiizi mini grid powered by a 300kW power plant serving the Hospital and the community
    around covering a linear distance 14km of 11kV power line.
•   With GIZ, a 60 kW small hydro has been developed in Buhoma (Bwindi) and serves Bwindi
    Hospital, and loads in the trading centre of Buhoma. Another one, 40kW has been established in
    Suam close to the Border with Kenya. It has been undergoing reliability tests since November
    2012.

•   Independent grids based on thermal generation have been supported; Kalangala (250kVA
    generator), Adjumani and Moroto (each with 750kVA Generator)




Impact of ERT Activities          Medard Muganzi                                                     17
Achievements - Solar Photo Voltaic Installations

Promoted through two approaches under ERT II
•   Private sector led access mainly implemented through the PV Targeted
    Market Approach (PVTMA) Programme
     a. Focuses on increased uptake of solar PV systems for households,
        business enterprises and institutions through provision of consumer
        subsides and promotion of credit to spread the upfront cost of solar
        PV systems and make them affordable
     b. 12000 installations have been achieved to date and targets 27000
        installations by 2016.
     c. Under ERT I that ended in Feb 2009, about 10,000 systems were
        installed making a cumulative total of 22000 systems.




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                      18
Achievements - Solar Photo Voltaic Installations

•   Publicly funded solar PV Packages for social services
     a. Implemented by line ministries of Water, Health and Education.
     b. 26 upcountry growth centres under MOW, 301 post primal educational
        institutions under education and 366 health centres under Ministry of
        Health.
     c. Under ERT I 15 rural growth centres were covered under MOW, 125
        post primary schools under education and 155 health centres under
        Health.




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                   19
Impact Of ERT

•   Access by households: Many households in ERT I areas were within
    proximity of grid lines but few households were connected due to high
    connection costs. In addition, high tariffs were found to limit,
    signiﬁcantly, the electricity consumption of rural households sometimes
    leading to service disconnection.
•   Enterprise creation: New enterprises had sprung up in ERT areas with
    access to grid. Many were small enterprises employing family labour to
    provide phone charging services, entertainment such as video shows
    and refrigerated drinks.
•   Access to ICT services: There was a general increase in the use of mobile
    phones and internet in ERT project areas but attribution to the project
    was inconclusive.




Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                       20
Impact Of ERT

Access for social services: Access to electricity in ERT areas had
inﬂuenced the quality of education and health services mainly due to: (i)
Use of educational aids such as computers, internet and television (ii)
Lower operating costs for diagnostic laboratory services, conservation of
drugs through refrigeration and sterilisation of medical equipment in
health facilities and photocopying, scanning and printing in schools (iii)
Staff motivation – staff at schools and health centres valued the
availability of power at their houses and ofﬁces mainly because of the
personal beneﬁts derived such as good quality light compared to candles
and parafﬁn lamps, options to watch TV and use other audio equipment
and the option to use computers and internet. As a result of the higher
levels of motivation, education and health facilities reported that they
were better able to attract and retain staff.


Impact of ERT Activities   Medard Muganzi                                    21
Challenges Encountered

•   Access target of 10% by 2010 (2012) was not met because of the following
    constraints:
      Delayed start up of REA – it took more than two years to constitute REA
      after the establishment of Statutory Instrument No. 75 of 2001.
      Delayed start of implementation of the ERT project activities, which
      was the driving force of RE programme, due to the unworkable model of
      private sector investment in RE. This was later changed to a public
      investment model.
      High connection and house wiring costs
      High electricity tariffs
      Inability of service providers to market electricity services and make
      timely connections
      Initial high cost of solar PV equipment

Impact of ERT Activities     Medard Muganzi                                     22
Challenges Encountered

•   Issues of wayleaves and compensation
      Resistance to passage of lines over land of individuals in project areas
      Demands for compensation even when no crop or property has been
      tampered with
      Legal petitions which delay implementation
•   Low population density
      Dispersed nature of settlements increases per capita cost of rural
      electriﬁcation. This has a direct negative impact on meeting access
      targets.
•   High population growth
      At 3.5% population growth, the number of households is increasing at a
      higher rate than that of rural electriﬁcation.


Impact of ERT Activities    Medard Muganzi                                       23
Challenges Encountered

•   Low ﬁnancial capacity of service providers
      Private sector and cooperatives of rural concessions in Pader, Kibaale,
      Bundibugyo, Kasese and Kanungu, Rakai are all struggling and run the
      risk of collapse due to lack of commercial viability
      Technical and commercial capacities remain weak within the service
      providers




Impact of ERT Activities    Medard Muganzi                                      24
Challenges Encountered

•   Electricity for all by 2040
      Increasing access levels from 7% to 100% in 23 years
      Intermediate targets of 26% by 2022 and 50% by 2030.
      Required resources for 2012-2022 will be about US$1BN


Period                     2001         2013       2022   2030     2040


Rural                      1%             7%       26%       50%   100%
Access

National                   4%            14%       40%       80%   100%
Access


Impact of ERT Activities          Medard Muganzi                          25
Interventions To Address Challenges

•   Reviewing technical standards and material speciﬁcations to include low cost designs in REA
    projects

•   Incorporation of substantial connection subsidies in construction contracts so that as many
    consumers are already connected at the commissioning of a project

•   Provision of connection subsidies on the existing grid through the Output Based Aid (OBA)
    initiative

•   Introduction of ready boards to reduce the cost of house wiring for poorer households
•   Provision of subsidies and credit for PV and solar lanterns

•   On wayleaves, REA urges local leaders to take the lead in getting written commitments for
    electricity line passage

•   Creation of concessions which have geographical area coverage to achieve commercial viability
    in the short timeframe.

•   Providing professional and skills training to staff of service providers




Impact of ERT Activities            Medard Muganzi                                                  26
MEASURING SOCIAL INCLUSION




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando
Social Inclusion Is Measurable




      Taking part in society




      Improving the terms



Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando   2
How Can We Measure Social Inclusion?

•   Ability
      We know how to measure human capital (education/skills, health)
•   Opportunity
      Measures like the Human Opportunity Index can be used to measure
      how opportunities are distributed and accessed by different population
      groups
•   Dignity (perception of being respected/valued)
      Perceptions can be measured. More to come on Thursday.




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                             3
Human Opportunities Index

              	  




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando   4
WB Human Opportunities Index: LAC




Source	  :	  UY	  Equality	  of	  Opportuni9es	  (WB,	  2010)	  


 Measuring Social Inclusion                                                Maria Beatriz Orlando   5
How Can We Measure Social Inclusion?

Markets and services
•   Measures of market penetration, access to services


Spaces
•   We have good proxies for political participation (number of seats in
    parliament, cabinet, political parties, participation in elections, etc.)
•   Access to physical and cultural spaces can be measured through surveys
    and qualitative methods (more on this tomorrow)




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                              6
How Can We Measure Social Inclusion?

•   The choice of measure(s) depends on what social inclusion means in a
    particular context
•   Data availability might be a constraint in the short term
•   Two types of measures can be used: indices and dashboards
•   An index is a ﬁgure that aggregates the levels of several variables
•   A dashboard is a set of variables to be used at the user’s discretion




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                          7
Indices Or Dashboards?

                             Indices                                        Dashboards
 Pros                                                          Pros
 •   Single number – easy to                                   •   User decides whether and how
     understand                                                    to use the different variables
 •   Allows comparability                                      •   Flexible and adaptable
 •   Can be used to rank
 Cons                                                          Cons
 •   Can be used to rank                                       •   ‘Subjective’ (even ‘arbitrary’)
 •   Information loss during                                   •   Multiplicity of measures might
     aggregation                                                   add confusion
 •   Fixed weights
 •   Inﬂexible

Measuring Social Inclusion             Maria Beatriz Orlando                                         8
Measures Of Social Inclusion

•   Page 262 of “Inclusion Matters”
•   Highly multidimensional
•   Perceptions measures are included in all of them




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando     9
Monitoring And Evaluation

•   Establish a monitoring network that can be accessed by the excluded
    groups
•   Create community monitoring mechanisms
•   Establish third-party monitoring mechanisms
•   Use social audits and hold public meetings
•   Publicly disclose results of monitoring
•   Use ICT and other methods to solicit anonymous feedback
•   Impact evaluation … is coming




Measuring Social Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                        10
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MODULE 3

GENDER AS A DRIVER OF EXCLUSION
GENDER AND INCLUSION




Gender and Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando
What Is Gender?

•   Gender is a social construct:
      “ social, behavioral, and cultural attributes associated with being a
      woman or a man..”


•   Difference with other dimensions of exclusion:
     •   Intra-household phenomena
     •   Preferences, needs and constraints vary signiﬁcantly between men
         and women
     •   Gender cuts across income, ethnicity, and class




Gender and Inclusion         Maria Beatriz Orlando                            2
Gender Equality And Development

•   Productivity
•   Impact on next generation’s human capital and well-being
•   Women’s voice can lead to different policy choices
•   Gender equality promotes social inclusion
•   Gender mainstreaming in projects increases development impact




Gender and Inclusion       Maria Beatriz Orlando                    3
Gender Inequality Has A Cost

                                               Economic costs


                                               … equalizing access to inputs
                                               such as land and fertilizers
                                               would increase agricultural
                                               output by 2-4%


                                               … eliminating employment
                                               segregation would increase
                                               labor productivity by as much
                                               as 3-25%




Gender and Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                                   4
WDR 12 Framework

                                                       Endowments – large gains, but
                                                       not uniform (men’s health)


                                                       Economic Opportunities – gains
                        Households                     in LFPR, but not enough


                                                       Agency – external gains ,
                                                       internal challenges (domestic
                                                       violence)


                           Informal
                         Institutions
                        (social norms,
           Formal
                         preferences)
         Institutions                                 Markets
            (CCTs,                               (land, credit, labor)
          education)



Gender and Inclusion     Maria Beatriz Orlando                                          5
Global Progress

•   Recognition of women’s rights (CEDAW)
•   More girls in school
•   Sharp decline in fertility
•   More women in the labor force
•   … and pace of change is faster




Gender and Inclusion        Maria Beatriz Orlando   6
Gender Gap In Education Closing




Gender and Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando   7
Women In Labor

In the last 30 years, 552 million women joined the labor force

                                       World
                                                                                                  + 2%
                         Sub - Saharan Africa
                                                                                                   + 4%
                                  South Asia
                                                                                                  + 2%
                   Middle East & North Africa
                                                                                                  + 5%
                   Latin America & Caribbean
                                                                                                  + 16%
                                High income
                                                                                                   + 7%
                       Europe & Central Asia
                                                                                                   - 7%
                          East Asia & Paciﬁc
                                                                                                   - 3%
                                                0%   10%    20%    30%   40   50%    60%   70%   80%

                                                 Female labor force participation rate



Gender and Inclusion                             Maria Beatriz Orlando                                    8
Global Challenges

•   Persistent education gaps for some disadvantaged groups
•   Excess female mortality (at birth, in infancy, and in the reproductive
    years)
•   Segregation in employment and earnings gaps
•   Differences in voice and decision-making power (agency) in households
    and in society




Gender and Inclusion       Maria Beatriz Orlando                             9
Overlapping Disadvantage


                                                                                                                                                          Intersecting identities
                                                                                                                                                          transfer cumulative
                                                                                                                                                          disadvantage: Secondary
                                                                                                                                                          school completion in
                                                                                                                                                          Bolivia.




Source:	  World	  Bank	  team’s	  analysis	  based	  on	  the	  Minnesota	  PopulaCon	  Center,	  IPUMS	  database,	  2011	  and	  the	  Bolivian	  NaConal	  InsCtute	  of	  StaCsCcs,	  2001.	  Note:	  Secondary	  
School	  CompleCon	  marginal	  eﬀects,	  using	  Male	  and	  Spanish	  Mother	  Tongue	  as	  the	  reference	  group.	  CalculaCons	  refer	  to	  secondary	  school	  compleCon	  rates	  for	  persons	  25	  years	  
of	  age	  or	  older,	  controlling	  for	  age,	  age-­‐squared,	  and	  urban/rural	  residence.	  All	  values	  are	  signiﬁcant	  at	  the	  1%	  level.	  	  	  

 Gender and Inclusion                                                              Maria Beatriz Orlando                                                                                                                                            10
For Every Dollar A Man Makes, A Woman Earns…



                       Mexico 80¢                       Germany 62¢



                       Malawi 90¢                       Nigeria 60¢



                   Sri Lanka 50¢                       Bangladesh 12¢



Gender and Inclusion           Maria Beatriz Orlando                    11
Who Controls Women’s Own Income?

                                               Women in poorest quintile


                                               Women in richest quintile




Gender and Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                               12
What Can We Do To Eliminate These Gaps?

                                               Focus on gaps that do not disappear
                                               with growth.


                                               •   Gender gaps in human
                                                   endowments
                                               •   Earnings and productivity gaps
                                               •   Gender differences in voice and
                                                   agency
                                               •   The reproduction of gender
                                                   inequality over time


                                               Target determinants of gender
                                               inequality

Gender and Inclusion   Maria Beatriz Orlando                                         13
For More Information

•   World Development Report 2012 : Gender Equality and Development


•   www.worldbank.org/gender


•   www.worldbank.org/socialdevelopment




Gender and Inclusion     Maria Beatriz Orlando                        14
Gender And Inclusion




                       What about the project level?




Gender and Inclusion    Maria Beatriz Orlando          15
Gender Mainstreaming 101

 Analysis                        Actions                    M&E

• Identify and analyze          • Show how                  • Propose the collection
  gender issues relevant          interventions are           of gender and/or sex-
  to the project                  expected to narrow          disaggregated
                                  existing disparities        indicator(s)
• Report ﬁndings of
  country/regional              • Include speciﬁc or        • Include an evaluation
  gender diagnostics or           targeted actions that       strategy which will
  undertake project               address the needs and       analyze the gender-
  speciﬁc analysis                constraints of women,       speciﬁc impacts of the
                                  girls, men, or boys         project
• Reﬂect the results of
  consultations on the          • Include actions to
  project objectives or           offset risks of adverse
  components with                 gender impacts
  women/girls/men/boys
  and/or gender NGOs




Gender and Inclusion       Maria Beatriz Orlando                                       16
Gender Analysis: Key Themes

•   Differences in well-being between men, women, girls, and boys
•   Gender differentiated economic roles
•   Gender differentiated demand (usage, needs, willingness to pay) for
    infrastructure and services
•   Impact of economic shocks
•   Gender disparities in access to jobs and economic opportunities
•   Reproductive health issues
•   Gender disparities in voice and decision making (role of social norms?)




Gender and Inclusion       Maria Beatriz Orlando                              17
Gender Mainstreaming And Project Results

Brazil Rio Grande do Norte Poverty Reduction


Key constraints to women’s economic empowerment:

•   Reducing the female burden within the household economy (household chores),

•   Empowering women in household and community processes of decision making,

•   Changing the patterns of gender relations that traditionally prevail in poor rural societies


How did the project address these gender issues?

•   Investments in water supply systems that help diminish the time spent collecting water and thus
    decrease the time women spent in household activities and

•   “Access to market economy” investments, including small agriculture production and productive
    investments, that can help women access local markets/buyers and improve their income.




Gender and Inclusion                Maria Beatriz Orlando                                           18
Gender Mainstreaming And Project Results

Brazil Rio Grande do Norte Poverty Reduction


Impact:

•   Investments in community water supply increased the free time of those involved with fetching
    water particularly women and children which resulted in an increase in time dedicated to
    farming.

•   The results suggest that 30 percent of the increase in farming income originated in women’s
    increased income from off-farm work.

•   Expanded women’s participation in networks and decision making




Gender and Inclusion              Maria Beatriz Orlando                                             19
Gender Mainstreaming And Project Results

Gender Actions-Barrios de Verdad Bolivia


Urban Infrastructure

•   Indoor sanitation facilities and street lighting are improving pedestrian mobility and women’s
    security

•   Child care facilities, community centers, and recreational centers are empowering women
    economically and fostering social cohesion

•   Titles to the land and assets registered to both men and women. This is a ﬁrst step towards
    tackling gender disparities in endowments.




Gender and Inclusion               Maria Beatriz Orlando                                             20
EMPOWERING ADOLESCENT GIRLS


EVIDENCE FROM THE ELA PROGRAM




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva
The Labor Market Problem

• 86% of young women out of the labor force altogether in Uganda,
  compared to an average of 58% in 14 Sub-Saharan countries
• At all ages females have higher unemployment rates than men, and this
  is especially pronounced in the youngest age cohorts (15 to 19 years of
  age)




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                               2
The Health Problem

• Fertility rates (the number of births per 1,000 women) are three to four
  times higher in Uganda than in developed countries
• This gap in fertility rates is most pronounced among the youngest
  female aged cohort of 15 to 19 year olds.




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                                3
The Health Problem




Source:	  Uganda	  AIDS	  Indicator	  Survey,	  2011


 Empowering Adolescent Girls                                Benedetta Lerva   4
A Self Reinforcing Loop




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva   5
A Program That...

• Improves HIV and pregnancy related knowledge
• Increases condom usage
• Reduces adolescent fertility rate
• Reduces forced sexual intercourse
• Increases participation in income generating activities (IGA)




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                     6
Classic Approach

• Majority of policy interventions focused exclusively on
      • classroom-based education courses designed to reduce risky
        behaviors, or
      • vocational training designed to improve labor market outcomes
        among youth




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                           7
The BRAC Strategy

• BRAC is one of the largest development NGOs in the world, founded in
  Bangladesh in 1972
• One of BRAC’s most successful programs is the ELA Program
  (Empowerment and Livelihood for Adolescents).




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                            8
The ELA Program

• It is based on adolescent development clubs, established at the village
  level.
• Beneﬁciaries: girls between 10 and 25 years of age
• All activities take place in a dedicated club house
• Activities:
      – Life skills training
      – Vocational skills training (including ﬁnancial literacy)
      – Dancing, singing, playing games, reading books




Empowering Adolescent Girls    Benedetta Lerva                              9
The ELA Program

• Clubs are open 5 days a week, from 2 to 5pm
• Each club is led by an adolescent leader, called the club “mentor”.
• Each club has 20 to 35 club members
• Actually, more than 1,300 clubs established throughout Uganda
  (Karamoja included), reaching about 50,000 girls.




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                           10
Life-skills Training




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva   11
Vocational Training

                                                5 types of vocational
                                                trainings are offered:
                                                1) tailoring,
                                                2) hairdressing,
                                                3) computing,
                                                4) agriculture,
                                                5) poultry rearing.


                                                They are complemented
                                                with ﬁnancial literacy
                                                courses.



Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                            12
Vocational Training




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva   13
The Evaluation

• Randomized control trial (RCT) following 4800 girls over two years.
• Girls, parents and household head were interviewed.
• 10 BRAC branch ofﬁces: 5 in urban or semi urban areas of Kampala and
  Mukono, 5 in rural areas surrounding Iganga and Jinja
• 100 treatment villages receive ELA
• 50 control villages do not receive ELA




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                            14
The Beneﬁciaries

• Information about the intention to participate in ELA was collected at
  baseline, and can be compared to actual participation
• Girls that are more likely to intend to participate in ELA are:
     • Those who are more likely to beneﬁt from the program
     • Those who place a high value in ﬁnancial independence
     • Those who believe they would be successful entrepreneurs but lack
       the skills
• When we look at actual participation, we see that girls who participate
  are not substantially different from girls who do not participate.




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                               15
Health-related Findings

• Improvement in HIV and pregnancy related knowledge
• Self-reported routine condom usage increases by 50%
• 28.6% decrease in fertility rates among the targeted population
• 76% reduction in girls reporting having recently had sex unwillingly




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                            16
Labor-market Related Findings

• The Program raised the likelihood of girls being engaged in income
  generating activities by 35%
• This effect is concentrated on an increased participation in self-
  employment
• 3% increase in likelihood girls will spend any hours engaged in self
  employed activities
• Annual income increase from self-employment of 45k UGX.
• No results for wage




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                            17
Findings On Satisfaction And Empowerment

• No impact on general life satisfaction…
• …but signiﬁcant increase in satisfaction with income and earnings
• Increase in gender empowerment index: girls believe that certain tasks
  should be more gender neutral
• No impact on attitudes towards work and society




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                              18
Conclusions

• Key of ELA’s success could be explained by the fact that it’s a two
  pronged program (life-skills training and vocational training)


• Synergies between providing girls information about health risks and
  empowering them economically


• The two components build on each other and reinforce the overall
  impact




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                            19
Way Ahead: The Tenancy Pilot

•   We are currently piloting an extension of the program to test whether we
    can make the ELA Program self sustainable
•   BRAC gives to one girl in selected clubs:
      •   ½ acre of land
      •   Seeds
      •   Agricultural training
•   After cultivation, the product of the land is shared equally between the
    ELA Farmer and BRAC, and revenues are spent to pay for club-related
    expenses




Empowering Adolescent Girls   Benedetta Lerva                                  20
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MODULE 4

CONSULTATIONS
AN INTRODUCTION TO
COMMUNITY CONSULTATION
IN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
“HOW – TO”, THE “DOS” AND “DON’TS” OF
COMMUNITY CONSULTATION




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru
Community Consultations And Social Inclusion

•   Consultations are a cornerstone of diagnosing problems and building
    support for interventions


•   Consultations give voice: Active listening to beneﬁciaries and careful
    consideration of comments, ideas and recommendations of
    beneﬁciaries/the excluded


•   Consultations can help frame the key questions and identify right
    channels for intervention




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                 2
What Is Community Consultation?

•   Deﬁned in various ways depending on purpose
•   A level of community involvement
•   Resident community members, groups of interest and users of a service
•   Given an opportunity
•   Inform a decision about policy, project or service change
•   Giving and getting information




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                3
Context Of Consultations

Inﬂuences the outcomes/results
Context includes:
•   Issue
•   Purpose
•   Affected/target groups
•   Scope (single or multiple issue)
•   Timeframe
•   Consultation methods
•   Previous experience




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru   4
Issues For Consultation In Development

•   Legislation
•   Strategy development – government, NGOs
•   District development planning
•   Policy development and implementation
•   Policy change and implementation
•   Projects and Programmes
     •   Community needs
     •   Planning
     •   Performance
     •   Impact




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru   5
Research The Issue For Consultation

•   Review available relevant literature
•   Consultations on the issue in the past
•   Very important as it may reveal:
     •   Concerns and challenges faced
     •   Community opinion to be expected
     •   Identifying various interest groups
     •   Ways of accessing them


•   Example: The Proposed Uganda GPE Project – DCI & Unicef Education
    Programs




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru            6
Who Do You Consult On The Issues?

•   Depends of the purpose
•   All stakeholders potentially affected by the decision
•   Consider equality and diversity issues if any
•   Direct and indirect stakeholders


Example: Privatisation of water services: Stakeholders consulted -
community elders, women, men & children, LC I C/Ps, owners of water
points & water vendors (direct stakeholders); government ofﬁcials from
DWD, Water ministry/GTZ, district, PU, NWSC, MUK; NGO ofﬁcials from
WaterAid, AWEPON, SEATINI, UWASNET, DENIVA,NETWAS; Private sector,
district and municipal council




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru             7
How Do You Reach Excluded Groups?

•   Will and Commitment
•   Establish and identify
•   Devise ways of accessing them
•   Know what you want from them
•   Innovative methods
•   Monitor progress


Example: How the Ik and Batwa were reached in consultations for the
proposed Uganda GPE project last year (2013)




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru          8
Approach To Community Consultation

The Approach involves a number of procedures including:
•   Determine who will be responsible
•   Identify the issue, stakeholders and, decide how often you will consult
    with them
•   Determine the resources required
•   Select appropriate methods
•   Prepare a consultation plan
•   Make contacts, build relationships with stakeholders and provide all
    information
•   Conduct the consultations
•   Disseminate the results and ﬁnally evaluate the consultation activity



An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                  9
Methods For Undertaking Consultation

•   Context of consultations determines the choice of methods
•   Use mixed methods to encourage different groups to participate
•   Wide spectrum of methods from which to choose
    •   Interviews
    •   Surveys
    •   Meetings
    •   Workshops
    •   Working groups
    •   Discussion papers
    •   Web-based methods




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru         10
Consultation Methods: Some Examples

•   Privatisation of urban water services: key informant interviews (one-on-
    one and face-to- face), FGDs, informal meetings and interviews, transect
    walks, and observations (only qualitative methods)


•   The proposed Uganda GPE project: open community meetings, key
    informant interviews, FGDs and observations (only qualitative methods)


•   Kindernothilf (KNH): trainee survey, key informant interviews, FGDs,
    time lines, wealth ranking, mapping and observations




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                   11
Appropriate Locations

•   Depends on the context of the consultations
•   Comfortable, safe and familiar
•   Accessible to a wide range of participants preferably within the
    communities
•   Use variety of venues
•   Most prefer to meet ‘near’ or ‘at’ the project/issue of discussion where
    relevant


•   Example: Consultations for the GPE project – venues were the selected
    primary school premises. Privatisation of water services – venues were
    near or at the water source




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                   12
Appropriate Timing/Schedule

Should be timed well and allow enough time
Should be early enough in the decision-making process
Should be viewed at 2 angles :
•   Timing in the policy process and project cycle
•   Policy formulation and implementation
•   Project development, implementation and completion
•   Timing of actual consultation activity
•   Availability of target groups


•   Example: Consultations for GPE (good timing); consultations for BAP
    (poor timing)


An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru              13
Data Processing And Analysis

•   Requires expertise in research methodology and statistical procedures
•   Quantitative data (surveys) easier to analyse – SPSS and Excel
•   Qualitative data is richer but more difﬁcult to analyse – Atlas ti.
•   Take caution when interpreting and drawing conclusions
•   Interpretations and conclusions should be evidence-based




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                14
Documentation And Dissemination

•   Is an important aspect of effective consultations – depends on purpose &
    audience
•   Plan for the process of giving feedback and use suitable mechanism
•   Report consultation results to your managers and participants
•   Ways of documentation and reporting include:
       •   Formal detailed reports (summary report)
       •   Posters, leaﬂets, booklets, newsletters, ﬂyers, journal articles
       •   Media – news papers, radio, television, press releases
       •   Public/community meetings
       •   Presentations


•   Example: GPE Project: - formal in-depth report, community meeting

An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                   15
Integrating Results In Project Design And Implementation


Consultations undertaken to improve project design and implementation.
How?


Example: integrating consultation results in the proposed Uganda GPE
project’s design & implementation - paid particular attention to
recommendations & issues raised e.g. overlook selection criteria to ensure
the Ik and Batwa beneﬁt and; sensitise them on the thematic curriculum
Example: incorporating consultation results in FK Norway S-S project
design & implementation – results of consultations during project
implementation greatly improved the design and implementation of the
programme over the years in the following ways: home visits, ﬂexed age
limit for female participants, funds for home coming activities and
logistical support


An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                 16
Challenges

•   Managing dominant participants/saboteurs e.g. GPE project and EU
    HRGGP
•   Dealing with indifference and consultation fatigue
•   Managing false expectations
•   Dealing with conﬂict/varying opinions e.g. GPE Project (Ik and Batwa)
•   Devising suitable methods & ensuring inclusiveness of all affected
    parties
•   Inadequate resources/poor planning
•   Determining when consultation efforts have been sufﬁcient
•   Integrating consultation results into project design & implementation




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                17
Successful Examples Of Consultations

•   Ireland Aid Supported Projects of Kiboga District Development
    Programme (KDDP) 1999 – 2001


•   The 9th EU/EDF Micro Projects Programme (MPP) in Uganda


•   The Revision of the PEAP in 2000 and its transformation into PRSP




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru            18
Conclusion

•   No simple, quick and cheap way
•   Make deliberate efforts, wise decisions and follow the ‘good practices’
•   It can be done, it has been done and anybody can do it
•   Its beneﬁts far outweigh any challenges or costs
•   No justiﬁcation for avoiding community consultations
•   Continue to be an essential part of development work




An Intro to Community Consultation   Georgina Angela Manyuru                  19
UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL INCLUSION AND IMPACT EVALUATION: Concepts, Trends, Policies,
Methods and Measurement

Held at L. Victoria Serena Resort, UGANDA, February 3 – 7, 2014




AN INTRODUCTION TO COMMUNITY CONSULTATION IN
DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS SESSION: The “How – To”, the “dos” and
“don’ts”

February 5, 2014

By Georgina A. Manyuru
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  


1.0 INTRODUCTION

It is a common practice now days for governments (central and local),
development partners and many other development agencies in Uganda to seek
input from communities/service users when addressing issues or problems that
affect them.          Community consultation is a good democratic practice whose
usefulness in increasingly being recognised. However, to undertake effective
community consultations and achieve the desired outcomes, it requires a genuine
commitment on the part of government and development agencies usually
reflected in proper planning and implementation of the activity.

What is Community Consultation?

Consultation may be defined in various ways depending on the purpose but for
purposes of this training the concept will be used to refer to a level of community
involvement in which community members resident in a particular local area,
groups of interest and users of a specific service are given an opportunity to
discuss particular issues of concern to them in order to inform a decision about a
policy, project, new proposal or service change. Consultation is a particularly
common way of involving people and goes beyond information giving by actively
seeking, listening to and taking account of peoples’ views before making
decisions or setting priorities.



2.0 CONTENT

2.1 Context of Consultations

The context of any consultation very much influences the outcomes, either for
better or worse. It determines to a great extent which consultation processes will
be effective and which might not. The context of a consultation includes the
immediate issue(s), policy, project for which consultation is sought; the overall
aim/purpose of the consultation; the people or groups affected/target groups; the
scope (single issue or multiple/general issue-based); the intended timeframe
(brief, extended or on-going consultations); previous experience with past


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 1
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
consultations (has an influence on community attitudes); how the information
collected will be used etc. Understanding all these will help in planning for
consultations and executing your plan.                   Therefore for consultations to be
effective, it is important to take careful account of the context in which the
consultations would take place.




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 2
	  
                      An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  



2.2 Issues on which there needs to be Consultation

It is vital that you clearly state the issue(s) or proposal for which consultation is to
be undertaken. These issues can be wide-ranging but this training will focus on a
few, particularly those in the development arena. These include:

•        Legislation – e.g. constitution (1995 and 2005 in Uganda) and, other laws
•        Strategy development – e.g. government: PEAP/PRSP which has facilitated the
         formulation of policies since its inception in Uganda in 1997, for development
         partners, CSOs/NGOs
•        Development Planning – e.g. 3 or 5 years development plans for districts
•        Policy development and implementation – fiscal and monetary policies,
         policies in various sectors
•        Policy change and implementation
•        New proposals in different development areas
•        Projects and Programmes:
               -­‐ consulting over community needs/problems - establishing the needs
                      of the communities and/or involving them in decision making
                -­‐   consulting over planning for the community
                -­‐   consulting on performance to improve service delivery by reviewing
                      the project/programme and identifying gaps in the service delivery.
                -­‐   consulting       over    evaluation             of        provision         of
                      services/project/programme
                -­‐   consulting over service change

2.3 Research the Issue under Consideration for Consultation

You do not have to reinvent the wheel.                   Find out and review any available
secondary data regarding the issue for consultation.                          Have community
consultations been done on the same issue in the past that can be drawn upon?
Who did it, where and how can the information be accessed? Remember that no
matter what the issue and no matter how original you think your
idea/proposal/initiative is, there is usually a chance that someone, somewhere
has tried it (or something similar) before.



       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                               Page 3
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
Therefore before you embark on consulting the community review some relevant
literature on the issue – look at some of the concerns and challenges faced in
other areas.          This is likely to provide valuable clues as to what community
opinion is expected, or might give you an insight into the issue itself and how it
has played out in the past. The review of past work in your area of interest may
also be helpful in identifying all the groups/individuals that should be consulted
on the issue(s) as well as having revealed ways for gaining access to them. For
example the consultations for the proposed Uganda GPE project benefited from
the work that the Ireland embassy (DCI) had done in its support to the education
programme and the UNICEF education programme in the Karamoja region.

       2.4 Who to Consult on the Stated Issue

The list of who to involve in the consultations will vary according to the issue(s)
and purpose of the consultation. All those people or groups of people with some
stake (stakeholders) in the decisions to be made, form the population to be
consulted on the issue(s) under consideration. It is crucial at all times to bear in
mind that there are always different groups of people in any given community
who may have different needs, common interests, religions, ethnic origins,
perspectives and races. Consequently, you will need to consider equality and
diversity issues (if any) and where possible, aim to involve all potentially affected
groups and interested parties and ensure there is equal involvement from all the
members of the community in the consultations. This will enable views of those
people/areas most affected by the proposal/issue to be heard; the views of non-
users of the service to be enlisted, especially when service changes are being
consulted on, and above all allow the views of groups frequently excluded or
overlooked to be voiced.             People to be consulted can be grouped in two broad
categories:

         •   Direct stakeholders – those immediately and directly affected by the
             proposal e.g. local people who reside in the project area e.g. men, women,
             children, youth, elderly, community leaders etc and;


         •   Indirect stakeholders - these have an interest which is indirect and less
             immediate e.g. government officers, experts, CSOs, NGOs, development



       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 4
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                  2014

	  
             partners, community activists at different levels – local, national, regional
             and international levels.




               Figure 1: Some of the direct stakeholders (local people) in Kanungu for the GPE project




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                             Page 5
	  
                                   An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                                  2014

	  



Example 1: Stakeholders consulted in consultations on privatisation of urban
                                water services


          The	  GoU	  was	  implementing	  the	  privatisation	  policy	  and	  NWSC	  was	  undergoing	  reforms	  in	  preparation	  for	  
          its	   privatisation.	   	   Policy	   discussions	   around	   the	   privatisation	   of	   water	   had	   excluded	   the	   concerns	   and	  
          analysis	   of	   those	   who	   are	   most	   affected.	   	   CSOs	   in	   Uganda	   were	   not	   generally	   active	   in	   water	   activities	  
          apart	   from	   providing	   alternative	   water	   sources	   in	   rural	   areas	   and	   informal	   settlements	   in	   urban	   areas.	  	  
          However,	  CSOs	  predicted	  the	  likely	  impact	  of	  the	  transfer	  of	  the	  provision	  of	  urban	  water	  services	  from	  
          government	  into	  private	  hands.	  	  And	  they	  had	  also	  seen	  how	  civil	  society	  activism	  in	  the	  water	  sector	  in	  
          Ghana	   had	   stopped	   the	   privatisation	   of	   the	   services.	   	   In	   light	   of	   the	   above,	   a	   coalition	   of	   CSOs	   carried	   out	  
          a	  study	  aimed	  at	  taking	  a	  critical	  analysis	  of	  privatisation	  of	  water	  services	  in	  Uganda	  and;	  assess	  how	  its	  
          privatisation	  would	  impact	  on	  the	  vulnerable	  and	  marginalised	  urban	  poor.	  	  This	  was	  to	  enable	  CSOs	  have	  
          an	  informed	  basis	  upon	  which	  to	  advocate	  for	  keeping	  the	  service	  as	  a	  responsibility	  of	  government.	  	  I	  led	  
          the	   team	   that	   undertook	   the	   consultations	   where	   a	   wide	   range	   of	   players/interest	   groups	   in	   the	   urban	  
          water	  sector	  were	  consulted.	  These	  were:	  	   direct	  stakeholders:	  -­‐	  women	  and	  children	  at	  various	  water	  
          points;	   women	   and	   men	   in	   the	   communities,	   community	   elders,	   LC	   I	   chairpersons,	   owners	   of	   water	  
          points,	   water	   vendors,	   and	   youths	   and;	  indirect	   stakeholders	   (national	   level):-­‐	   government	   officials	   from	  
          the	  Directorate	  of	  Water	  Development	  (DWD),	  Reform	  of	  the	  urban	  water	  sector	  (Water	  Ministry/GTZ),	  
          Privatisation	   Unit,	   NWSC,	   and	   Makerere	   University;	   NGO	   officials	   from	   WaterAid	   Uganda	   and	   UK,	  
          AWEPON,	   SEATIN.	   UWASNET,	   DENIVA,	   NETWAS;	   and	   private	   sector	   officials	   from	   WSS	   services,	   OSUL,	  
          AquaConsult	  and	  an	  independent	  consultant	  (individual)	  in	  the	  sector	  –	   (district	  level):-­‐	  NWSC	  officials,	  
          district	  technical	  officers,	  district	  and	  municipal	  council	  members,	  SNV;	  private	  sector	  –	  BIKA	  and,	  Iruma	  
          and	  Associates,	  public	  stand	  pipe/tap	  dealers.	  




2.5 Reaching Excluded Groups

Many times, for one reason or another, consultations leave out certain segments
of the community either deliberately or unconsciously. These groups are
excluded due to two main reasons: i) they have distinctive characteristics that
make it difficult to reach them and; ii) the inability and unwillingness of some
agencies to seek the involvement of all interested groups in a manner that suits
them. Therefore the failure to reach excluded groups rests not so much with the
groups per se but rather with those undertaking consultations. As indicated
earlier result there is a great need to focus on the issue of diversity and equality in
consultations in order to ensure that all interest groups consulted. Inclusive
consultation gives all people/groups with an interest in the policy/project/issue
an opportunity to be heard but how can this be achieved? This can be attained by
making sufficient effort and in smart ways to involve them through the following:

       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                                             Page 6
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  

a) Have the will and commitment by government and development agencies to
   involve all people including often excluded groups. This includes availing
   resources for consultations. For example the World Bank’s policy on
   Indigenous Peoples (IPs) is a commitment to having excluded groups involved.
   There are several examples of organisations (especially local organisations) in
   a number of countries that lack the will and commitment to embrace this good
   practice in development work. In Malawi for example, a local NGO, which was
   championing the cause of children in the country deliberately had no
   intentions of consulting with its key stakeholders in its activities. The
   organisation was opposed to any form of accountability and transparency.
   This was revealed through the routine monitoring of the programme and the
   funding to the organisation had to be stopped. However, there are also local
   organisations that consider consultations very seriously and take no major
   decision without consulting the people it affects.

b) Establish and identify who the excluded groups are among the potential
   stakeholders spotted - some are clearly defined, whereas others may not.
   These groups/communities could be ethnic minorities, marginalised groups,
   women, children, youth, teenage girls, victims of domestic violence, people
   with impairments, elderly people, refugees, drug users, vulnerable people,
   homeless people, poor people, albinos, and gays/lesbians.

         Albinos are distinct and can be easily identified by their very nature. In
         Tanzania, the albinos are hunted and murdered due to negative perceptions
         and misconceptions to the extent that the government of Tanzania appointed
         a minister for the emancipation of the Albinos. In Uganda, you may identify
         excluded groups through the constitution which provides recognised minority
         ethnic groups.     The local governments (especially the planning, and
         community development departments) are also able to assist in providing
         demographic profiles of the areas or communities under consideration.
         However, data may not be available at a level that allows you to identify some
         of these groups. If this is the case, you may have to talk to intermediary
         community groups/activists, CBOs, and any other local development
         organisation that operate in the area who will be able to provide a different,
         localised perspective on who these groups are within your target community.
         As indicated earlier, a review of past work undertaken in your area of interest
         may also help identify some of these groups.

c) Access them. Once you have identified who these groups are, you need to


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 7
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
         devise ways of accessing them. Consider their potential motivations for
         involvement and where possible address any barriers to their participation in
         order to access often excluded groups. Some of the barriers include: difficult
         areas to access (topography and lack of roads); poverty; physical
         inaccessibility (disability, older or frail people); transport; literacy levels;
         inappropriate language (may require an interpreter); cultural perceptions and
         traditions; social expectations (e.g. children and young people who are often
         not considered as appropriate to be consulted and who themselves often do
         not expect to be taken seriously); poor timing and inaccessible venues. These
         parameters should help in informing the choice of methods to be used for
         consultation.

         The review of past work in your area of interest could have provided ways for
         gaining access to the identified excluded groups. If however, the review does
         not help, you may have to think of creative ways to access these groups. This
         could be via informal networks, social venues, or local organisations who work
         with these groups.


   Then go direct to them, that is, in places where they live or where they spend
   most of their time during the day to get their views and ideas about the issue.
   Where possible have direct access to excluded groups and/or use their
   representatives to make decisions or provide information on their behalf if
   this is what suits the circumstances.
d) Know exactly what you want from them and when this should be sought
e) Devise innovative methods that would enable them participate. Once you are
   able to access excluded groups in your area of interest, it is necessary to take
   measures that will help overcome the barriers that prevented them from
   participating in the first place. Consider how you will ask them to participate
   and provide information in culturally appropriate ways where relevant.
   Diversify consultation methods beyond the traditional/conventional
   techniques to suit their needs so that their voices can be heard. This may
   involve using interpreters, using visual aids, adapting facilities for disabled
   people etc. It is important to note that indigenous cultural traditions are based
   on verbal and informal approaches of information sharing. You should also try
   to be flexible over the timing and location and; endeavour to use a neutral
   venue in their own community. This would enable them to express their
   views freely. For example, it would not be appropriate to use a police station to
   explore issues around juvenile offenders! This will provide them with an
   opportunity to express their views freely and have them considered.


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 8
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects           2014

	  

f) Monitor the progress of the implementation project/policy to ensure that
   excluded groups are taking part in the project and are using the services as
   required. It is only when they involved and benefit from the project that the
   consultations will be considered successful – there should be a reasonable
   uptake of the project by the excluded groups for you to know that the efforts
   were worthwhile.

The above step by step endeavour would enable groups or communities who often
experience social exclusion and disempowerment; communities that are
generally perceived by agencies as being by their nature difficult to access, to be
reached.




         Figure 2:    Primary school children of the Batwa reached during the consultations for GPE project




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                       Page 9
	  
                                An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                            2014

	  



Example 2: Reaching the Ik and Batwa (excluded) groups, under the proposed
                              Uganda GPE project of the MoES




           Last	   year,	   the	   MoES	   undertook	   a	   social	   assessment	   in	   two	   regions	   of	   Uganda	   where	   Indigenous	   Peoples	  
           (IPs)	   reside	   –	   that	   is	   the	   Ik	   in	   the	   Karamoja	   and	   the	   Batwa	   in	   the	   Rwenzori	   regions.	   The	   consultations	  
           were	  part	  of	  a	  process	  that	  led	  to	  the	  development	  and	  approval	  of	  the	  project	  entitled:	  “The	  Uganda	  
           Global	   Partnership	   for	   Education”	   (GPE),	   a	   proposed	   GoU	   project	   supported	   by	   the	   GPE	   fund	   and	  
           supervised	   by	   the	   World	   Bank.	   	   The	   project	   will	   be	   implemented	   in	   priority	   public	   primary	   schools	  
           selected	   based	   on	   the	   BRMS	   and;	   related	   institutions,	   particularly	   the	   PTCs.	   	   The	   overall	   aim	   of	   the	  
           consultation	   was	   to	   determine	   the	   relevance	   of	   specific	   approaches	   designed	   in	   the	   GPE	   project	   and	  
           how	   these	   would	   potentially	   affect	   the	   two	   indigenous	   communities.	   The	   Ik	   and	   Batwa	   are	   clearly	  
           defined	   in	   the	   Ugandan	   constitution	   and	   were	   thus	   easily	   identifiable.	   	   They	   are	   largely	   vulnerable,	  
           marginalised	   and	   often	   excluded	   from	   development	   projects.	   	   According	   to	   WB’s	   policy	   on	   IPs,	   such	  
           groups	   must	   get	   involved	   in	   all	   its	   supported	   projects/programmes	   so	   that	   they	   too	   can	   benefit.	  	  
           Researching	  on	  the	  issue	  and	  the	  two	  groups	  as	  well	  as	  interviewing	  knowledgeable	  officers	  from	  WB,	  
           MoES	  and	  national	  NGOs	  that	  work	  in	  the	  communities	  provided	  some	  useful	  clues	  about	  these	  groups.	  	  	  

           I	   then	   made	   contacts	   with	   the	   district	   education	   offices	   and	   sent	   a	   tentative	   schedule	   for	   the	  
           consultations	   before	   travelling	   there.	   On	   arrival	   at	   the	   districts,	   selection	   of	   the	   actual	  
           communities/schools	  for	  the	  consultations	  was	  done	  and	  a	  final	  schedule	  agreed	  on.	  The	  first	  days	  were	  
           spent	   consulting	   with	   district	   level	   target	   groups	   which	   provided	   relevant	   information	   and	   was	   useful	   in	  
           refining	  consultation	  instruments	  that	  were	  used	  to	  consult	  with	  the	  two	  communities.	  The	  initial	  days	  
           were	   also	   used	   to	   go	   direct	   to	   these	   communities,	   informally	   talk	   to	   a	   few	   key	   people	   about	   the	  
           consultations,	  build	  relationships	  as	  well	  as	  plan	  and	  mobilise	  for	  the	  actual	  consultations.	   I	  also	  had	  to	  
           go	   direct	   to	   the	   communities	   to	   inform	   them	   about	   the	   consultations	   as	   the	   DEO	   had	   failed	   to	   reach	  
           them	  within	  the	  available	  time	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  transport	  and	  a	  poor	  telephone	  network.	  	  	  

           The	  methods	  used	  were	  interactive	  and	  provided	  qualitative	  data.	  	  Key	  informant	  interviews	  were	  held	  
           with	   head	   teachers	   of	   selected	   schools	   and	   community	   leaders.	   	   Additional	   secondary	   data,	   mainly	  
           statistics	  was	  obtained	  from	  the	  HT’s	  office.	  	  Separate	  FGDs	  were	  conducted	  with	  teachers,	  SMCs	  of	  the	  
           selected	  schools	  and	  school	  children.	  Open	  public/community	  meetings	  were	  held	  with	  a	  cross	  section	  
           of	  community	  members	  including	  parents,	  local	  people	  resident	  in	  the	  area	  (women	  and	  men),	  church	  
           leaders,	   local	   leaders	   and	   any	   other	   interested	   member	   of	   the	   community.	   	   At	   the	   end	   of	   the	  
           community	   meeting	   with	   one	   of	   the	   excluded	   groups,	   people	   expressed	   their	   appreciation:	   “we	   are	  
           grateful	  that	  for	  the	  first	  time	  government	  has	  consulted	  us	  and	  we	  are	  ready	  to	  work	  together”.	  The	  
           same	   sentiments	   were	   expressed	   in	   the	   second	   community:	   “we	   thought	   that	   government	   had	  
           forgotten	  about	  us	  totally”.	  	  

           Upon	  reporting	  the	  results	  of	  the	  consultations	  to	  relevant	  authorities	  in	  the	  MoES	  and	  WB,	  follow-­‐up	  
           consultations	  were	  conducted	  with	  the	  IPs	  to	  prepare	  an	  Indigenous	  Peoples	  Planning	  Framework	  (IPPF)	  
           which	  will	  guide	  the	  involvement	  of	  the	  IPs	  in	  the	  implementation	  of	  the	  GPE	  project.	  	  It	  now	  remains	  to	  
           be	  seen	  if	  the	  groups	  will	  participate	  in	  project	  implementation	  by	  taking	  more	  children	  to	  school	  and	  
           keeping	  them	  there	  until	  they	  complete	  primary	  level	  education.	  




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                                   Page 10
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  




2.6 Approach and Methods of Consultations

2.6.1 Approach: The approach to be taken for consultations should be
systematic and well coordinated to allow effective consultations to take place.
Generally, processes that generate high rather than low participation are
recommended. Therefore the approach to be used should aim to maximise
involvement and access to decisions within the constraints of time, money and
other resources. The process of consultation requires a series of decision
procedures including:

         ! Determine who will be responsible for the consultation;
         ! Identify the issue, policy or project about which consultation is to occur;
         ! Identify the stakeholders – may be done through asking key informants
             and interviewing known stakeholders;
         ! Decide how often you will consult with the various stakeholders/ interest
           groups/interested parties;
         ! Determine the resources that will be required to undertake the
             consultation;
         ! Prepare a consultation plan which should include a time framework;
         ! Consider all methods of consultation: meetings, surveys, key informant
             interviews, focus groups etc. and decide on appropriate ones;
         ! Make contacts with stakeholders and any other interest groups e.g. through
           media where relevant;
         ! Establish relationships with stakeholders by telephone, email or better by
             visiting them;
         ! Take advantage of community activists or members who have been
             involved in managing a consultative process or community mobilisation
           project before to give valuable advice;
         ! Have a genuine desire to learn from the process so that you can address
             any concerns, take into account any constructive suggestions and improve
             any weaknesses in your argument, plan or position.



       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 11
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
         ! Provide all the relevant information so that they make contributions from
             an informed view point;
         ! Conduct the consultations;
         ! Disseminate the results of the consultations;
         ! Ensure there is a follow up after any consultation and that those who
           participate know where to access final results/findings and;
         ! Evaluate the consultation activity




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 12
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  



2.6.2 Consultation Methods: The choice of methods will depend on the
issue(s) involved, the target groups/community in question, levels of literacy,
cultural appropriateness, resources available and the stage at which the project
is. It is essential to employ a combination of consultation methods, formal and
informal, that encourage different members of a community to participate in
ways that suit them to provide relevant information. The use of mixed methods
increases the likelihood of engaging a diversity of people, from powerful
influencers to people who are impacted and affected but have traditionally been
excluded from consultations e.g. marginalised and vulnerable groups.

Therefore, if consultation is to be effective, traditional methods must be
augmented and triangulated with some more participatory methods. Once the
aims and objectives of the consultation exercise have been agreed and other
contextual issues have been considered, you must identify the methods that are
most suitable for your needs in order to achieve successful results.

There is a wide spectrum of consultation methods or techniques from which to
select those that are suitable for your purpose. All consultation methods have
advantages and disadvantages and it is upon you to come up with the right
combination which will increase the benefits while minimising the limitations
within the context of the consultations. Therefore when selecting appropriate
methods for consultation, you need to ask yourself the following questions:

a) What is the nature of the issue/project?
b) What resources are available and how much time is needed for this purpose?
c) What type of information is required and from whom? Quantitative, qualitative
   or both?
d) How can you enable everyone to participate or will there be any groups unable
   to respond using a combination of the methods selected?
e) What training and skills are available/will be required to conduct the
   consultations and analyse the data?
f) How much involvement and participation do you require?
g) What are the requirements of specific groups e.g. language
h) What is the likely impact of the project on that community?


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 13
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
The above factors will determine how widely you consult, who you will consult,
why you need to consult, the timeframe in which you wish to consult and the
form the consultations will take. Consequently the consultation process can
range from a single and simple meeting with relevant stakeholders to more
complex process to a long-term on-going consultative process involving more
time and resources. The heterogeneous nature of communities and projects
demands that the methods of community consultation must be context specific.
Therefore careful understanding of particular contexts is central to successful
community consultation.

Methods of community consultation include the following:

1. Interview – Is the most common method and comes in different forms ranging
from structured, semi-structured to unstructured interviews.                     Interviews are
conducted with individuals and/or small groups, both in person and over the
phone to provide in-depth and useful information while giving individuals
maximum opportunity to have their say. These are most effective when teamed
with other techniques. For consistency, be sure to use a standard set of questions
when interviewing.

         1.1 One-on-one interviews – these are conducted with one individual at a time
         either face to face or via telephone to provide important qualitative
         information at a level of detail that is difficult to obtain by any other method.
         It may not be feasible to interview everyone in the community but a
         representative sample with a cross-section of people could be interviewed.
         The aim of in-depth interviews is to understand perceptions and attitudes
         underlying a problem or practice in a target group and to gather ideas and
         information. They include key informant interviews.


         1.2 Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) – this is a way of collecting information
         from a small group (6-12 people) of identified stakeholders selected either
         randomly or purposively to deliberate on the issue under consultation. The
         size of FGDs is debatable but as a general rule, it should be large enough to
         generate discussion and small enough to maintain adequate control over the
         agenda.    Often, the group comprises of people with common attributes or
         interests but the mix of people will depend on the purpose of the consultation.
         FGDs are usually small meetings that tend to involve open-ended questions
       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 14
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
         with a limited number of issues deliberated upon. It is a way of getting a
         cross-section of views from people who would not usually contribute to a
         consultation in a big public/community meeting. FGDs involve setting up
         collective discussions guided by a skilled facilitator. They are an effective
         means of providing information and explanation, exploring issues around
         proposals and gathering the views of those involved. It is a popular form of
         consultation which is flexible in that each FGD can be changed to suit the
         needs of its participants e.g. adapting the content and level at which
         information is pitched to suit the participants.

2. Surveys – these are very good if you want to make generalisations although
they may not give the complete picture. They involve posing a standard set of
open and/or closed questions to a range of people. They are popular for collecting
mainly quantitative but also qualitative information from a population at a certain
point in time. They can be conducted through face-to-face interviews, self-
administered (questionnaire), through telephone or electronically via the internet
or email.

3. Meetings – meetings of all kinds bring together interest groups to share
information, discuss ideas, hear differing perspectives, build consensus, resolve
issues and/or clarify points of disagreement.                 Meetings can be small or big
depending on the purpose.               Different parties will need to meet for different
reasons. These include:

         3.1 Open public/community meetings – these allow interested members of the
         public to get information about and express their views on a particular issue.
         They provide a two-way means of communication and facilitate interactive
         discussion. They are used to inform the public or community about an
         intention and get views on the subject.

4. Workshops – these are more structured formal activities which combine
dialogue and information giving with a limited number of community issues
discussed

5. Working groups or advisory committees – these involve a cross section of
affected people and/or organisations. They allow on-going exchange of
information between stakeholders and the policy/project proponent. A balance of


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 15
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
interests promotes broad thinking and creative solutions. This method is most
effective for more complex projects/issues.

6. Discussion Papers – these are tentative government reports and consultation
documents of policy proposals for debate and discussion, without any
commitment to action. They contain government policy proposals/issues which
are considered in working groups for the purpose of creating discussion within
the group.

7. Web-based consultation methods –                      Information     and    Communication
Technologies (ICT) have opened up innovative channels for people to participate
in the processes of government policy development, programmes/projects and
service planning and implementation. This is a tool which should be considered
in combination with other consultative methods as it may exclude people with no
access, are illiterate, or lack computer skills. It is also very useful when the
consultations go beyond national boundaries. Web-based methods include:

             7.1 Internet surveys are used to gain information from the public on a single
             issue or to gauge public opinion on a number of topics.               It can be an
             effective way for users of the internet to submit their ideas and opinions
             directly to government and development agencies. For example, FK
             Norway programme in Africa frequently used this method to obtain
             information from its participants (users of the service) across various
             countries to gauge their satisfaction of the programme and how it impacted
             on their careers.

             7.2 Interactive websites can be used to support consultation by encouraging
             technology based participation including surveys mentioned above, polls,
             online discussions and email feedback. Email feedback can be an easy way
             to obtain ideas from the public on an issue or a range of issues. It is quicker
             than most forms of consultation and may be attractive to those with little
             time. FK Norway programme used this method in consultations for its M&E
             activities in the different countries.

             Consultations come in different forms. `One size does not fit all’. A creative
             approach and a selection of the most appropriate methods will enable you
             to engage discussion, resolve differences and solicit feedback. One of your


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 16
	  
                               An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                   2014

	  
                  most valuable tools will likely be meetings with the various players. Try to
                  make the methods fit the subject, audience and scope of the issue.
                  Effective community consultation typically incorporates two or more
                  complementary methods.



Example 3: Methods used in various consultations on different projects


           Privatisation	  of	  urban	  water	  services:	  The	  study	  on	  the	  privatisation	  of	  urban	  water	  services	  in	  Uganda	  
           employed	   a	   combination	   of	   interactive	   consultation	   methods	   to	   get	   the	   required	   data	   for	   the	  
           assessment.	  	  The	  methods	  included:	  Key	  informant	  interviews	  (KIs	  –	  one-­‐on-­‐one	  as	  well	  as	  face-­‐to-­‐face)	  
           at	   national	   and	   district	   levels	   with	   high	   level	   officials	   from	   government	   and	   development	   agencies	  
           identified;	   KIs	   with	   community	   leaders,	   members	   and	   elders;	   FGDs	   with	   women,	   men,	   and	   children;	  
           informal	   meetings	   and	   interviews	   at	   the	   water	   sources,	   transect	   walks	   with	   some	   community	   members	  
           and	  observations	  at	  water	  points.	  	  These	  were	  all	  qualitative	  consultation	  methods.	  
           	  
           Proposed	   Uganda	   GPE	   Project:	   The	   methods	   used	   were	   all	   qualitative	   in	   nature	   such	   as:	   open	  
           community	  meetings	  with	  local	  communities	  of	  the	  Ik	  and	  Batwa;	  KIs,	  FGDs	  and	  observations	  
           	  
           Kindernothilf	   (KNH)	   Community	   Based	   Training	   (CBT)	   Programme:	   Consultations	   were	   conducted	   in	  
           the	  last	  quarter	  of	  2013	  to	  assess	  the	  relevance,	  effectiveness,	  efficiency,	  outcomes	  and	  sustainability	  
           of	  KNH	  supported	  CBT	  programme	  in	  Uganda.	  	  KNH	  supports	  CBT	  projects	  implemented	  by	  Vocational	  
           Training	   Centres	   at	   four	   sites	   in	   Uganda.	   	   The	   programme	   seeks	   to	   provide	   opportunities	   for	  vulnerable	  
           and	   poor	  youth	  to	  access	  skills	  training	  earn	  more	  on	  a	  sustainable	  basis	  and	  improve	  their	  incomes	  for	  
           a	   better	   livelihood.	   	   The	   methods	   used	   for	   the	   consultations	   provided	   both	   qualitative	   and	   quantitative	  
           information.	   	   These	   were:	   trainee	   survey	   (with	   separate	   questionnaires	   for	   current	   and	   ex-­‐trainees),	  
           KIs,	  FGDs,	  observations	  and	  some	  PRA	  exercises	  (timelines,	  wealth	  ranking,	  and	  mapping)	  
           	  




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                         Page 17
	  
                                An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                              2014

	  



2.7 Appropriate locations for conducting consultations

The appropriate location for conducting consultations depends on the
circumstances of the target group and context of the consultations. In general, a
suitable venue should be comfortable, safe, familiar to the participants, accessible
to a wide range of individuals and should be a place where people are confident in
expressing their views freely. An accessible venue can make it easier to attract
people to participate. Try to take the consultation to the target groups rather than
making them come to you. Use a variety of community venues for meetings with
local communities and ensure they are accessible to all interest groups including
people with disabilities. For example people with little experience with venues
such as conference centres may feel uncomfortable with them.

Example 4: Venues used for Consultations for the GPE project


         Community	   consultations	   for	   the	   GPE	   project	   took	   place	   at	   the	   selected	   primary	   school	   premises,	  
         under	   trees	   or	   in	   church.	   Although	   this	   was	   a	   bit	   of	   a	   disruption	   to	   school	   activities,	   it	   was	   the	  
         community’s	   preference	   and	   seemed	   to	   be	   the	   most	   appropriate	   venue	   for	   the	   consultations.	  	  
         Communities	  that	  have	  community	  halls	  or	  meeting	  places	  will	  always	  prefer	  meeting	  in	  these	  places	  
         e.g.	  under	  a	  big	  tree.	  

         Experience	  has	  shown	  that	  community	  people	  prefer	  to	  meet	  near	  or	  at	  the	  issue/project	  of	  discussion	  
         where	  relevant	  e.g.	  at	  water	  sources,	  health	  centres	  and	  schools.	  

         	  




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                    Page 18
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects      2014

	  




        Figure 3:     A Community meeting with community members in Kanungu in a church at one of the
                                          selected schools (GPE)


2.8 Appropriate timing/schedule for conducting consultations

The timing of any consultation should be considered at two angles: timing in the
policy process (formulation to implementation) or project cycle (project
development to completion); and timing for the actual consultation events or
activities.

The appropriate timing for consultations in the policy process and project cycle
depends on the purpose of the consultations or the stage of the policy process or
project cycle. As a general rule however, consultations should be timed well to
allow the results to influence policy/proposal development and improve
implementation. People are less likely to take the consultations seriously if they
feel that decisions have already been made and that their involvement is of minor
importance or a mere rubber stamp. Community consultations must therefore
take place early enough in the decision-making process during project
development and approval (i.e. during scoping or identification of the issues) to
ensure that its outcomes are considered prior to the decisions being made.
Important to note is that the earlier the involvement of the communities in the
consultation process, the better the outcome.

Depending on the purpose, consultations during project implementation may be
continuous (M&E), mid-way (effectiveness) or towards the end of the project
(outcomes/impact). It is worthwhile to note that many times far too little time is
       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                Page 19
	  
                                An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                2014

	  
allowed for effective consultations, and yet they often take much longer than
usually expected. Timing is thus a key factor in consultations and enough time
should be planned as tight deadlines to have the community consulted may affect
the quality of community involvement and ultimately the outcomes.

On the other hand, timing for consultation activities should consider how it may
affect the availability of local people or target groups. Avoid religious events or
festivals, school hours, lunch times, rainy season, peak of agricultural activities,
drought/hunger periods, market days, and national campaigns/election periods.
Therefore caution should be taken to ensure that the day/period chosen does not
coincide with a major event for a particular community. Allow some flexibility in
the timing to cater for unforeseen eventualities. In Ethiopia, days close to the
Epiphany holiday should be avoided and the month of Ramadan in Zanzibar,
Tanzania.

Example 5: Good timing of consultations in policy implementation and project
design


        The	   study	   on	   water	   privatisation	   was	   timed	   well	   before	   the	   policy	   could	   be	   implemented	   on	   NWSC	   and	  
        it	   was	   saved	   from	   getting	   into	   private	   hands.	   	   This	   is	   a	   good	   example	   of	   appropriate	   timing	   in	   policy	  
        implementation.	   	   The	   timing	   for	   the	   consultations	   for	   the	   proposed	   Uganda	   GPE	   project	   was	   also	  
        suitable	  as	  it	  enabled	  the	  results	  of	  the	  consultations	  to	  be	  incorporated	  into	  the	  GPE	  project	  design,	  
        thus	  improving	  its	  development.	  


Example 6: Poor timing of consultation events in reviewing BAP


          I	  was	  involved	  in	  consultations	  to	  review	   Bundibugyo	  Actionaid	  Programme	  (BAP)	  in	  Bundibugyo	  district	  
          but	  were	  interrupted	  and	  shortened	  due	  to	  poor	  timing.	  It	  was	  unwise	  to	  undertake	  the	  consultations	  
          during	   the	   rainy	   season	   in	   a	   mountainous	   area	   that	   is	   prone	   to	   land	   and	   mud	   slides.	   Heavy	   rains	  
          suddenly	   arrived	   and	   swept	   away	   all	   the	   huts/tents	   of	   the	   community	   (IDP	   camps)	   in	   which	   the	  
          consultations	   were	   taking	   place,	   killing	   17	   people	   and	   leaving	   the	   rest	   further	   displaced	   with	   no	  
          shelters.	  	  The	  organisation	  together	  with	  other	  NGOs	  in	  the	  district	  had	  to	  now	  focus	  on	  addressing	  
          the	  emergency	  situation.	  	  We	  got	  stranded	  close	  to	  4	  hours	  as	  the	  car	  could	  not	  cross	  a	  fast	  running	  
          seasonal	   river	   which	   had	   been	   created	   with	   the	   heavy	   rains	   until	   a	   time	   when	   drove	   through	   with	   our	  
          Actionaid	  strong	  car.	  	  Other	  road	  users	  were	  not	  so	  lucky	  due	  to	  their	  not	  so	  strong	  vehicles	  that	  could	  
          not	  cross	  through	  the	  heavy	  mud	  left	  behind	  by	  the	  river.	  	  They	  had	  to	  spend	  the	  night	  on	  the	  road!	  	  
          This	  was	  before	  the	  road	  from	  Fort	  Portal	  to	  Bundibugyo	  was	  tarmacked.	  

          	  


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                      Page 20
	  
                       An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects           2014

	  



Sometimes it might be the right timing in the policy process or project cycle to
conduct consultations but unsuitable for implementing the consultation activity
making it difficult to strike a balance.




         Figure 4: A Community Meeting with the Ik (GPE) at a time when the district was experiencing famine




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                       Page 21
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  



2.9 Analysis, Documentation and Dissemination of Consultation
Results

2.9.1 Analysis

On completion of the consultations, you will have to embark on data processing
and analysis. You should know how you are going to do this from the outset.
Data analysis can be a complex process that requires expertise in research
methodology and statistical analysis. Quantitative data is simpler to analyse
once one is skilled at statistical procedures (e.g. SPSS and Excel) but should
ensure that appropriate software is used, if the results are to be meaningful and
accurate. Qualitative data (from semi-structured and unstructured interviews) on
the other hand is ‘richer’ but more difficult to analyse as there are no standard
analytical procedures that one can follow. There are some computer aided
qualitative data analysis softwares such as Atlas ti. but these are not
standardised.           One should take precaution when interpreting findings and
drawing conclusions to remain as objective as possible.                     Interpretations and
conclusions should be evidence-based so that you are able to justify any
conclusions in case you come under scrutiny from key stakeholders.

2.9.2 Documenting and disseminating your results

Following analysis, you will have to report your consultation results.
Documentation            and     dissemination      are   important     aspects     of    effective
consultations. Reporting serves 3 main purposes: i) informing managers and
decision makers of your findings and recommendations in terms of project,
policy, and strategy development; ii) as a mechanism of providing feedback and;
iii) as a mechanism of sharing your findings and experiences with partner
agencies. It is therefore vital that documentation is undertaken and feedback
given to the participants of the consultation. Participants will want to know the
outcomes of the consultation process and the reasons for the decisions that are
made, particularly if they are different or contradictory to the ideas expressed
during the consultations.




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                             Page 22
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
In spite of the importance of providing feedback to participants, it is often ignored
by many agencies. You have a duty to tell those involved what conclusions have
been made and what you plan to do with the information.                             Feedback is
particularly necessary when the outcomes are relatively `invisible’, for example
where strategies or policies have been developed, but there are no immediate
tangible outputs. Telling people about how the information they provided will be
or is being used shows people that their involvement is worthwhile and counts,
thus helping to avoid apathy and a `why bother’ attitude. In turn this encourages
future involvement.

Plan for Feedback activity: reporting back is mechanism of engagement that
requires the same planning process as the original exercise. When planning the
feedback process, it is necessary to consider the most appropriate mechanism.
Participants should be told from the outset how and when they should expect to
receive feedback.

Ways of Documentation: In light of the above you will need to document and
present your findings in a variety of ways.

•        A formal, in-depth report is usually written specifically for your
         organisation/commissioning agency. It is the most complex report, and
         should include a detailed analysis and descriptive statistics if applicable,
         together with key recommendations. A summary report that can be accessed
         by participants, the public and partner organisations may be written if
         necessary. However, feedback does not always have to be in form of a report.
         There are a wide variety of dissemination methods and, it is important to
         select the right one(s) to get your message across to the target audience and
         achieve your purpose. These include:
•        Posters
•        Leaflets and booklets
•        Newsletters
•        Flyers
•        Journal articles
•        Websites
•        Workshops or online discussion lists
•        Media - newspapers, radio, television, Press releases
•        Direct mailing

       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                            Page 23
	  
                               An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                  2014

	  
•        Public/community meetings
•        Presentations - are a useful way of communicating consultation findings to
         sections of the community that would not normally be reached by other
         methods, particularly if the presentations are entertaining and in their
         language.

Example 7:                                 How the results of Consultations for the proposed Uganda GPE
                             project were documented and disseminated


          The	   information	   from	   the	   consultations	   for	   the	   GPE	   project	   were	   categorised	   and	   analysed	  
          manually	   according	   to	   various	   themes	   that	   emerged	   from	   the	   exercises	   and	   a	   formal	   detailed	  
          report	  including	  an	  executive	  summary	  was	  written.	  	  Since	  the	  consultation	  results	  revealed	  the	  
          presence	   of	   IPs	   in	   the	   proposed	   Uganda	   GPE	   project	   areas,	   the	   implementation	   of	   the	   project	  
          will	  trigger	  Operational	  Policy	  (OP)	  4.10:	  Indigenous	  Peoples.	  This	  called	  for	  the	  preparation	  of	  an	  
          Indigenous	   Peoples	   Planning	   Framework	   (IPPF)	   that	   would	   guide	   their	   inclusion	   in	   the	   project	  
          and	  ensure	  that	  they	  benefit	  from	  the	  project	  to	  the	  greatest	  extent	  possible.	  	  As	  a	  result,	  further	  
          consultations	   were	   carried	   out	   with	   the	   IPs	   and	   a	   plan	   was	   prepared	   together.	   	   It	   was	   during	   the	  
          follow	  up	  consultations	  that	  results	  of	  the	  first	  consultations	  were	  reported	  to	  them	  through	  a	  
          presentation.	  



2.10 Integration of consultation results in project design and
implementation

One of the most important reasons for conducting consultations is to improve
policy and practice; project design and implementation and; to increase project
ownership and sustainability. But how do you ensure that the outcomes of
consultations inform and improve those processes? As mentioned earlier, it is
important to be clear from the outset about what you want to get from the
consultations and how the information will be used.

Bear in mind that however good your initial idea, the consultation process might
end up changing your proposal or improving it in some way to take in the
suggestions and to provide the ability for wider community ownership over the
concept. Alternatively it might remain the same but refinements will be made in
the implementation phase, which arise out of the consultation process. Examples
8 and 9 below show how consultation results were used in improving project
design and implementation.



       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                      Page 24
	  
                                 An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                               2014

	  
Example 8: Incorporating results of consultations in the proposed Uganda GPE
                              project’s design and implementation



           The	   proposed	   Uganda	   GPE	   project	   improved	   its	   design	   by	   paying	   particular	   attention	   to	   some	   of	   the	  
           recommendations	   of	   the	   social	   assessment	   and	   issues	   raised	   during	   the	   consultations	   with	   the	   Ik	   in	  
           Kaabong	   and	   Batwa	   in	   Kanungu	   districts.	   	   The	   MoES	   decided	   that	   it	   would	   overlook	   the	   selection	  
           criteria	  of	  the	  schools	  to	  benefit	  from	  the	  project	  for	  the	  two	  excluded	  groups	  as	  a	  way	  of	  ensuring	  that	  
           they	   benefit	   from	   the	   project.	   	   This	   would	   ensure	   that	   at	   least	   one	   school	   in	   the	   excluded	   groups’	  
           communities	   would	   benefit	   from	   the	   project.	   	   Both	   ethnic	   groups	   raised	   issues	   to	   do	   with	   the	   `new’	  
           thematic	  curriculum	  being	  implemented	  in	  Uganda.	  	  The	  thematic	  curriculum	  requires	  that	  learners	  in	  
           the	  lower	  classes	  from	  Primary	  1	  to	  Primary	  3	  be	  taught	  in	  the	  language	  commonly	  used	  by	  the	  majority	  
           of	   people	   in	   a	   given	   community	   and;	   Primary	   4	   is	   a	   transition	   class	   in	   which	   the	   language	   of	   instruction	  
           is	   gradually	   switched	   from	   the	   local	   language	   to	   English,	   after	   which	   it	   would	   be	   the	   only	   instruction	  
           language	   up	   to	   Primary	   7.	   	   However,	   one	   of	   the	   communities	   (the	   Batwa)	   expressed	   strongly	   their	  
           dislike	   for	   the	   thematic	   curriculum	   and	   called	   upon	   government	   to	   stop	   it	   in	   their	   schools	   as	   they	  
           preferred	  only	  English	  as	  the	  language	  of	  instruction.	  The	  reason	  for	  this	  was	  that	  they	  (Batwa)	  were	  
           least	   educated	   in	   the	   area	   and	   wanted	   their	   children	   to	   speak	   good	   English	   so	   that	   they	   could	   teach	  
           their	  parents	  and	  in	  turn	  be	  recognised	  in	  their	  larger	  community.	  	  The	  second	  ethnic	  minority	  group	  
           (the	   Ik)	   on	   the	   other	   hand	   requested	   that	   the	   thematic	   curriculum	   be	   implemented	   in	   their	   language	  
           instead	  of	  the	  dominant	  local	  language	  in	  their	  district.	  This	  was	  because	  they	  wanted	  to	  be	  identified	  
           as	   the	   Ik	   by	   recognising	   their	   language	   instead	   of	   teaching	   their	   children	   in	   Karimojong,	   some	   of	   whom	  
           do	  not	  understand	  it	  well.	  	  This	  is	  not	  possible	  at	  the	  moment	  due	  to	  a	  lack	  of	  orthography	  and	  teachers	  
           to	   teach	   in	   the	   language.	   	   These	   are	   recognition	   and	   identity	   issues	   that	   were	   of	   great	   concern	   to	   these	  
           communities	   but	   will	   not	   be	   addressed	   by	   the	   GPE	   project	   the	   way	   they	   would	   want.	   	   Instead,	   MoES	  
           will	  emphasise	  the	  above	  issues	  in	  its	  community	  mobilisation	  and	  sensitisation	  on	  the	  importance	  of	  
           education	   during	   project	   implementation.	   	   They	   will	   also	   be	   sensitised	   on	   the	   importance	   of	   the	  
           thematic	  curriculum	  and	  why	  it	  is	  not	  possible	  at	  the	  moment	  to	  have	  it	  implemented	  in	  all	  languages.	  

           	  




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                                      Page 25
	  
                             An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                             2014

	  



Example 9: Incorporating results of consultations in the FK Norway South to
                           South (S-S) project design and implementation and the eventual
                           success of the Programme


           FK	  Norway	  is	  a	  programme	  of	  the	  Norwegian	  government	  under	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Foreign	  Affairs	  that	  
           facilitates	   the	   mutual	   exchange	   of	   personnel	   between	   organisations	   and	   businesses	   in	   Norway	   and	  
           Africa,	  Asia	  and	  Latin	  America.	  	  It	  is	  a	  capacity	  building	  programme	  that	  aims	  to	  make	  the	  world	  a	  
           smaller	   and	   better	   place	   through	   an	   exchange	   of	   knowledge	   and	   skills.	   	   FK	   Norway	   S-­‐S	   exchange	  
           programme	   in	   Africa	   which	   effectively	   started	   in	   2002	   undertook	   continuous	   consultations	  
           throughout	   project	   implementation	   while	   performing	   the	   programme’s	   M&E	   function	   in	   the	  
           region.	   	   The	   results	   of	   constant	   consultations	   with	   stakeholders	   during	   project	   implementation	  
           greatly	   improved	   the	   design	   and	   implementation	   of	   the	   programme	   over	   the	   years.	   This	   was	   in	   the	  
           following	  ways:	  The	  programme	  made	  particular	  consideration	  to	  the	  provision	  of	  one	  home	  visit	  
           during	   the	   exchange	   to	   participants	   who	   had	   own	   biological	   children;	   it	   flexed	   the	   age	   limit	   for	  
           female	  participants	  to	  encourage	  more	  women	  to	  participate	  in	  the	  programme,	  provided	  a	  fund	  
           that	  was	  used	  by	  the	  host	  organisation	  to	  improve	  its	  logistical	  situation	  especially	  computers	  and	  
           office	   furniture	   to	   serve	   the	   extra	   staff	   (exchange	   participant)	   and;	   created	   a	   fund	   that	   was	   utilised	  
           by	  the	  sending	  organisation	  on	  homecoming	  activities	  once	  the	  participants	  returned	  to	  their	  home	  
           organisations.	   	   These	   greatly	   improved	   the	   effectiveness	   and	   outcomes	   of	   the	   programme.	   	   An	  
           evaluation	  carried	  out	  in	  2006	  for	  the	  entire	  FK	  Norway	  programme	  concluded	  that	  generally	  the	  
           South	   –	   South	   partnerships	   were	   very	   successful	   with	   regard	   to	   capacity	   building	   and	   two	   of	   the	  
           reasons	   for	   this	   was	   that	   the	   monitoring	   of	   the	   programme	   was	   very	   professional	   and	   effective	  
           and;	  that	  the	  exchanges	  were	  often	  based	  on	  a	  participatory	  capacity	  needs	  assessment.	  




2.11 Challenges and Successful examples

2.11.1 Challenges

While community consultation can be an interesting and rewarding venture
when effectively conducted, it can also be challenging and there are no simple
solutions for success. Communities are complex and dynamic and can react in
various ways to efforts to consult with them. As a result, there is no assurance
that what works in one context can be replicated in another, or that following
‘good practice’ in consultations will always deliver the desired outcomes. Having
said this, my experience with consultation is that the activity has always been
welcomed by the target communities occasionally marked with a few isolated

       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                Page 26
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
challenges. These could be grouped into two categories: challenges emanating
from the community and; those that are a result of issues on the side of the
consulting agency/individuals.




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                            Page 27
	  
                                      An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                                  2014

	  



a) Challenges as a result of mainly `Consultees’

Managing dominant participants/ Saboteurs: In any community there are some
people in the target group who will always want to dominate meetings either
unconsciously or intended. It takes good facilitation skills to manage such people
and allow others to contribute. Another type is the saboteur – individuals or
agencies that may be against the consultations and work towards failing the
activity or may want to take the consultations in their direction. If such people
are left unmanaged, the results of the consultations would be skewed or
unrepresentative of the views of the community.

Example 10: How                                     to         manage                    dominant                       participants                        and             saboteurs                      in
consultations


       In	  two	  separate	  consultation	  meetings	  with	  the	  Ik	  in	  Kaabong	  district	  for	  the	  Uganda	  GPE	  project,	  a	  lady	  and	  
       gentleman	   wanted	   to	   dominate	   the	   discussions	   but	   were	   politely	   asked	   to	   make	   their	   submissions	   when	  
       their	  turn	  came	  and	  give	  chance	  to	  others	  so	  that	  every	  participant	  present	  in	  the	  meeting	  could	  be	  heard.	  	  
       It	  always	  works.	  
       	  
       Another	   example	   was	   a	   local	   NGO	   in	   Uganda	   that	   was	   contracted	   by	   the	   EU	   HRGGP	   to	   undertake	  
       nationwide	  sensitisation	  of	  citizens	  on	  the	  1995	  Uganda	  constitution	  and	  its	  review.	  	  This	  was	  to	  enable	  the	  
       people	   of	   Uganda	   to	   make	   informed	   contributions	   to	   the	   constitutional	   review	   process	   that	   was	   taking	  
       place	   in	   the	   early	   2000s.	   	   It	   turned	   out	   that	   the	   NGO	   was	   deliberately	   biased	   in	   selecting	   the	   people	   for	   the	  
       sensitisations/training,	   advised	   them	   what	   to	   say	   on	   certain	   contentious	   articles	   and,	   even	   made	   them	  
       collect	   their	   views	   which	   they	   presented	   at	   the	   constitutional	   review	   commission	   meetings.	   	   This	   was	  
       revealed	   by	   an	   independent	   consultant	   contracted	   to	   monitor	   the	   activities	   of	   the	   NGO	   and	   the	   entire	  
       constitutional	  review	  consultation	  process.	  	  As	  a	  result	  the	  EU	  HRGGP	  stopped	  funding	  the	  activities	  of	  the	  
       NGO	  thus	  denying	  the	  majority	  of	  the	  population	  the	  right	  to	  know	  in	  order	  to	  make	  informed	  decisions.	  
       	  


Dealing with indifference and consultation fatigue: We saw that giving feedback
shows people that they are taken seriously and encourages them to participate in
future consultations. And yet many agencies in Uganda rarely give feedback
which makes most communities loose interest in consultations. Remember not
to make consultation meetings unnecessarily long and always give feedback. On
the other hand, many consultations in various sectors from several agencies take
place in the same communities which makes them exhausted.




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                                              Page 28
	  
                                  An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                        2014

	  
Managing false expectations: This is one of the greatest obstacles to effective
consultations. The mere going to communities to consult with them can raise
unrealistic expectations beyond what government/agencies can reasonably
deliver and managing them can be problematic. To minimise this, there is a need
to carefully and clearly communicate the limits of the project; clarifying what the
project will be able to address and what it will not undertake and; what is the
responsibility of others.

Dealing with conflict/varying opinions: While consultation may seek to achieve
consensus, this will not always be attainable due to fundamental differences in
opinions among parties.

Example 11: How to deal with conflict/varying opinions


         In	   consultations	   with	   minority	   ethnic	   groups	   in	   Uganda	   (Uganda	   GPE	   Project)	   on	   the	   issue	   of	   how	   the	  
         proposed	  project	  would	  impact	  on	  them	  and	  how	  best	  they	  can	  participate	  and	  benefit	  from	  the	  project;	  
         there	   were	   strong	   divergent	   views	   by	   one	   of	   the	   communities	   regarding	   the	   thematic	   curriculum	   –	   they	  
         rejected	   it	   and	   demanded	   that	   the	   learners	   should	   be	   taught	   in	   only	   English.	   	   While	   in	   another,	   they	  
         demanded	   that	   the	   learners	   be	   taught	   in	   their	   own	   local	   language	   (lack	   of	   orthography	   and	   teachers	   in	   the	  
         local	  language	  could	  not	  make	  it	  possible	  at	  the	  moment)	  and	  not	  in	  a	  language	  spoken	  by	  the	  majority	  in	  
         the	  area.	  	  To	  deal	  with	  the	  two	  varying	  views,	  the	  MoES	  will	  emphasise	  community	  sensitisation	  in	  order	  to	  
         educate	   the	   two	   communities	   on	   the	   importance	   of	   the	   thematic	   curriculum	   and	   why	   some	   of	   their	  
         requests	  could	  not	  addressed	  at	  the	  moment	  




b) Challenges Caused Mainly by the `Consultants’

Devising suitable methods and ensuring inclusiveness of all affected parties:
Working out successful methods for generating adequate and relevant
community input can be challenging too, particularly in coming up with methods
that will enable inclusiveness in the consultations.                                                                                Sometimes, there is one
reason or two that may affect efforts to reach all interested participants in the
consultation process such as the difficulty in identifying some communities of
interest, inappropriate methods, overlooking gender issues, time constraints and,
consulting representatives who fail to represent common interests of the group.




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                               Page 29
	  
                                  An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                            2014

	  



Example 12: Missing inclusiveness of all affected groups


        Consultations	  with	  the	  Ik	  minority	  ethnic	  group	  in	  Kaabong	  district	  for	  the	  proposed	  Uganda	  GPE	  project,	  
        the	   voices	   of	   women	   could	  have	   been	   heard	   better,	   if	   a	   separate	   meeting	   for	   them	   had	   been	   organised.	   	  In	  
        an	  open	  community	  consultation	  meeting,	  a	  few	  of	  them	  actively	  participated	  much	  as	  efforts	  were	  made	  
        to	   have	   the	   majority	   of	   them	   express	   their	   views.	   	   The	   consultations	   had	   to	   be	   conducted	   within	   the	  
        available	  time	  and	  therefore	  time	  could	  not	  allow	  meetings	  for	  women	  separately.	  

        	  



Inadequate resources/Poor planning: Resources such as skills, staff, time and
finances coupled with proper planning are a prerequisite for effective
consultations. Running a genuine consultation process is often more work
initially than expected but often inadequate resources are allocated for the
exercise. Preparation of a comprehensive consultation plan which identifies the
required resources as part of the overall project plan including services of a
consultant if necessary is an important step in overcoming the challenge and
achieving successful consultations. Adequate time for response by participants
should be provided in case of consultation by government over policy. This will
ensure that consultations are not carried out hurriedly for the sake of it but
instead yield sustainable outcomes.

Determining when consultation efforts have been sufficient – At what point do
you know that you have received sufficient and relevant data? This is usually a
challenge with qualitative data. Striking a balance between ensuring that
consultations have yielded adequate and good quality information on which
balanced, informed decisions can be made and; an overly extensive consultation
which may be ineffective, get bogged-down and hamper other important work.
One of the solutions is by gauging after several interviews conducted, when you
reach a point where no new information is coming in but instead only repetitions,
you know you have reached a point in which you are `saturated’ with the required
information.

Integrating consultation results into policy formulation, project design and
implementation can sometimes be challenging. Although it is undesirable to

       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                                   Page 30
	  
                       An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
dismiss community objections or concerns, failure to consider them on the basis
of objections by groups who are non-representative or who have not carefully
considered the issues at hand is also problematic. An account is needed for
determining when investigators may justifiably dismiss community concerns;
which account must be sensitive to the nature of disagreements.



2.11.2 Successful Examples of Consultations

As           indicated    throughout     the   presentation     ideally,   effective   (successful)
consultation will demonstrate the following features:

         •    Information is made available in appropriate formats for informed input
         •    Access different social groups and make sure they participate
         •    People feel involved and their input valued
         •    Have a strong qualitative component
         •    Have structures and practices already in place for direct follow up and
              action
         •    Timing of the consultation is right so that its results are able to influence
              policy, planning and decision-making.
         •    Plan services and policies based on the needs/views of the people
         •    Improves the take-up of those services/community ownership
         •    Success of the project in relation to its objectives and expected outcomes




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                               Page 31
	  
                                 An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                         2014

	  



Example 13: Ireland Aid Supported Projects of Kiboga District Development
                              Programme (KDDP) 1999 - 2001


         Ireland	  Aid	  (now	  Development	  Cooperation	  Ireland)	  was	  working	  in	  partnership	  with	  the	  GoU	  to	  achieve	  its	  
         development	   objectives	   enshrined	   in	   the	   PEAP.	   	   Following	   assessments	   undertaken	   based	   on	   existing	  
         government	  and	  line	  ministries’	  development	  policies,	  programmes,	  and	  information;	  Ireland	  Aid	  committed	  
         to	   support	   six	   key	   projects	   of	   the	   KDDP	   for	   three	   years.	   	   These	   were:	   food	   security,	   feeder	   roads,	   health,	  
         water	  and	  sanitation,	  basic/primary	  education,	  and	  institutional	  support	  and	  training.	  	  Several	  consultations	  
         were	   conducted	   at	   different	   stages	   of	   the	   projects’	   cycle	   and,	   at	   district	   and	   community	   levels.	   	   The	   first	  
         consultations	   were	   conducted	   at	   district	   and	   sub	   county	   levels	   through	   a	   participatory	   planning	   workshop	  
         held	  with	  key	  stakeholders	  including:	  district	  heads	  of	  departments	  and	  their	  technical	  staff,	  district	  executive	  
         committee	  members,	  chairpersons	  of	  the	  district	  council	  sectoral	  committees,	  sub	  county	  extension	  workers	  
         and	   NGOs/CSOs	   operating	   in	   the	   district.	   	   This	   was	   followed	   by	   consultations	   with	   the	   communities	   for	  
         immediate	  needs	  identification,	  planning	  and	  implementation.	  	  The	  projects	  were	  planned	  and	  implemented	  
         based	   on	   the	   communities’	   own	   identified	   prioritised	   needs.	   	   I	   carried	   out	   consultations	   with	   various	  
         stakeholders	   to	   assess	   the	   performance	   of	   the	   projects	   after	   three	   years	   with	   the	   aim	   to	   document	   the	  
         successes	   and	   failures	   of	   the	   projects	   in	   light	   of	   the	   expected	   outputs,	   short-­‐term	   as	   well	   as	   intermediary	  
         outcomes.	  	  The	  projects	  were	  largely	  successful	  with	  a	  registered	  high	  participation	  at	  district,	  sub-­‐county	  and	  
         community	  levels	  and	  a	  felt	  sense	  of	  ownership	  of	  the	  projects	  by	  the	  service	  users/local	  communities.	  




Example 14: The 9th EU/EDF Micro projects Programme in Uganda


                    th
           The	  9 	  European	  Union	  (EU)/European	  Development	  Fund	  (EDF)	  Micro	  projects	  Programme	  (MPP)	  was	  funded	  
           by	   the	   EU	   under	   the	   Lome	   convention	   and	   implemented	   in	   7	   districts	   (by	   then).	   	   The	   MPP	   aimed	   at	   improving	  
           the	  livelihoods	  of	  the	  people,	  especially	  of	  the	  more	  marginalised	  people	  and	  the	  rural	  population.	  	  Specifically	  
           the	   EU/EDF	   MPP	   in	   Uganda	   was	   to	   provide	   the	   target	   population	   with	   improved	   access	   to	   social	   services	   –	  
           health,	  education,	  water	  and	  sanitation.	  	  The	  general	  approach	  of	  the	  MPP	  was	  to	  get	  communities	  participate	  
           in	  financing	  (25%	  community	  contribution	  in	  cash	  and/or	  kind),	  project	  selection,	  appraisal,	  implementation,	  
           monitoring,	   supervision,	   operation	   and	   maintenance	   of	   the	   micro	   projects.	   The	   programme	   partnered	   with	  
           NGOs	   and	   private	   sector	   organisations	   to	   support	   communities	   and	   local	   authorities	   in	   strengthening	   the	  
           capacities	   of	   communities	   to	   undertake	   future	   development	   initiatives.	   EU/EDF	   MPP,	   through	   contracted	  
           private	   firms,	   also	   supported	   local	   governments	   and	   communities	   to	   strengthen	   their	   capacities	   in	   project	  
           identification	   and	   appraisal,	   planning,	   implementation	   and	   management	   of	   the	   projects.	   Consultations	   with	  
           communities,	   local	   government	   officials,	   NGOs,	   private	   sector	   organisations	   and	   other	   stakeholders	   were	   at	  
           the	   centre	   of	   the	   programme.	   	   Prior	   to	   the	   MPP,	   a	   capacity	   needs	   assessment	   was	   conducted	   in	   the	  
           beneficiary	  districts	  as	  a	  baseline	  and	  to	  guide	  the	  capacity	  building	  component	  of	  the	  programme.	  	  I	  served	  on	  
           the	   programme	   as	   a	   short-­‐term	   specialist	   and	   participated	   in	   the	   CNA,	   capacity	   building	   activities	   and	  
           evaluation	   of	   the	   capacity	   building	   component.	   	   The	   evaluation	   of	   the	   EU/EDF	   MPP	   capacity	   building	  
           component	   which	   was	   a	   key	   component	   for	   the	   programme	   in	   Uganda	   indicated	   that	   the	   consultations	   had	  
           worked	   in	   meeting	   the	   objectives	   of	   the	   programme.	   	   In	   yet	   another	   evaluation	   at	   the	   global	   level	   (in	   ACP	  
           countries)	   commissioned	   by	   the	   EU	   in	   Brussels,	   the	   conclusions	   were	   that	   the	   Ugandan	   EU/EDF	   MPs	  
           programme	  was	  quite	  a	  success.	  

           	  

       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                                Page 32
	  
                                An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects                                                                        2014

	  



Example 15: The Revision of PEAP in 2000 and eventual transformation into the
PRSP



           The	   Poverty	   Eradication	   Action	   Plan	   (PEAP)	   is	   a	   broad	   policy	   framework	   first	   formulated	   in	   1997	   for	   the	  
           elimination	   of	   poverty	   in	   Uganda,	   and	   revised	   in	   2000	   with	   extensive	   public	   consultations	   involving	  
           CSOs.	   	   Uganda’s	   Poverty	   Reduction	   Strategy	   Paper	   (PRSP)	   is	   based	   on	   the	   revised	   PEAP	   2000,	   as	   was	  
           determined	   by	   the	   World	   Bank	   and	   IMF	   to	   serve	   as	   a	   requirement	   for	   debt	   relief	   under	   the	   Highly	  
           Indebted	   Poor	   Countries	   (HIPC)	   initiative	   and	   future	   concessional	   lending	   under	   the	   World	   Bank’s	  
           Poverty	   Reduction	   Support	   Credit	   and	   IMF’s	   Poverty	   Reduction	   and	   Growth	   Facility.	   	   Uganda	   was	  
           fortunate	   that	   when	   the	   requirement	   for	   governments	   by	   the	   WB	   and	   IMF	   to	   prepare	   PRSPs	   was	  
           communicated,	   consultations	   to	   revise	   the	   PEAP	   were	   already	   underway	   which	   led	   to	   its	   quick	  
           transformation	   into	   PRSP	   between	   January	   and	   April	   2000,	   having	   discussed	   it	   with	   the	   WB.	   The	  
           consultation	  process	  had	  several	  dimensions:	  
           	  
           i)	  Consultations	  between	  government	  and	  donors;	  
           ii)	  Consultations	  between	  the	  lead	  government	  ministries	  and	  other	  line	  ministries;	  
           iii)	  Consultations	  between	  government	  and	  civil	  society	  and;	  
           iv)	  Consultations	  within	  civil	  societies	  
           	  
           I	   participated	   in	   some	   of	   the	   consultations	   for	   the	   revision	   of	   the	   PEAP	   as	   a	   rapportour	   at	   the	  
           consultations	  within	  CSOs	  at	  national	  level	  and	  the	  PEAP/PRSP	  is	  widely	  recognised	  both	  in	  official	  and	  
           CSO	   circles	   in	   Uganda	   for	   its	   comprehensiveness	   and	   extensive	   consultations	   made	   in	   its	   formulation	  
           and	  revision.	  
           	  




3.0 CONCLUSION

There is no simple, quick and cheap route to conducting effective community
consultations. There is always a need to make deliberate efforts and wise
decisions within the constraints of time, finances and skills in order to conduct
successful consultations. It can be done, it has been done and anybody can do it
as long as the `good practices’ of community consultation are followed. Other
factors remaining constant, it is unlikely that policy and practice as well as
projects and programmes would fail if they reflect the concerns and requirements
of all groups it affects in the community. The benefits accrued from successful
consultations far outweigh whatever challenges that one may experience or the
immediate costs which may appear high in the short-run. The process would pay
off in the long-term making it a worthwhile venture.                                                                             Therefore there should be

       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                                                                                                              Page 33
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
no justification for avoiding consultations.                   Community consultation will
continue to be an essential part of development work in Uganda and elsewhere.




       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                            Page 34
	  
                     An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects    2014

	  
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACP                        Africa Caribbean and Pacific Countries
AWEPON                     African Women’s Economic Policy Network
CBOs                       Community Based Organisations
CBT                        Community Based Training
CNA                        Capacity Needs Assessment
CSOs                       Civil Society Organisations
DENIVA                     Development Network for Indigenous Voluntary Associations
DEO                        District education Officer
EU HRGGP                   European Union Human Rights and Good Governance Programme
FGD                        Focus Group Discussion
FK Norway                  Fredskorpset
GoU                        Government of Uganda
GPE                        Global Partnership for Education
GTZ                        German Development Cooperation
HIPC                       Highly Indebted Poor Countries
IDPs                       Internally Displaced Persons
IPPF                       Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
IPs                        Indigenous Peoples
KDDP                       Kiboga District Development Programme
KI                         Key Informant Interviews
KNH                        Kindernothilf
LCs                        Local Councils
M&E                        Monitoring and Evaluation
MoES                       Ministry of Education and Sports
NETWAS                     Network for Water and Sanitation
NGOs                       Non-Governmental organisations
NWSC                       National Water and Sewerage Corporation
ONSUL                      Ondeo Services Uganda Limited
PEAP                       Poverty Eradication Action Plan
PRGF                       Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility
PRSC                       Poverty Reduction Support Credit
PRSP                       Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
PTCs                       Primary Teachers’ Colleges
SEATINI                    Southern and Eastern Africa Trade Information and Negotiation Institute
SMC                        School Management Committees
SNV                        Netherlands Development Cooperation
UWASNET                    Uganda Water and Sanitation NGO Network
WB                         World Bank
WSS                        Water and Sanitation Sector
BDP                        Batwa Development Programme
BMCT                       Bwindi Mgahinga Conservation Trust


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 35
	  
                      An Introduction to Community Consultations in Development Projects   2014

	  
References

Bolton Council (May 2007): Involving our communities: Bolton’s Community Engagement
and Consultation Toolkit

Carmarthenshire Community Tool Kit: Community Consultation

Community Consultation: Good Practice – Key Issues accessed at
http://www.lga.sa.gov.au/webdata/resources/files/community

Dr. Lyn Carson and Dr. Katharine Gelber; Plan First, Department of Urban Affairs and
Planning: Ideas for Community Consultation: A discussion on principles and procedures
for making consultations work

Ethical Goals of Community Consultation in Research accessed at
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMc1449329/

INVOLVE: Promoting public involvement in NHS, public health and social care research:
Involving Marginalised and Vulnerable People in Research: A consultation Document.

       Pain R., Francis P., Fuller I., O’Brien K., & Williams S.: ‘Hard to Reach’ Young People and
Community Safety: A Model for Participatory Research and Consultation

Planning and Community Consultation: Capital Project Planning and Community
Consultation found at http://www.vsb.bc.ca/planning-and-community-consultation

Practical ways to engage with your community accessed at
http://www.local.gove.uk/localism-act/-/journal_content/56/10180/3510950/ARTICLE

Reid Howie Associates (2002): Good Practice Guidance: Consultation with Equalities
Groups. Scottish Executive Central Research Unit and Equality Unit

Resource Papers in Action Research: Community Consultation Checklist found at
http://www.aral.com.au/resources/comcon.html

Running Consultative Processes accessed at
http://www.ourcommunity.com.au/trainig/trainig_main.jsp

VLGA; Community Consultation: Resource Guide accessed at
http://www.vlga.org.au/Resources/Consultation_and_Engagement.aspx

Volunteering Qld; Conducting Community Consultations: Information Sheet found at
http://www.vlcaconsultation.org.au


       Georgina Angela Manyuru                                                              Page 36
	  
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
AGREEMENTS (CDAs)
INVOLVING COMMUNITIES IN THE EXTRACTIVE
INDUSTRIES




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt
Extractive Industries In Uganda

•   Expectation for Uganda to become oil and gas producer in the next four
    to ﬁve years


•   Hydrocarbon revenues could double government revenue (at today’s
    prices)


•   Hydrocarbons are an important growth sector and will be key to achieve
    Vision 2040




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                              2
Extractive Industries In Uganda

What does social inclusion mean in the context of Extractive Industries?
•   Uganda’s National Oil and Gas Policy 2008: “lasting beneﬁts to society”
•   Two key dimensions for inclusion in Extractive Industries:
    - Equitable outcomes
    - Participation in processes
•   Inclusion is not a luxury but a political and business requirement!




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                               3
CDAs Within The Bigger Picture: Outcomes

•   Types of beneﬁts/outcomes expected from Extractive Industries:


    - Public revenues


    - Investments by companies in communities affected by extractive
    industries


    - Economic opportunities created through private sector




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                        4
CDAs Within The Bigger Picture: Processes

•   Processes/negotiations in extractive industries:


    - Between government and company (contract terms)


    - Between company and communities (local beneﬁts)


    - Between government and citizens (distribution)




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt         5
What Is A CDA?

•   Formal agreement between companies, local communities and the state
    regarding the responsibilities of each party to ensure sustainable local
    development takes place alongside mining/hydrocarbon operations.


•   CDAs are put in place to share beneﬁts, which is distinct from
    compensation!




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                                6
Why Should We Care?

    Mining company                                                                    Community                       Government

    • Social License to Operate                                                       • Long-term improvements in     • Greater beneﬁt-sharing
                                                                                        quality of life                 from private sector
    • Risk and reputation
      management                                                                      • Access to opportunities       • Reduced pressure on
                                                                                                                        government for local
    • Productivity gains
                                                                                                                        community investment
    • Positive legacy
                                                                                                                      • Utilization of potentially
    • Company of choice for next                                                                                        effective implementation
      project                                                                                                           system held by company
                                                                                                                      • Retained support at local
                                                                                                                        level for industry
                                                                                                                        responsible for generating
                                                                                                                        signiﬁcant GDP
                                                                                                                        contribution




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2010):	  Mining	  Founda>ons,	  Trusts	  and	  Funds	  –	  A	  Sourcebook.	  

                                                                                                                                                     7
Content Of A CDA

•   Context is crucial: Consultations with local communities and all other
    stakeholders to determine content of CDAs.


•   CDAs can vary greatly in complexity, depending on existing structures
    and vision.


•   But some basic building blocks:
    - Outputs: mechanism for regular dialogue & socio-economic beneﬁts
    - Structures: ﬁnancing agreement & institutional structure




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                              8
            Some issues that are important to consider to make Community
                   Development Agreements an instrument for inclusion…




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                            9
Who Should Beneﬁt From A CDA?

Two dimensions that are important to consider.


•   Which communities should be included?
    Geographical deﬁnition, Social and Environmental Impact Assessment,
    administrative boundaries, perceived/expected impacts.


•   Are there potentially excluded groups that need to be targeted?
    Difference in impacts across groups. Some may ﬁnd it hard to access
    beneﬁts of CDAs. May have to be targeted with tailored interventions.




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                             10
Community Representation In CDAs

•   Capacity
•   Legitimacy
•   Existing vs. New
•   Context-speciﬁcity (case by case vs. some national consistency)
•   Ability to represent divergent views within community and develop
    consensus positions that does not exclude




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                         11
The Need For Capacity Building

•   Often, capacity of local communities needs to be built to enable more
    transformational engagement (e.g. ﬁnance, management, monitoring and
    evaluation, planning, negotiation and leadership)


•   Intermediaries (state institutions, civil society and international NGOs)
    can play a key role in representing the interests of local communities
    and the poor and vulnerable


•   Critical step that needs to take place even earlier: information sharing




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                                 12
Options For Implementing A CDA

•   Depending on context: can be implemented by government (local or
    central), civil society organizations, mining companies, independent
    trusts


•   Critical factor for deciding what is most suitable is the capacity of
    various organizations


•   Trusts and funds often used when there is limited capacity on the part of
    other institutions, or when there is concern regarding the independence
    or accountability of the institution responsible for implementing beneﬁt
    sharing arrangements




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                             13
An Example From Ghana: Newmont Mining

•   US$1 per ounce of gold sold and one percent of net annual proﬁts for a
    Community Development Fund


•   Social Responsibility Forum to facilitate community participation in
    decisions on how the Community Development Fund should be used


•   Three CDAs were set up through the Forum:
    - Social Responsibility Agreement
    - Local Employment Agreement
    - Newmont Ahafo Development Foundation Agreement




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                              14
Social Responsibility Forum

•   55 members + independent monitor: regional and district government
    ofﬁcials, Members of Parliament, members of the District Assemblies,
    ofﬁcials from Newmont, traditional chiefs, NGOs and representatives
    from affected communities, including women, youth and farmers
•   Members ﬁrst nominated by the community and then elected in secret
    ballots
•   Tasks: 1) developing and overseeing the implementation of the Social
    Responsibility Agreement, 2) assisting with conﬂict-resolution, 3)
    managing the Community Development Foundation, and ﬁnally 4)
    ensuring open and regular communication between Newmont and the
    local community
•   Meets twice a year and has a standing committee to meet in the interim
    in cases of emergencies


Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                              15
Social Responsibility Agreement

•   Between Newmont Ghana Gold Company and 10 communities/towns in
    two districts


•   Regulates the interaction of stakeholders


•   Documents formal commitments made by them, e.g. how
    announcements and information should be transmitte




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                      16
Local Employment Agreement

   1) The hire of local skilled labor.


   2) The hire of local unskilled labor.


   3) A Newmont target of employing 35 percent (to be increased to 50%
   within 10 years) of their workforce (including contractors) from local
   communities.




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                             17
Development Foundation Agreement

•   Regulates the use of the funds dedicated to community development by
    company


•   Deﬁnes the conduct of the Foundation’s affairs


•   Sets parameters for the selection of sustainable development projects as
    agreed by company and community




Community Development Agreements   Lisa Schmidt                                18
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MODULE 5

SUBJECTIVE WELLBEING
SUBJECTIVE WELLBEING


WHY AND WHAT DOES IT CONTRIBUTE TO
POLICY MAKING?




Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra
Why Should We Care About Subjective Wellbeing?

• It is widely recognized that economic outcomes can tell us only part of
  the story about quality of life.
• Measures of subjective wellbeing can provide information on the relative
  importance of several domains in people’s lives.
• The maximization of wellbeing should not necessarily be the primary
  policy goal (e.g., future vs current generations, certain human rights)
• People’s wellbeing has more to do with perceptions of quality of life than
  with material comforts, pleasure, or any objective feature.




Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                     2
Using Monetary Indicators To Measure Wellbeing

• What if people are bad at predicting how much satisfaction they would
  get from speciﬁc goods?
• What if the link between work and utility is not only derived income?
• People who get divorced after a bad marriage act rationally in terms of
  the effect of this decision on subjective wellbeing, even if this lowers
  their economic wellbeing.




Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                   3
Using Measures Of Wellbeing For Policy

• Any measure that consistently contradicts intuitions about the effects of
  life circumstances would likely be of little use in inﬂuencing public
  policy
• The value of these measures would be quite limited if they only conﬁrm
  what we already knew
• Subjective wellbeing encompasses many different areas in a person’s life
  so each factor can explain only a small share of the variance in wellbeing
  outcomes.




Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                     4
Using Measures Of Wellbeing For Policy

• The effect size needs to be interpreted carefully.
• For example, a study found that whether a person is employed or
  unemployed accounted for 4% of the variance in life satisfaction ratings,
  with a correlation of 0.2
• However, using standardized mean differences, the average employed
  person is happier than 83% of those who are unemployed




Subjective Wellbeing      Juan Carlos Parra                                   5
Some Criticisms To The Use Of Subjective Wellbeing And Response


• These measures capture irrelevant information. Empirical evidence
  suggests that trivial concerns (weather) don’t have a large inﬂuence on
  wellbeing measures.
• SWB can be manipulated.
      – Any measure can be manipulated if poorly captured (e.g., income
        from HHS).
      – SWB is not the only criterion for policy (e.g., men and women with
        comparable levels of life satisfaction despite unequal access to
        opportunities).
      – Only preferences formed under free conditions should be used (SWB
        of minority groups based on imposed cultural norms or ideals freely
        chosen?)
• We assume that voting decisions as a valid reﬂection of their political
  preferences.

Subjective Wellbeing       Juan Carlos Parra                                  6
Some Criticisms To The Use Of Subjective Wellbeing And Response


• Too much SWB would make people lazy. Emotions and moods help
  people deal more efﬁciently with complex stimuli. ‘Happier’ people tend
  to experience more positive outcomes (work, love and health).
• SWB condones immoral behavior. It is more a criticism of utilitarianism.
• One question, multiple answers. No different from economic indicators.




Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                   7
Examples Of The Use Of Subjective Wellbeing Measures In Policy


   Health
• Checkups for school children. Mental health problems have direct
  consequences on overall well (anxiety, social phobias, and depression are
  associated with drop-outs, failing grades, drinking, etc.) SWB can be used
  as an effective screening tool.
• Subjective health measures (quick, easy, cheap) add valid information
  about a person’s true health status. Simple self-rated measures predict
  mortality and longevity even after controlling for objective reports!
• A study found that people who are low in social integration report twice
  the number of sick days as do people high in social integration.




Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                     8
Examples Of The Use Of Subjective Wellbeing Measures In Policy


   Unemployment
• Unemployment has psychological effects. It might signal to an individual
  that he or she is not as valuable, and this might affect self-esteem and
  optimism.
• According to classical theory, unemployment is a voluntary state.
• People who are unemployed for a long time do not report higher levels of
  life satisfaction
• People who have been previously unemployed still react negatively to a
  new bout of unemployment (they don’t get used to being unemployed)
• The negative effects of unemployment remain even after people are
  reemployed (scarring effect)
• The negative effects of unemployment are smaller in societies with high
  level of unemployment protection

Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                   9
Examples Of The Use Of Subjective Wellbeing Measures In Policy


   Wellbeing in the workplace
• Several studies ﬁnd a positive (~0.3) correlation between job satisfaction
  and performance and it is signiﬁcantly stronger for complex jobs
• Other studies ﬁnd that average satisfaction of speciﬁc work unit
  predicted factors such as proﬁtability, productivity, and customer
  satisfaction


   Management of cities
• Perception surveys have gained popularity among large cities. Improving
  urban life is high in the agenda of local governments. What services are
  providing good value in relation to their underlying cost?




Subjective Wellbeing      Juan Carlos Parra                                    10
Concluding Thoughts

• Subjective wellbeing gives us a more holistic view about people’s
  wellbeing
• Remember, people add on the basis on how they feel
• SWB adds valuable information about priorities
• It is increasingly used for policy making and even as an objective in
  itself




Subjective Wellbeing     Juan Carlos Parra                                11
MEASURES OF SUBJECTIVE
WELLBEING




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra
Reliability Of Measures Of Wellbeing

• Reliability refers to the extent to which a measure yields consistent
  results (weight scale).
• The average reliability of a SWB measure is about 0.6
• More points in the scale of response categories tend to produce more
  reliable measures




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                      2
Validity Of Measures Of Wellbeing

• Validity refers to the extent to which a measure actually assesses what
  is supposed to assess.
• There is a relatively strong correlation between national levels of income
  and life satisfaction (somewhere between 0.6 and 0.8)
      – Good: life satisfaction measures are genuine measures of wellbeing
      – Bad: why do they need measures of SWB if we already have income?
        Between 40 and 60% of the variation in life satisfaction can be
        explained by per capita income. Measures of SWB go beyond what
        can be explained by differences in per capita income




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                           3
How To Go About Measuring Subjective Wellbeing?

• Most times it makes more sense to add modules or questions on SWB to
  existing surveys than creating a new instrument
• There are very rich sources of SWB measures
• Afrobarometer (afrobarometer.org) and other barometers (Euro, Latin)
• World Values Survey (worldvaluessurvey.org)
• Gallup World Poll Survey (gallup.com)




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                     4
How To Go About Measuring Subjective Wellbeing?

• Use neutral language
• The order of the questions might affect responses
• Control for objective and subjective factors that might affect the answer




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                          5
How To Measure Aspects Of Subjective Wellbeing?

• Life satisfaction
          “Generally speaking, how satisﬁed are you with your life these days?”
• Self-esteem
          How much do you agree with the following statement?
          “I describe myself as a conﬁdent person”
• Empowerment
          “How are decisions made at home regarding _____”
• Tolerance
          “Who would you like to have as a neighbor?




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                              6
How To Measure Aspects Of Subjective Wellbeing?

• Fairness
          “Do you think [group A] and [group B] are treated equally in society”


• Perceptions of inequality
          Objective vs. subjective inequality (Egypt)




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                              7
Examples Of Measures Of Subjective Wellbeing

   From Afrobarometer round 5 (Uganda)




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra   8
Examples Of Measures Of Subjective Wellbeing

   From Afrobarometer round 5 (Uganda)




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra   9
Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra   10
Concluding Thoughts

• Subjective wellbeing can be measured validly and reliably
• Measurement issues are not too different from the encountered when
  measuring objective wellbeing
• Increasing availability of SWB data and instruments makes the design of
  modules/questions easier
• Adding short modules to standard LSMS/HHS has high potential and is
  relatively inexpensive




Measures of Subjective Wellbeing   Juan Carlos Parra                        11
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MODULE 6

QUALITATIVE METHODS
QUALITATIVE METHODS


WHY AND WHEN?




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt
Why Are Maternal Deaths Among Tribal Women In India High?




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2013),	  p.	  236.	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                     Lisa Schmidt   2
Why Are Maternal Deaths Among Tribal Women In India High?




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2013),	  p.	  236.	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                     Lisa Schmidt   3
Implications For Program Design




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2013),	  p.	  236.	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                     Lisa Schmidt   4
Ethnic Minority Poverty In Vietnam

 What do you think is the most effective policy to reduce ethnic minority
 poverty in Vietnam?




Source:	  h=p://blogs.worldbank.org/eastasiapaciﬁc/why-­‐ethnic-­‐minority-­‐poverty-­‐persistent-­‐vietnam


Qualitative Methods - Why and When                               Lisa Schmidt                                  5
Analyzing Poverty I

           “Rural poverty in Tanzania has been halved in the period from 1985 to
           2001. At present about 38 per cent of people living in rural areas are
           classiﬁed as poor. This progress is reﬂected in the United Nations
           Development Programme's Human Development Index for Tanzania,
           which rose from 0.3 in 1991 to 0.4 in 2002.”




Source:	  Kielmann	  et	  al.	  (2011),	  p.	  6.	  	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                               Lisa Schmidt      6
Analyzing Poverty II

      “If you want to do something
      and have no power to do it,                                                “Poverty is like living in jail,
      it is talauchi (poverty).”                                                 living under bondage, waiting
      — a proverb from Nigeria                                                   to be free.”
                                                                                 — a saying from Jamaica




     “For a poor person everything is terrible - illness, humiliation, shame.
     We are cripples; we are afraid of everything; we depend on everyone.
     No one needs us. We are like garbage that everyone wants to get rid of.”
     — a blind woman from Tiraspol, Moldova




Source:	  Kielmann	  et	  al.	  (2011),	  p.	  6.	  	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                               Lisa Schmidt                                      7
Equal Treatment




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2013),	  p.	  182.	  	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                         Lisa Schmidt   8
If You Only Have A Hammer…

   … you tend to see every problem as a nail


• Surveys are not the ideal tool to answer certain questions and address
  certain research purposes that are relevant for policy-making.


• By using surveys only, you may neglect important dimensions, especially
  when concerned with social inclusion issues.


• Ultimately, this can lead to the design of interventions that do not target
  the actual problem.




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                               9
Qualitative Methods Are Useful When You…

• are at the beginning of exploring a question/issue/problem and to
  develop a theory and hypotheses.


• need a complex, detailed understanding of the issue or a speciﬁc case
  and textual description.


• want to know how people experience a given research issue, e.g.
  exclusion.


• need to know more about seemingly contradictory/”irrational” behaviors,
  beliefs, opinions, emotions, norms, culturally shared meanings, roles and
  relationships of individuals that affect their behavior.


Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                         10
Qualitative Methods Are Useful When You…

• are more interested in the “why” and “how” (mechanisms/processes)
  than the “what” and “how much”.


• want to empower individuals to share their stories, hear their voices.


• want to follow up on quantitative research or develop survey
  instruments for it.




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                          11
Main Differences With Quantitative

                                                Quantitative                                Qualitative
General framework                    Seeks to conﬁrm hypothesis                 Seeks to explore

                                     Seeks to elicit and categorize responses   Flexible and iterative style of eliciting
                                     to speciﬁc questions                       responses to questions

                                     Uses highly structured methods             Semi-structured methods



Analytical objectives                Quantify variation                         Describe variation

                                     Predict causal relationships               Describe and explain relationships

                                     Describe characteristics of population     Describe individual experiences

                                                                                Describe group norms


Study design                         Stable                                     Some ﬂexibility in study design and
                                                                                instruments
                                     Participants responses do not determine
                                     how study proceeds                         Participants responses affect process

                                     Study design is subject to assumptions     Iterative design, data collection and
                                     and conditions                             research questions adjust




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                                                                           12
Main Trade-off




             Rich and complex understanding of a speciﬁc social context or
                                                    phenomenon

                                                        vs.

         Eliciting data that can be generalized to other geographical areas or
                                                    populations




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                                13
Examples




        Some examples of the types of questions for which researchers used
        qualitative methods & their rationale for using qualitative methods...




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                                14
Uganda “Moving Out Of Poverty” Study

  • “Why do some people move out of poverty, and stay out of poverty, while
    others remain trapped into poverty?”


  • Qualitative: Investigation of the dynamics of upward (and downward)
    mobility from poverty in the community by means of so-called Ladders
    of Life. In addition to that, Individual Life Stories.


  • “This study was conducted as part of our larger mandate to provide
    voices and perspectives of the poor in evidence-based decision-making
    processes.”




Source:	  Uganda	  Ministry	  of	  Finance,	  Planning	  and	  Economic	  Development	  (2007)


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When                                         Lisa Schmidt                  15
“On Norms And Agency” Study

  • capture men’s and women’s perspectives and their own accounts on how
    they experience gender differences in their communities


  • work from a vantage point that gives primacy to local people’s own
    perceptions and interpretations of their experiences


  • capture local narratives of different situations where gender differences
    come into play without imposing pre-conceived concepts and models




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2012)	  


 Qualitative Methods - Why and When      Lisa Schmidt                           16
“Voices Of The Poor” Study

• What is it like to be poor? How do people deﬁne well-being or a good
  quality of life? And ill-being or a bad quality of life? (people’s experience
  of poverty)


• Location-speciﬁc information: Poverty’s dimensions vary across time,
  place and social groups involved.


• Interest in “livelihood” as opposed to “income” and “employment”


• Engage the “respondents” actively in the research process to empower
  them




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                                 17
Blattman (2009)

   From Violence to Voting: War and Political Participation in Uganda
• Quantitative evidence for a link from past violence witnessed to
  increased political engagement among ex-combatants/abductees:
  “Survey data suggest that abduction leads to substantial increases in
  voting and community leadership, largely due to elevated levels of
  violence witnessed”


• Patterns are not easily explained by conventional theories


• Qualitative interviews suggest that violence may lead to personal growth
  and political activation, a possibility supported by psychological
  research on the positive effects of traumatic events.



Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                            18
References

• Blattman, Christopher (2009): From Violence to Voting: War and Political
  Participation in Uganda. American Political Science Review 103 (2).
• Kielmann, Karina, Fabian Cataldo, Janet Seeley (2011): Introduction to
  Qualitative Research Methodology.
• Narayan, Deepa (1999): Voices of the Poor Volume 1 – Can Anyone Hear Us?
  Voices from 47 Countries. Washington DC: World Bank.
• Uganda Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development (2007):
  Moving out of Poverty - Understanding Freedom, Democracy and Growth from
  the Bottom up.
• World Bank (2012): On Norms and Agency – Conversations about Gender
  Equality with Women and Men in 20 Countries. Washington DC: World Bank.
• World Bank (2013): Inclusion Matters – The Foundation for Shared Prosperity.
  Washington DC: World Bank.




Qualitative Methods - Why and When   Lisa Schmidt                                19
QUALITATIVE METHODS


THE HOW




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt
Key Features Of Good Qualitative Research

• Reproducible: someone else could use the same research plan and guide
  to generate similar information


• Systematic: not just picking interviewees or data that support our pre-
  existing ideas about the answers


• Credible: the questions asked, and the ways in which they are asked
  should generate valid accounts of phenomena


• Transparent: methods and protocols should be written up so that others
  can see exactly how the data were collected and analyzed.




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                    2
Steps Involved

• Study objectives and main questions
• What do we know already (literature review)?
• Data collection tool
• Sampling
• Data analysis




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt         3
Data Collection Tools

• Observation: Participant and non-participant


• Conversational: Interviews (structured, semi-structured, open-ended/in-
  depth), focus groups


• Documentation/text


• Visual material: Mapping, pictures, videos




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                    4
How To Decide Which One

• Questions in need of answer


• Level of structure and comparability required


• Level of exploration


• Time and cost




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt          5
Observation

• Main goal:
      – ‘See through the eyes of the people’ without imposing a pre-
        conceived frame of reference
      – We can understand things better if within a context


• Two crucial aspects of observational research:
      – Capture interactions
      – Observational approaches allow to learn about things people may be
        unaware of or are unwilling/unable to discuss in an interview or
        focus group.




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                     6
Focus Group

• Recruit small group of people who share a particular characteristic and
  encourage an informal group discussion on a particular topic or set of
  issues.
• Combine elements of both interviewing and participant observation
• Capitalize on group dynamics that can stimulate a richer response and
  new thoughts
• Focus group participants:
      – Participants are homogeneous group of people, and power balances
        and differences among them need to be considered (class, age, sex,
        education, etc.)
      – Conduct at least two groups for every variable considered to be
        relevant to the outcome (sex, age, educational level, etc.).



Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                     7
Focus Group

• Process:
      – Participants are asked to reﬂect on the questions asked by the
        moderator (guided by list of topics and question areas).


      – Participants permitted to hear each other’s responses and to make
        comments beyond their own original responses.


      – Participants don’t have to reach any kind of consensus, nor it is
        necessary for people to disagree.




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                    8
Text And Documents

• Records provide insights into a setting and/or group of people that
  cannot be observed or noted in another way.


• They are particularly useful in describing institutional characteristics,
  and in identifying institutional strengths and weaknesses.


• They provide a record or history not subject to recall bias.


• Useful for making comparisons (e.g between project participants and
  project applicants, project proposals and implementation).


• Most used: public records, personal documents

Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                      9
Visual

   Example:
• Visual representations by participants: photos, videos, maps, allow them
  to express views that they might not be able to verbalize




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                     10
On Sampling

• Participants for qualitative data collection are not selected without a
  method.


• Sampling strategies should be determined by the purpose of the research
  project.


• Samples are purposive: Participants are selected because they are likely
  to generate useful data for the project.


• Sample sizes are typically small




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                     11
Differences With Sampling For Quantitative Research


                   QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH                                            QUALITATIVE RESEARCH


     Large probability samples                                                Relatively small probability samples




     Randomly selected                                                        Purposefully selected




     Statistically representative                                             Representative (but not all statistically) of the
                                                                              broad types of informants relevant to the
                                                                              research

     Purpose: generalization; statistical comparison                          Purpose: selection of Information-rich Cases




Source:	  Kielmann	  et	  al.	  (2011),	  p.	  19.	  


 Qualitative Methods - How                                     Lisa Schmidt                                                       12
A Few Strategies

• Maximum variation sample:
      – Select key demographic variables that are likely to have an impact on
        participants’ view of the topic
      – Recruit groups that reﬂect various combinations of variables


• Deviant case sampling: Learning from “outliers”




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                    13
Analyzing Qualitative Data I

• What patterns and common themes emerge in responses dealing with
  speciﬁc items?


• How do these patterns (or lack thereof) help to illuminate the broader
  study question(s)?


• Are there any deviations from these patterns? If yes, are there any factors
  that might explain these atypical responses?




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt                                    14
Analyzing Qualitative Data II

• Time consuming


• Involves:
      • transcribing
      • coding
      • interpreting the data
      • plus translation if necessary




Qualitative Methods - How   Lisa Schmidt   15
Coding I




Source:	  h@p://onlineqda.hud.ac.uk/Intro_QDA/phpechopage_KtleOnlineQDA-­‐Examples_QDA.php


Qualitative Methods - How                               Lisa Schmidt                          16
Coding II




Source:	  h@p://www.qualitaKve-­‐research.net/index.php/fqs/arKcle/view/209/461


Qualitative Methods - How                                  Lisa Schmidt            17
Presenting Data




Source:	  World	  Bank	  (2012),	  p.	  37.	  


 Qualitative Methods - How                             Lisa Schmidt   18
References

• Kielmann, Karina, Fabian Cataldo, Janet Seeley (2011): Introduction to Qualitative Research
  Methodology.


• World Bank (2012): On Norms and Agency – Conversations about Gender Equality with Women
  and Men in 20 Countries. Washington DC: World Bank.




Qualitative Methods - How        Lisa Schmidt                                                   19
STUDY ON PARADOXICAL ISSUES
ON PRIMARY EDUCATION IN
UGANDA




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo
Outline Of The Presentation

• Background (UNHS ﬁndings)
• Objectives of the Study
• Methodology
• Key Findings
• Policy Implications




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo   2
Background (UNHS Findings)

• Reason for not being enrolled (6-12 who have never been to school)

       100%%
        90%%
        80%%
        70%%
                                                                                                 45.7%
        60%%
                                                 60.9%                                                         63.8%           61.7%
        50%%                                                                  79.9%
                                 70.7%                           60.9%
                   75.3%
        40%%
        30%%
        20%%
        10%%
         0%%
                 Kampala%     Other%urban%      Rural%        Central%       Eastern%        Northern%       Western%

                             Residence%Area%                                           Region%                               Uganda%
                 Too%expensive%                          Too%far%away%                              Poor%school%quality%
                 Had%to%help%at%home%                    Had%to%help%with%farm%work%                Had%to%help%with%family%business%
                 EducaRon%not%useful%                    Parents%did%not%want%                      Not%willing%to%aSend%
                 Too%young%                              Orphaned%                                  Displaced%
                 Disabled%                               Insecurity%                                Other%(specify)%



Primary Education in Uganda                    Clarence Tsimpo                                                                          3
Background (UNHS Findings)

• Share of children not attending school by age

                   90"

                   80"

                   70"

                   60"

                   50"
            (%)$




                   40"

                   30"

                   20"

                   10"

                    0"
                         4"   6"   8"         10"         12"             14"   16"   18"   20"
                                                              Age$

                                                      Boys"      Girls"


Primary Education in Uganda         Clarence Tsimpo                                               4
Background (UNHS Findings)

• Reason for not being enrolled (6-18 who drop-out)

       100%%
        90%%
                    6.0%
        80%%
                                   6.6%                           12.0%
        70%%
        60%%                                                                                                    23.0%           17.9%
                                                 20.0%
                                                                                23.0%            13.6%
        50%%
                    56.1%
        40%%
                                  58.8%
        30%%                                                      55.8%
                                                 35.3%                                                          36.9%           38.7%
                                                                                24.4%            33.6%
        20%%
        10%%
          0%%
                  Kampala%    Other%urban%       Rural%          Central%     Eastern%       Northern%        Western%

                              Residence%Area%                                          Region%                                Uganda%
                 Completed%desired%schooling%             Further%schooling%not%available%          Too%expensive%
                 Too%far%away%                            Had%to%help%at%home%                      Had%to%help%with%farm%work%
                 Had%to%help%with%family%business%        Poor%school%quality%                      Parents%did%not%want%
                 Not%willing%to%aSend%further%            Poor%academic%progress%                   Sickness%or%calamity%in%family%
                 Pregnancy%                               Other%(specify)%



Primary Education in Uganda                    Clarence Tsimpo                                                                          5
Objectives Of The Study

• Quantitative analysis: The What?
      – Late enrollment
      – Cost still and issue despite UPE reform
      – High Drop out rate
      – Many considers education as useless


• Qualitative analysis: The Why?
      – Why is it that late enrollment is the norm?
      – Why is the cost still and issue despite UPE?
      – Why are kid dropping out?
      – Why some people considers education useless


Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo          6
Methodology

• 1. Document Review; consultation with sector experts
• 2. Random selection of 14 districts
      – 10 sub-regions
      – Over sample were the issues are deeper
• 3. People to consult
      – Key Informant Interviews
      – Focus Group Discussions
      – Case Studies
• 4. Design of data collection tools
• 5. Field work, data analysis, dissemination




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo            7
Methodology




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo   8
Methodology




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo   9
Determinants Of Age At Enrollment

• Insecurity and difﬁcult
  terrain
• Inculcate basic livelihood
  skills before starting school
• Access food provided at
  school and absence of
  caregiver at home
• Parents who value education
  less delay enrollment




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo   10
Cost As Still A Barrier

• UPE is neither absolutely free nor compulsory
• Cost is a trade-off of alternative investment.
• Cost interacts with value attached, age of start and drop out
• School requirements vary across ranging between 30,200= lowest(Kasese
  rural) and 87,500= highest (Kampala)
• Exam fees are a signiﬁcant cost




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo                         11
Causes Of Drop-out

• Affordability of other costs that UPE does not cater for
• Distraction from entertainment and leisure involvements
• Sanitary facilities are a signiﬁcant factor for girls
• Inadequate counseling and guidance
• Early marriages, pregnancy and deﬁlement for girls
• Absence of Role models of education leading to better lives
• Economic participation
• Absenteeism correlates with seasonality of local economic activities




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo                            12
Dropping Out

                                                • A dropout due to
                                                  early pregnancy
                                                  being interviewed by
                                                  the research
                                                  assistant




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo                            13
Value Attached To Education

• Education is valued but competing trade-offs limit investment in
  education
• Uncertainty on outcome and return of education
• Education is a major exit route out of poverty
• Degree of involvement and level of investment in education correlates
  with value attached by parents




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo                             14
Competing Interests



                                                • Education is valued
                                                  but competing trade-
                                                  offs limit investment
                                                  in education.




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo                             15
5. Policy Implications

• Invest more in Games, sports, music, dance and drama?
• Integrating economic activities into education curriculum and calendar
  an incentive to parents?
• Policy on lunch at school?
• Teacher re-orientation for standardized and uniform thematic
  curriculum?
• Standardize content, language of instruction and duration of stay in
  ECDs?
• Sensitization by role model
• Scale-up existing programs for girls affected by pregnancy




Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo                              16
Primary Education in Uganda   Clarence Tsimpo   17
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
MODULE 7

IMPACT EVALUATION
METHODS TO ASSESS THE
IMPACTS OF AN INTERVENTION




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra
Objective

• To assess the causal impact of an intervention on outcomes. Why?
• The ideal scenario is not feasible (two options: cloning or time travel)
• Since we cannot observe the counterfactual, proxies are needed
• Counterfactual: what if beneﬁciaries had not received the program?


• Example for the rest of the presentation:
      – Initiative (training) to improve employability of adolescent girls




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                            2
Trying To Establish Causal Impacts

   Before and After
• Measure outcomes before and after an intervention


• Using the example, measure employment rates among beneﬁciaries
  before and after the training.


• Q: Is the difference the impact of the intervention?




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                  3
Trying To Establish Causal Impacts

   With and Without
• Measure outcomes for both beneﬁciaries and non-beneﬁciaries


• Using the example, measure employment rates among those who
  received the training and for those who did not.


• Q: Is the difference the impact of the intervention?




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra               4
Trying To Establish Causal Impacts

   With and Without
• This comparison suffers from selection bias. The people who enroll in
  this training is different from those who did not.


• One proposed solution: compare people with identical characteristics
  (age, education, etc.)




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                         5
Trying To Establish Causal Impacts

   Randomized Experimental Methods
• Considered the gold standard of evaluation. Randomly assign potential
  beneﬁciaries to be in the treatment and control group.


• If the sample is large enough, observables and unobservables will be, on
  average, very similar. The only difference is the treatment.


• Is it ok to randomize?




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                            6
… But Randomization Is Not Always Possible

• Treatment has been assigned and announced (or program is over)
• Universal take-up
• Universal coverage and non-excludable


   How can we construct a good control group?




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                  7
Quasi-experimental Methods

   Matching
• Control group as similar (observables) as possible to the treatment group


• Compare matched observations from treatment and control groups


• Direct matching compares individuals from treatment and control with
  identical characteristics.


• Propensity score matching uses an estimated probability of being in the
  treatment group, given observed characteristics, to compare individuals.




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                             8
Quasi-experimental Methods

   Differences in Differences (diff-in-diff)
• 2 groups observed at 2 different points in time


• 1 group (T) receives the program only in the second period while the
  other group (C) does not receive the program


• Diff-in-diff is calculated as the change in time for the treatment group (T)
  minus the change in time for the control group (C)


• Any differences (observable and unobservable) between the groups that
  don’t change over time are removed



Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                                9
Quasi-experimental Methods

   Differences in Differences (diff-in-diff)
• The underlying assumption is that pre-intervention differences are a
  good indicator for the post-intervention would have been without the
  intervention (common trends)


   Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD)
• Compares participants and non-participants around a threshold for
  eligibility.


• We assume individuals are randomly assigned to the treatment around
  the threshold (eligibility index, age), i.e., is not manipulated.




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                        10
Quasi-experimental Methods

   Regression Discontinuity Design (RDD)
• Estimates of causal impact are only valid around the threshold.


• Can be used to evaluation ex-post using the discontinuity as an
  experiment.




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                   11
How To Design Impact Evaluations - Sampling

• Selecting units from a population to estimate some of the characteristics
  of the population


• Larger samples yield more precise estimates of these characteristics but
  are more costly


• How to draw a good sample?
                Deﬁne the target population clearly
                Deﬁne a sampling frame
                and a sampling procedure




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                             12
How To Design Impact Evaluations - Sampling

• Random sampling is not enough for impact evaluation. Why?


• How to determine the ‘right’ sample size for an IE? Power calculations


• The ‘right’ sample size depends on i) the minimum impact of the
  intervention that you would like to capture, ii) the variance of the
  outcome and iii) the level of clustering.


• Attrition is also critical when computing the sample size


• Increasing sample size is costly but so is having a useless evaluation



Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                          13
How To Design Impact Evaluations - Sampling

• Minimum impact that you would like to capture
   What is the minimum impact that would justify the intervention?


• ii) Variance of outcome


• iii) Clustering – outcomes at the unit of implementation might be
  correlated
   Unit for the measurement of impact
   Unit for implementation of the intervention
   It adds more information to add an observation in a new cluster than to
   add it in an existing cluster



Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                            14
How To Design Impact Evaluations - Sampling

   Other important considerations:
• Multiple evaluation questions
• Multiple treatments
• Data quality
• Choice of the evaluation method




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra   15
Example Of An Impact Evaluation

• Zambia Social Recovery Project II (1995-2000)


• IE conducted by Chase and Sherburne-Benz, 2001 (PSM + qualitative,
  $175K)


• As part of its poverty reduction strategy,
  the government of Zambia (GoZ) adopted a decentralization policy
  to facilitate participatory bottom-up planning and to allow
  communities to formulate proposals to ﬁnance their initiatives
  and a systematic participatory monitoring system




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                      16
The Zambia Social Action Fund

• Compared with control groups, education projects increased school
  attendance and households’ education expenditures to a signiﬁcant
  degree.


• Health projects primarily involved rehabilitating health posts; they saw
  increased use of primary health facilities (94 vs. 71%) and their access to
  safe water (88 vs. 77).


• There were also improvements in some types of child vaccinations,
  speciﬁcally diphtheria vaccinations. There is limited evidence of
  increased BCG and Polio vaccinations.




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                               17
The Zambia Social Action Fund

• The IE shows that the social fund had important impacts on social
  capital in rural area to bring communities together.

• In rural households where the project operated, households were more
  likely to have participated in the project. Increased participation in
  parent-teacher meetings, higher contribution to the ﬁnancing of projects,
  longer construction times for facilities.

• Subjective measures of community togetherness increased. Further,
  those communities were more likely to undertake other community
  initiatives, such as building new health posts and other new schools.

• However, urban areas with social funds saw no such social capital
  improvements.



Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                         18
Concluding Thoughts

• IE is the preferred method to assess the impact of interventions


• IEs are costly and should be done carefully


• There are a public good in some sense so it makes sense for government
  and other agencies to contribute to their ﬁnancing


• Increased number of IEs on many different topics provide a critical mass
  to increase external validity




Methods to Assess the Impacts   Juan Carlos Parra                            19
CLICK OR TAP HERE TO RETURN TO EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
