 CIGARETTE
 AFFORDABILITY
 IN CHINA THE LON
MODELING
TERM HEALTH AND
 2001 –2016




COST IMPACTS OF
REDUCING SMOKIN
PREVALENCE
THROUGH TOBACC
TAXATION IN
                                                        Rong Zheng,
                                               Yang Wang and Xiao Hu
                          WHO Collaborating Center for Tobacco and Economics,
              University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China.




UKRAINE                                              Patricio V. Marquez
                                  The World Bank Group, Health, Nutrition and
                              Population Global Practice, Washington, DC, USA.
“An all-around moderately prosperous society
   cannot be achieved without the people’s
             all-around health.“

  “So prevention should be more important
              than treatment.”

“If these issues are not addressed effectively,
      the people’s health may be seriously
undermined, and economic development and
     social stability will be compromised”

                 Xi Jinping, President
               Peoples Republic of China


 National Meeting on Health attended by all members of the Standing
 Committee of the Political Bureau of the Communist Party of China
                  Central Committee, August 2016.
                                           Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




Among various tobacco control policies,
taxation has been shown to be an effective
means to reduce tobacco consumption,
reduce the risk of tobacco-related diseases
and premature death, and thus to reduce
health care costs, while generating a steady
and reliable revenue stream to finance
sustainable development.

Abstract

This study investigates the affordability of cigarettes in China between 2001 and
2016. In the past two decades, China has achieved unprecedented economic
growth rates. The country’s per capita GDP has increased at an average annual
rate of 10 percent. Rapid economic growth increases people’s purchasing
power and makes cigarettes more affordable, as income gains overrun cigarette
price increases.

Our results show that average-price cigarettes in China were 1.85 times more
affordable in 2016 than in 2001, while the cheapest category of cigarettes,
typically consumed by low-income persons, became 2.09 times more
affordable over this period. Thus, cheap cigarettes aimed at low-income
Chinese consumers exhibit higher levels of affordability, and have increased
their affordability faster, than other cigarettes aimed at average-income
consumers. The study estimates the affordability elasticity of cigarette
consumption in China at -0.6, suggesting that a 10 percent increase in cigarette
affordability will result in 6.01 percent increase in cigarette consumption.

Cigarette affordability in China has also increased in comparison with other
countries. China’s cigarette affordability was still at a low level compared with
other countries in the 1990s, but increased quickly and to a high level within
just two decades.

Findings from this study have important implications for tax policy, pertaining
to tobacco prices and tobacco control. These findings confirm that for tax
increases to reduce the number of smokers and deaths in China, policy makers
need to review the potential effects of rising income and prices with a focus on
reducing cigarette affordability. It is also important to look at affordability not
only on average but by income group—in this study proxied by using average
and rural incomes.
                                                                                      5
    Contents


    Abstract 								5

    Abbreviations							8

    Acknowledgments							9

    Introduction								10

    Literature Review							11

    Sources and Methods	                                12	
    	     • Cigarette Affordability Definition	         15
    	     • Price Data	                                 16
    	     • Income Data	                                17

    Results	                                            17
    	     • Affordability: Level, Trend, Magnitude of
    	      change and Growth rate	                      17
    	• The Affordability Elasticity of Demand	          24
    	• Global Ranking of Cigarette Affordability	       25

    Discussion	                                         27

    References 	                                        30




6
                                                       Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




Tables

Table 1:	   Cigarette affordability on average: RIP average,				                            18
		          IPC average, and CAI average

Table 2:	   Cigarette affordability of cheap brands: RIP cheap				                          19
		          brands, IPC cheap brands, and CAI cheap brands


Figures

Figure 1:	 Per capita disposable income of urban and rural households and	
		         the ratio of urban to rural disposable income in China			                        14

Figure 2: 	 RIP average and RIP cheap brands				                                            20

Figure 3: 	 IPC average and IPC cheap brands				                                            20

Figure 4:	 Income ratio vs. price ratio				                                                 21

Figure 5:	 CAI average and CAI cheap brands				                                             22

Figure 6:	 IPC average annual growth rate and fixed-base				
		         growth rate				22

Figure 7:	 IPC cheap brands annual growth rate and fixed-base 				
		         growth rate				23

Figure 8:	 Annual growth rate of income, annual growth rate of
		         price and CAI average				                                                        23

Figure 9:	 Cigarette consumption, IPC average and RIP average			                            25

Figure 10:	Cost of 100 packs of cigarettes as percentage of per 				
		         capita GDP, 2014				                                     26

Figure 11:	Trends of cigarette price, affordability and consumption			                      28




                                                                                                  7
    Abbreviations

    CAI: Cigarette Affordability Index

    CPDIR: Cigarette Price / Daily Income Ratio

    China CDC: Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention

    GDP: Gross Domestic Product

    HIC: High-Income Country

    IPC: Income Purchasing Capacity

    LIC: Low-Income Country

    LMIC: Lower Middle-Income Country

    MoL: Minutes of Labor

    NCI: National Cancer Institute

    RIP: Relative Income Price

    STMA: State Tobacco Monopoly Administration

    UMIC: Upper Middle Income Country

    WHO: World Health Organization



    Key Legislation and Regulations

    FCTC: WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control

    FCTC Article 6: Price and tax measures to reduce the
    demand for tobacco




8
                                         Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




Acknowledgments

This report was prepared by a team comprised of Rong Zheng, Yang Wang,
and Xiao Hu, WHO Collaborating Center for Tobacco and Economics,
University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. and Patricio
V. Marquez, The World Bank Group, Health, Nutrition and Population Global
Practice, Washington, DC, USA.

Support for the preparation of this study was provided by the World Bank’s
Global Tobacco Control Program, co-financed by the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, the Bloomberg Foundation, and the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grant No. 71373045).

The authors would like to thank the following peer reviewers for their
insightful comments and valuable suggestions that helped to improve an
earlier draft of the report:

   •	 Paul Isenman, former senior manager with the OECD/DAC 		
		    Secretariat, the World Bank Group, and USAID
   •	 Vito Tanzi, former Director of the Fiscal Affairs Department of the 	
		    International Monetary Fund (IMF)
   •	 Teh-wei Hu, Professor Emeritus, School of Public Health, University 	
		    of California, Berkeley, and now Director of the Public Health
		    Institute’s Center for International Tobacco Control, Berkeley, 		
		    California
   •	 Konstantin Krasovsky, Head, Tobacco Control Unit, Ministry of 		
		    Health of Ukraine
   •	 Feng Zhao, Human Development Program Leader for Ukraine, 		
		    Belarus and Moldova, World Bank Group
   •	 Shiyong Wang, Senior Health Specialist, World Bank Group
   •	 Francisco Meneses, Duke University
   •	 Alexander Irwin served as Editor of the report

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions in this paper are entirely those
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank
Group, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.


Beijing, China, and Washington, D.C., United States,
December 2016–April 2017




                                                                                    9
     Introduction

     China is the world’s largest consumer and producer of tobacco. One-third
     of cigarettes in the world are consumed in China (Hu et al. 2010). Smoking
     has had tremendous health and economic consequences for the country.
     Among various tobacco control policies, taxation has been shown to be an
     effective means to reduce tobacco consumption and thus to reduce health
     care costs, while generating a steady and reliable revenue stream to finance
     sustainable development. Increasing tax and price can reduce demand for
     tobacco products, but the effectiveness of price increases as a deterrent to
     tobacco use depends on how much the price rises in relation to the income
     of current and potential tobacco users, as well as with respect to inflation. The
     price of tobacco products in relation to the income of tobacco users—that is,
     affordability—is therefore a key determinant of tobacco-use behavior (Nigar
     et al. 2016).

     The FCTC has made a clear provision for taking affordability into account in
     setting tobacco tax policies. Article 6 guidelines recommend that: “When
     establishing or increasing their national levels of taxation, Parties should
     take into account—among other things—both price elasticity and income
     elasticity of demand, as well as inflation and changes in household income,
     to make tobacco products less affordable over time in order to reduce
     consumption and prevalence. Therefore, Parties should consider having
     regular adjustment processes or procedures for periodic revaluation of
     tobacco tax levels” (WHO 2014a).

     The past two decades have witnessed rapid economic growth in China,
     with per capita GDP growing at a rate of nearly 10 percent per year, while
     Chinese people’s incomes and purchasing power have also risen substantially.
     Cigarette consumption has likewise increased dramatically, despite the
     Chinese government’s efforts in raising the tobacco excise tax in 2009
     and 2015. This pattern suggests that cigarettes have become increasingly
     affordable. Few previous studies have examined cigarette affordability in
     China, despite substantial variation in cigarette prices and incomes, as well
     as in their trends over time. This study examines cigarette affordability in
     China and the correlation with increased consumption. It also compares the
     changes in cigarette affordability in China over time with changes in
     other countries.




10
                                                                      Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




The findings of this study will provide supportive evidence to Chinese policy
makers for a shift from price-based policy solutions to affordability-based
policy solutions, with the aim of making cigarettes less affordable. This will
involve raising taxes so that the nominal price of cigarettes increases by more
than the sum of the inflation rate and the real per capita income growth rate



Literature Review

Affordability refers to an individual’s purchasing power with regard to
a product. Over the past decades, various methodologies have been
developed, defining cigarette affordability as a function of cigarette price and
individuals’ income levels, with reference to the quantity or share of resources
required to buy a pack of cigarettes. Scollo (1996) and Lal and Scollo (2002)
developed the “relative price of cigarettes expressed in Big Mac terms,”
evaluating cigarette affordability in 30 developed countries. China, of course,
was not included in the sample list. Guindon et al. (2002) defined affordability
by Minutes of Labor (MoL), which is how many working minutes are needed
to buy a pack of local-brand or Marlboro (or equivalent) cigarettes. In this
study, Chinese people needed to work 61.8 minutes to purchase a pack of
Marlboros and 56.2 minutes to buy a pack of local-brand cigarettes in 2000,
suggesting a low affordability level. Kan (2007) developed the cigarette price/
daily income ratio (CPDIR) to evaluate cigarette affordability by calculating
the percentage of daily income needed to buy a pack of cigarettes. Shanghai
and Beijing were included in Kan’s study, which found that both cities had
a low level of cigarette affordability in 2006. Blecher et al. (2004) established
Relative Income Price (RIP) as the measurement indicator of cigarette
affordability. Blecher’s RIP result listed China as the lower middle-income
country (LMIC) where cigarettes were least affordable in the period from
1999 to 2001.

Hu et al. (2008) created a cigarette affordability index (CAI), which captures
the magnitude of cigarette affordability change in China. The results showed
that cigarette affordability in China increased 2.34 times between 1990 and
2007 (Hu et al. 2010).

WHO (2015) compared changing rates of cigarette affordability (defined by
RIP) between 2008 and 2014 for selected countries. The rate of increasing
cigarette affordability in China was the highest among the countries studied.
Another recent study of 49 sample countries also found that China’s rate
of cigarette affordability increase was the fastest among the countries
considered from 2000-2013 (U.S. NCI and WHO 2016). The examination of


                                                                                                                 11
     affordability change rates explains why, despite the fact that cigarettes remain
     less affordable in LMICs compared with high-income countries (HICs) overall,
     changes in affordability over time have led to a decrease in consumption of
     cigarettes in HICs but an increase in the rest of the world (U.S. NCI and
     WHO 2016).

     Some of the studies listed above examined the level of Chinese cigarette
     affordability for a period during the 1990s and the first half of the 2000s.
     Cigarette affordability in China as revealed in these studies presented a
     low level compared with other countries. These studies also describe an
     increasing trend in cigarette affordability in China from the 1990s through
     the 2000s, with China exhibiting the fastest rate of increase in cigarette
     affordability worldwide.

     The above studies took China as one of a number of sample countries for
     global comparison of cigarette affordability. To date, no study has focused
     specifically on China to analyze the country’s cigarette-affordability level and
     the magnitude of cigarette-affordability trends by time series since China
     joined the FCTC in 2005. Nor have existing studies characterized the current
     level of cigarette affordability in China by global comparison.

     The current study investigates cigarette affordability in China during the
     period from 2001 to 2016 with several objectives. Our research: (1) examines
     cigarette affordability in China both according to average prices and
     specifically for the cheap cigarette brands consumed by low-income persons;
     (2) estimates the correlation between cigarette affordability and cigarette
     consumption; (3) identifies the level and magnitude of cigarette-affordability
     increase in China from a global comparison perspective; and (4) explores
     various tobacco tax policy implications pertaining to tobacco price and
     tobacco control.



     Sources and Methods

     Among all methods applied in previous studies, the RIP method (which
     defines cigarette affordability as the percentage of per capita GDP required
     to buy 100 packs of cigarettes) has several advantages compared with
     other measures: first, per capita GDP or per capita disposable income
     nationwide are good indicators of living standard and income; second,
     these data are commonly available and therefore make it easier to calculate
     cigarette affordability, compared with other methods applied in previous
     studies (Blecher et al. 2004); third, every country calculates per capita GDP


12
                                                                       Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




or per capita disposable income nationwide annually using a consistent
methodology, thus enabling global comparison of tobacco affordability at
country level. The World Health Organization (WHO) has adopted the RIP
method, calculating cigarette affordability for all countries with available data
(WHO 2015). This makes it possible for our study to identify the current level of
cigarette affordability in China compared with other countries.

Taking into account that the Chinese government and state-owned
enterprises take a substantial part from social wealth distribution, nationwide
per capita disposable income would be much more suitable than per capita
GDP for use as an indicator of income. Accordingly, in our study, the RIP
method is adapted by replacing per capita GDP with nationwide per capita
disposable income.

Previous studies have demonstrated that different income groups respond
differently to price-related measures. This has been documented both in high-
income countries such as the United States (Hersch 2000) and lower middle-
income countries such as Indonesia (Adioetomo et al. 2005). In China, Hu et al.
(2008) showed that price-related measures for cigarettes are more effective in
low-income groups than in high-income groups.

China’s income inequality since 2005 has reached very high levels, with the
Gini coefficient in the range of 0.53-0.55. A substantial portion of this elevated
income inequality is due to two structural forces: regional disparities and the
rural-urban gap (Xie et al. 2014). This creates a situation quite different from
that in most other countries. For example, in the United States, individual-
level and family-level income determinants, such as family structure and
race/ethnicity, play an important role in determining income inequality
(McCall et al. 2010). Figure 1 presents the ratio of urban to rural disposable
income in China between 2001 and 2016. The difference between average
incomes in rural and urban areas has been particularly high in China. In
several years between 2001 and 2016, the ratio of urban to rural disposable
income reached 3.3 (National Bureau of Statistics of China 2012). This ratio
is much higher than in other emerging economies, such as India, where the
ratio of consumption between urban and rural households was just under 2
in 2009 (OECD 2012). The inequality between rural and urban areas is linked
with disparities in access to basic services—such as medical insurance and
education (Herd 2010)—and institutional factors—notably, the hukou system,
which prevents rural and urban migrants from acquiring the same rights as
people with the local urban registration status in the area in which they live
(Herd et al. 2010).



                                                                                                                  13
     Figure 1: Per capita disposable income of urban and rural households
     and the ratio of urban to rural per capita disposable income in China




     Considering the large disparities in income distribution in China, the use of
     average income as an indicator may produce a biased result for low-income
     groups who buy cheap cigarettes. Meanwhile, smoking is more prevalent
     among low-income groups, such as rural residents, than among urban
     residents (China CDC 2015). Therefore, when assessing the affordability of
     cigarettes, particular attention should be given to low-income groups and
     rural dwellers in China.

     Chinese households are categorized by income quintile based on per capita
     income level. The top 20 percent with the highest incomes are classified as
     the high-income group, and the other four quintile levels are designated as
     follows: upper middle-income group, middle-income group, lower middle-
     income group, and low-income group (National Bureau of Statistics of
     China 2017).

     In 2016, the per capita disposable income of rural Chinese households was
     12,363 RMB, while the per capita disposable income of the lower middle-
     income group of the national population was 12,899 RMB (National Bureau
     of Statistics of China 2017). Taking into account the equivalence in per capita
     disposable income between rural households and the lower middle-income
     group, along with the absence of data on per capita disposable income for
     the lower middle-income group before 2016 , in this study we will use the
     per capita disposable income of rural households for the affordability analysis
     of cheap brands consumed by low-income people.


14
                                                                                                       Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




               Given the difficulties of evaluating cigarette affordability among different
               income groups, we propose a dual examination. Our first approach assesses
               cigarette affordability on average by using the weighted average cigarette
               price and per capita disposable income nationwide. Our second analysis
 e a dual examination. Our first approach assesses cigarette affordability on average by using
               assesses cigarette affordability specifically for low-income groups by using the
 ighted average cigarette price and per capita disposable income nationwide. Our second
               price for the cheapest category of cigarettes in China, together with the per
               capitaaffordability
is assesses cigarette              specifically
                      disposable income             low-income groups by using the price for
                                                for households
                                           of rural
                 propose
eapest category of        a dual
                   cigarettes    examination.
                              in China,        Our
                                        together    first
                                                 with  theapproach  assesses
                                                           per capita        cigarette
                                                                      disposable income   of rural on average by using
                                                                                       affordability

holds.           the weighted average cigarette price and per capita disposable income nationwide. Our second
                 Cigarette Affordability Definition:
                 Inanalysis assesses
                    this paper, we use cigarette   affordability
                                          two methods             specifically
                                                            to define   cigarettefor low-incomeOne
                                                                                   affordability.  groups
                                                                                                       is by using the price for
 ette Affordabilitythe    Definition:
                       cheapest category 	 In this          we
                                                    paper, in   use two     methods   to define  cigarette
                 the RIP  method,    whichof    cigarettes
                                              defines          China,
                                                       cigarette        together
                                                                  affordability   with the
                                                                                  as the   per capita
                                                                                          percentage  disposable
                                                                                                       of        income of rural
ability. One is the RIP method, which defines cigarette affordability as the percentage of per
                   households.
                 per capita disposable income required to buy 100 packs of cigarettes. The
 disposable income
                 higher  the RIP, to
                       required      buy
                                   the less100   packs of
                                             affordable      cigarettes.
                                                          cigarettes      The
                                                                       are, andhigher   the RIP,
                                                                                 vice versa.      the less
                                                                                             Equation   (1)
                   Cigarette
able cigarettes are,            Affordability
                     and vice versa.
                 demonstrates          Equation
                                  the RIP
                                                     Definition:
                                            rationale.
                                                                     	 In this paper,
                                                   (1) demonstrates the RIP rationale. we  use two   methods to define cigarette
                 affordability. One is the RIP method, which defines cigarette affordability as the percentage of per
                                    100×P
                 RIP = disposable income required to
                 capita                                    buy 100 packs
                                                       																						 1 of cigarettes. The higher the RIP, the less
                         Disposable	Income567	895:;9
                 affordable cigarettes are, and vice versa. Equation (1) demonstrates the RIP rationale.
 RIP represents the relative income price of cigarettes, and P is the retail price of a pack of
                  where RIP represents the relative income price of cigarettes, and P is the retail
                                                            100×P
tes with 20 individual pieces. In subsequent parts of this report, “RIP average” represents the
                                             = 20 individual pieces. In subsequent
                                         RIP with
               price of a pack of cigarettes                                     																						
                                                                                                   parts1 of
                                                Disposable	Income
tage of nationwide per capita disposable income required to buy        100 packs of weighted
                                                                      567	895:;9
               this report, “RIP average” represents the percentage of nationwide per capita
                     andRIP
                 where
e-price cigarettes,       “RIPrepresents
                                 cheap    the relative
                                         brands”         incomethe
                                                                 price  of cigarettes, andper     the retail price of a pack of
                                                                                            P iscapita
               disposable   income    required   to represents
                                                     buy 100 packs   percentage
                                                                     of weighted  of  the
                                                                                    average-price
                 cigarettes
able income of cigarettes,
                rural       with 20
                      households     individual
                                   required       pieces.  In subsequent  parts ofavailable
                                                                                   this report,  “RIPofaverage” represents the
                           and “RIP   cheapto   buy
                                              brands” 100  packs of the
                                                        represents  thecheapest
                                                                         percentage    of thebrand
                                                                                              per capita
tes.             percentage
               disposable     of nationwide
                            income              per capita disposable
                                      of rural households     required toincome
                                                                           buy 100required
                                                                                     packs ofto the
                                                                                                 buy 100 packs of weighted
                 average-price
               cheapest           cigarettes,
                          available  brand of  and   “RIP cheap brands” represents the percentage of the per capita
                                                cigarettes.
 paper we introduce another method for assessing affordability, which measures how many
                  disposable income of rural households required to buy 100 packs of the cheapest available brand of
of cigarettes could     purchased
                     be paper
                   this
                Incigarettes.       with the per
                               we introduce      capita disposable
                                               another  method for  income   in a affordability,
                                                                      assessing   given setting.  For
                                                                                                 which
                the result is
 a better term, measures      called
                            how      the packs
                                  many   income ofpurchasing  capacity
                                                   cigarettes could   be(IPC).  The higher
                                                                         purchased          the per
                                                                                      with the   IPC,
                  In this paper
                capita disposable
re affordable cigarettes         we  introduce
                                     income
                          are, and vice         another
                                              inEquation
                                                 a given setting.
                                         versa.          method   for assessing
                                                                   For lack of
                                                          (2) demonstrates       affordability,
                                                                               a better
                                                                             the        term, the
                                                                                  IPC rationale. which measures how many
                packs
              result is of cigarettes
                        called  the incomecould be      purchasedcapacity
                                                      purchasing             per capita
                                                                    with the (IPC).            the income
                                                                                        disposable
                                                                                    The higher     IPC, thein a given setting. For
 Disposable	Income567	895:;9
                     of a better
                lack affordable
              more                  term,
                                    cigarettesthe result
                               																						 are, is called
                                                      2 	 and        the income
                                                               vice versa.       purchasing
                                                                            Equation         capacity (IPC).
                                                                                      (2) demonstrates   the The higher the IPC,
             P
              IPC rationale.
                the more affordable cigarettes are, and vice versa. Equation (2) demonstrates the IPC rationale.
IPC represents the income purchasing capacity of cigarettes, and P is the retail price of a pack
                         Disposable	Income567	895:;9
                 IPC = pieces. In our subsequent discussion,
rettes with 20 individual                                                 “IPC
                                                        																						 2 average”
                                                                                 	         will refer to the
                                      P
r of packs of average-price cigarettes that could be purchased with the nationwide per capita
                where
                 where IPC
                        IPCrepresents
                             representsthe
                                        the income
                                             income  purchasingcapacity
                                                    purchasing            capacity of   cigarettes, and
able income, while   “IPC  cheap  brands”   will refer to the number of of            cigarettes,
                                                                                   packs   of the and  P is the retail price of a pack
                                                                                                  cheapest
                 P is the  retail price  of a  pack of cigarettes  In with   20 individual       pieces. In  ouraverage” will refer to the
of cigarettes that of cigarettes
                   could           with 20
                           be purchased      individual
                                            with  the per pieces.     our subsequent
                                                          capita disposable       income of discussion,   “IPC
                                                                                                rural households.
                 subsequent discussion, “IPC average” will refer to the number of packs of
                   number of packs of average-price cigarettes that could be purchased with the nationwide per capita
he RIP and IPC     methods can be
                 average-price         used to that
                                   cigarettes     examine
                                                       couldlevels  and trendswith
                                                               be purchased         in cigarette    affordability.
                                                                                          the nationwide       per
                   disposable income, while “IPC cheap brands” will refer to the number of packs of the cheapest
                 same data,
 applied to the capita          the RIP
                          disposable       and IPC
                                        income,       methods
                                                    while        produce
                                                          “IPC cheap         exactly
                                                                          brands”       the
                                                                                      will    same
                                                                                           refer  to results.  Our of
                                                                                                      the number
s for introducing  brand   of
                          IPC
                     the of   cigarettes
                                method     that could
                                                as follows.
                                           arebrand    be purchased
                                                              (1) The   with
                                                                         IPC   the  per
                                                                                trendbe  capita   disposable
                                                                                            consistent with
                                                                                        is purchased           income of rural households.
                 packs      the  cheapest             of cigarettes    that   could                       with the
                                                                                                                the
                  trend,
 te affordabilityper       whereas
                      capita
                   Both   the        RIP
                               disposable
                               RIP and   IPCpresents
                                             income   an
                                                methods ofopposite
                                                           rural
                                                          can    households.
                                                                be   trend
                                                                   used    to to  cigarette
                                                                               examine         affordability,
                                                                                           levels   and trends i.e.,
                                                                                                                 in cigarette affordability.
RIP goes up, affordability       goes  down.     Thus,  IPC   better  describes       the  correlation   between
                   When applied to the same data, the RIP and IPC methods produce exactly the same results. Our
ability and consumption.
                   reasons for     While RIP represents
                              (2) introducing                  the cost
                                                  the IPC method      are ofas   follows. as
                                                                               cigarettes          percentage
                                                                                             (1)a The   IPC trendof is consistent with the
e, IPC more simply      reflects the numbertrend,       of cigarettes
                                                 packswhereas           that someone        could afford    to buy                                15
                   cigarette   affordability                      RIP presents      an opposite      trend to  cigarette affordability, i.e.,
 given income in     hand.   Rooted   in  the  everyday
                   when RIP goes up, affordability goes down. Thus, IPC better describesbe
                                                           model   of  a  simple     transaction,    IPC  may     the correlation between
for non-specialists,   including the
                   affordability   andgeneral             (2)grasp.
                                                  public, to
                                         consumption.           While Thus,
                                                                        RIP IPC      may be
                                                                               represents       a more
                                                                                                   cost intuitive,
                                                                                              the        of cigarettes as a percentage of
                           Both the RIP and IPC methods can be used to examine levels and trends
                           in cigarette affordability. When applied to the same data, the RIP and IPC
                           methods produce exactly the same results. Our reasons for introducing the
                           IPC method are as follows. (1) The IPC trend is consistent with the cigarette
                           affordability trend, whereas RIP presents an opposite trend to cigarette
                           affordability, i.e., when RIP goes up, affordability goes down. Thus, IPC better
                           describes the correlation between affordability and consumption. (2) While
                           RIP represents the cost of cigarettes as a percentage of income, IPC more
                           simply reflects the number packs of cigarettes that someone could afford to
                           buy with a given income in hand. Rooted in the everyday model of a simple
                           transaction, IPC may be easier for non-specialists, including the general
                           public, to grasp. Thus, IPC may be a more intuitive, “natural” measure for use in
                           policy dialog and advocacy.

                      In this paper, we also use the Cigarette Affordability Index (CAI) to measure
     In this paper, we also use the Cigarette Affordability Index (CAI) to measure the magnitude of
                      the magnitude of cigarette-affordability change during the whole
     cigarette-affordability change during the whole observed period.
                      observed period.
                      In this paper
     Equation (3) demonstrates       , we
                               the CAI     also use
                                         rationale   the
                                                   for   Cigarette
                                                       the         Affordability Index (CAI) to measure the magnitu
                                                           RIP method.
                      cigarette-affordability
                               RIP?@@A         change during the whole observed period.
                      CAI; =           ,      where	t	 = 	2001, 2002 … 2016							(3)
                      Equation RIP   demonstrates the CAI rationale for the RIP method.
                                 (3) ;
     Equation (4) demonstrates the CAI rationale for
                                                   RIPthe
                                                      ?@@AIPC method.
                                           CAI; =          ,    where	t	 = 	2001, 2002 … 2016							(3)
                       Equation (4) demonstrates theRIP ; rationale for the IPC method.
                                                      CAI
             LMNO
     CAI; =        ,				where	t	
                         Equation  	2001,
                                 =(4)     2002 … 2016							(4)
                                      demonstrates the CAI rationale for the IPC method.
               LMNPQQR


                              LMNO
     Price Data: Weighted
                    CAI; =average
                            LMN
                                   cigarette
                                   ,				where	t	 = for
                                             price     each
                                                   	2001,   year …
                                                          2002   is 2016							(4)
                                                                    calculated using the WHO TaXSiM
                                             PQQR
     China model. The cheapest-category price for each year is the representative price of the cheapest
                       Price
     category applied in      Data:
                         the WHO    Weighted
                                 TaXSiM      average
                                          China      cigarette
                                                model. c
                                                               price for
                                                        	 Normally,      each year
                                                                     TaXSiM        is calculated
                                                                               is based          using
                                                                                        on data for allthe WHO TaX
                       Price
                         China
     cigarettes (or at least  Data:
                                model.
                             covers     The cheapest-category
                                    80 percent                price applied
                                               of the market) when  for each year
                                                                            in     is the representative
                                                                               a country.  However, givenprice of the che
                        categoryaverage
                      Weighted     applied cigarette  price for each  year model.
                                                                           is calculated
                                                                                  c       using TaXSiM
                                                                                   	 Normally,   the
     that there are 870 different types of in the WHO
                                           cigarettes    TaXSiM
                                                      in China,    China
                                                                 with  large price variations,          is based on data f
                                                                                               a methodology
                       WHO TaXSiM China model. The cheapest-category price for each year is the
                        cigarettes
     including all cigarettes      (or
                              is not           covers
                                       at leastwith
                                     feasible         80 percent
                                                    TaXSiM       of the
                                                            China.  To market)  when
                                                                        solve this    applied
                                                                                   problem,   inTaXSiM
                                                                                                a country. However,
                                                                                            the
                       representative price of the cheapest category applied in the WHO TaXSiM
     China model selects     a there
                          that        are   870 different
                               representative       cigarette types   of cigarettes
                                                                for each              in China,
                                                                            price category,        withthe
                                                                                                using    large   price variations,
                                                                                                             market                 a methodo
                       China   model.    c
                                            Normally,    TaXSiM    is based    on data for all    cigarettes    (or at share
                                                                                                                       least of
     each price category  including    all cigarettes
                            to calculate
                       covers   80 percent   theof
                                                 weighted is not
                                                    the market)   feasible
                                                               average
                                                                    when      with
                                                                          price,
                                                                             appliedTaXSiM
                                                                                  weighted       China.
                                                                                               average
                                                                                       in a country.       To incidence,
                                                                                                          tax         this problem,
                                                                                                              solvegiven
                                                                                                        However,             etc.      the TaX
                          China
     The selection criteria
                       that  for choosing
                             theremodel
                                     are 870selects
                                              the     a representative
                                                   representative
                                                different    types of       cigarette
                                                                      cigarettes
                                                                        cigarettes   infor
                                                                                  are:  (1)  each
                                                                                             the
                                                                                         China,     price
                                                                                                 selected
                                                                                                  with     category,
                                                                                                            brand
                                                                                                        large       hasusing
                                                                                                                price          the market sha
                                                                                                                         a large
                          each   price
                       variations,
     market share in each    price      category
                                     a methodology
                                    category,    and     calculate
                                                     to (2) includingtheof
                                                             the price    weighted
                                                                         all cigarettes
                                                                             the          is not price,
                                                                                       average
                                                                                 representative   feasibleweighted
                                                                                                    cigarettewith   TaXSiM
                                                                                                                is the  median tax incidence
                                                                                                                      average
                       China.
     or very close to the The       price this
                                To solve
                               selection
                           median                problem,
                                            criteria
                                            in each   for      the
                                                           choosing
                                                      category.    TaXSiM
                                                                  The  the
                                                                        price China   model
                                                                           representative
                                                                               information      selects
                                                                                              cigarettes
                                                                                               on         aare:
                                                                                                            representative
                                                                                                  representative(1) the  selected brand has a
                                                                                                                     cigarettes
     is sourced from cigarette
                       themarket
                            Annual for
                                   shareeachin each
                                      Cigarette price  category,
                                                      price
                                                    Price    List   using
                                                              category,
                                                                  producedandthe  market
                                                                                (2)
                                                                               by   theChina
                                                                                   the      share
                                                                                         price   of of
                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                 State each   price
                                                                                                         representative
                                                                                                        Tobacco     Monopolycigarette is the m
                       category    to calculate
                          or very close                       price in average
                                                     the weighted
                                           to the median                          price, The
                                                                        each category.     weighted     average tax
                                                                                                price information     on representative ciga
     Administration (STMA).
                       incidence, etc. The selection criteria for choosing the representative cigarettes
                              is sourced from the Annual Cigarette Price List produced by the China State Tobacco Mono
     Income Data: Income data come from the National Bureau of Statistics of China. Because there
                        Administration
                     c. WHO  TaXSiM is designed(STMA).
                                                 to describe the current market and tax situation for domestically consumed cigarettes within
     were no nationwide           countrydisposable
                         per capita
                     a particular                          income
                                         or tax jurisdiction, and then data   published
                                                                       to forecast the impact by   the
                                                                                              of tax    National
                                                                                                     changes          Bureauprices,
                                                                                                                               of Statistics
                                                                                                             on final consumer      annual
                            consumption volumes, and tax revenues for the Government (WHO 2014b). The WHO TaXSiM China model was jointly
                        Income
     before 2013, the nationwide
                      developed     Data
                                    per
                                by WHO     : Income
                                         capita
                                       PND/TCE,   disposable
                                                the       data
                                                    Tax Policy   come
                                                                  income
                                                               Department fromdata
                                                                          of the  the  National
                                                                                     for
                                                                                 Chinese each year
                                                                                         Ministry      Bureau
                                                                                                         during
                                                                                                  of Finance,     of  Statistics
                                                                                                                    the
                                                                                                              and the   period
                                                                                                                      WHO          of China. Because
                                                                                                                                  2001-
                                                                                                                          Collaborating
                            Center on Tobacco and Economics, based in Beijing, China.
                       were
     2012 are calculated    no per
                         from  nationwide  per capita disposable
                                   capita disposable  income for   urban data
                                                                 income       published
                                                                         households  andbyper
                                                                                           the capita
                                                                                               National Bureau of Stat
                                                                                                      net
16                     before 2013,
     income for rural households,   the nationwide
                                  sourced          per
                                            from the   capita disposable
                                                     Chinese             income of
                                                               National Bureau  data for each year
                                                                                   Statistics,     during
                                                                                               using the the period 2
     population ratio of2012 are
                         urban   calculated
                               residents     rural per
                                         andfrom        capita respectively,
                                                    residents,               as the for
                                                               disposable income        urban
                                                                                     weight.  households
                                                                                             Data between and per capit
                              for rural households,
                      income nationwide
     2013 and 2016, including             per capita sourced from
                                                     disposable    the Chinese
                                                                income,        National
                                                                        per capita       Bureau
                                                                                   disposable    of Statistics, usin
                                                                                              income
                                                                                  Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




           are: (1) the selected brand has a large market share in each price category,
           and (2) the price of the representative cigarette is the median or very close to
           the median price in each category. The price information on representative
           cigarettes is sourced from the Annual Cigarette Price List produced by the
           China State Tobacco Monopoly Administration (STMA).

           Income Data:
           Income data come from the National Bureau of Statistics of China. Because
           there were no nationwide per capita disposable income data published
           by the National Bureau of Statistics before 2013, the nationwide per capita
           disposable income data for each year during the period 2001-2012 are
           calculated from per capita disposable income for urban households and per
           capita net income for rural households, sourced from the Chinese National
           Bureau of Statistics, using the population ratio of urban residents and rural
           residents, respectively, as the weight. Data between 2013 and 2016, including
           nationwide per capita disposable income, per capita disposable income for
           urban households, and per capita disposable income for rural households, are
ude of
           sourced from the National Bureau of Statistics of China.



           Results

           Affordability: Level, Trend, Magnitude of Change, and Growth rate
           Using the per capita disposable income and cigarette price information
           described, we performed a dual examination on cigarette affordability for
           weighted average-price and cheap cigarette brands between 2001 and
XSiM       2016, with the following aims: (1) estimate the levels of cigarette affordability
eapest     in each year; (2) present the trends of cigarette affordability through the
           period; (3) calculate the magnitudes of cigarette affordability change; and (4)
for all
           examine the annual growth rates, as well as the fixed-base growth rates.
 given
 ology
           Table 1 presents the level of average cigarette affordability (RIP average and
XSiM       IPC average) and the magnitude of average cigarette-affordability change
 are of    (CAI average) between 2001 and 2016. The RIP average lists the cost of 100
 e, etc.   packs of weighted average-price cigarettes as a percentage of nationwide
a large    per capita disposable income in each year. The IPC average lists the number
median     of packs of cigarettes that could be purchased with the nationwide per
arettes    capita disposable income in each year. CAI average lists the magnitude of the
           nationwide affordability change on average in each year compared with the
 opoly
           base year of 2001.


  there
 tistics
 2001-                                                                                                                       17
 ta net
ng the
            Table 1: Cigarette affordability on average: RIP average, IPC average,
            and CAI average

     YEAR         WEIGHTED        PER CAPITA      RIP AVERAGE   IPC AVERAGE   CAI AVERAGE
                  AVERAGE PRICE   DISPOSABLE      (%)           (PACKS)
                  (RMB/PACK)      INCOME
                                  NATIONWIDE
                                  (RMB)

     2001         4.12            4058.52         10.15         985           1.00
     2002         4.32            4518.90         9.56          1046          1.06
     2003         4.61            4993.22         9.23          1083          1.10
     2004         5.04            5644.62         8.93          1120          1.14
     2005         5.63            6366.57         8.84          1131          1.15
     2006         6.25            7210.91         8.67          1154          1.17
     2007         6.43            8566.60         7.51          1332          1.35
     2008         6.14            9938.92         6.18          1619          1.64
     2009         6.71            10964.57        6.12          1634          1.66
     2010         7.27            12507.58        5.81          1720          1.75
     2011         9.33            14581.95        6.40          1563          1.59
     2012         10.27           16668.53        6.16          1623          1.65
     2013         10.80           18310.76        5.90          1695          1.72
     2014         11.61           20167.12        5.76          1737          1.76
     2015         12.81           21966.19        5.83          1715          1.74
     2016         13.09           23821.00        5.50          1820          1.85


            Table 2 presents the level of cigarette affordability for the cheap brands
            primarily consumed by low-income groups (RIP cheap brands and IPC cheap
            brands) and the magnitude of cigarette affordability change for cheap brands
            (CAI cheap brands) between 2001 and 2016. The “RIP cheap brands” shows
            the cost of 100 packs of cheap-brand cigarettes as a percentage of the per
            capita disposable income of rural households in each year. The “IPC cheap
            brands” shows the packs of cigarettes that could be purchased with the per
            capita disposable income of rural households in each year. “CAI cheap brands”
            measures the magnitude of the affordability change relative to the base-year
            level (2001) for the cheap brands consumed by low-income groups.




18
                                                                      Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




Table 2: Cigarette affordability of cheap brands: RIP cheap brands, IPC
cheap brands, and CAI cheap brands

 YEAR        CHEAPEST           PER CAPITA        RIP CHEAP    IPC CHEAP       CAI CHEAP
             CATEGORY PRICE     DISPOSABLE        BRANDS (%)   BRANDS          BRANDS
             (RMB/PACK)         INCOME OF RURAL                (PACKS)
                                HOUSEHOLDS
                                (RMB)

 2001        1.20               2366.40           5.07         1972            1.00
 2002        1.20               2475.60           4.85         2063            1.05
 2003        1.20               2622.20           4.58         2185            1.11
 2004        1.20               2936.40           4.09         2447            1.24
 2005        1.40               3254.90           4.30         2325            1.18
 2006        1.40               3587.00           3.90         2562            1.30
 2007        2.00               4140.40           4.83         2070            1.05
 2008        2.50               4760.60           5.25         1904            0.97
 2009        2.50               5153.20           4.85         2061            1.05
 2010        2.00               5919.00           3.38         2960            1.50
 2011        2.50               6977.30           3.58         2791            1.42
 2012        2.50               7916.60           3.16         3167            1.61
 2013        2.50               9429.59           2.65         3772            1.91
 2014        2.50               10488.88          2.38         4196            2.13
 2015        3.00               11421.71          2.63         3807            1.93
 2016        3.00               12363.00          2.43         4121            2.09


Figure 2 and Figure 3 present the levels of cigarette affordability of the
average and cheap brands in each year between 2001-2016, expressed
respectively by the RIP method and the IPC method. For example, using the
RIP method, the cost of 100 packs of weighted average-price cigarettes as
a percentage of nationwide per capita disposable income was 5.5 percent
in 2016. By the IPC method, meanwhile, nationwide per capita disposable
income could buy 1820 packs of average-price cigarettes in 2016.

Both methods demonstrate that cheap cigarette brands had a higher level of
affordability than did average-price cigarettes throughout the whole period,
which means cheap-brand cigarettes are more affordable for low-income
consumers than are other cigarette price categories for average-income
groups. This finding runs counter to a number of results from previous
research, which have tended to show that cigarettes remain more affordable
for high-income groups than for low-income groups. This pattern has been
reported both in cross-country studies (Blecher et al. 2009; U.S. NCI and WHO
2016) and at the level of individual countries (Rodríguez-Iglesias et al. 2015)




                                                                                                                 19
     Figure 2: RIP average and RIP cheap brands




     Figure 3: IPC average and IPC cheap brands




     Why, then, do the cheap cigarette brands used by lower-income groups
     exhibit a consistently higher-than-average level of affordability in China?

     Figure 4 shows that, through the whole of our study period, the ratio of
     weighted-average cigarette price to cheapest-category price is higher than
     the ratio of nationwide per capita disposable income to the per capita
     disposable income of rural households. This suggests that the price gap
     between the weighted-average cigarette price and the cheapest price is
     larger than the income gap between average per capita disposable income
     nationwide and the per capita disposable income of rural households.



20
                                                                      Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




This is due, in particular, to the extremely low price of the cheap cigarette
brands in China. For example, in 2016, the price of the cheapest cigarette
brands was around 3 RMB (0.43 USD) per pack. The dramatically reduced ratio
of weighted-average price to cheapest-category price between 2006 and
2010, depicted in Figure 4, also explains why “CAI average” increased faster
than “CAI cheap brands” during this period, as Figure 5 makes clear.

Figure 4: Income ratio vs. price ratio




Figure 5 presents the trends and the magnitudes of cigarette-affordability
changes for the average and cheap brands, respectively, by CAIs. Both the
average and the cheap brands have become more affordable during the
period from 2001 to 2016. However, the upward trends are configured
differently in the two groups. The affordability of average-price cigarettes
presents a steadily increasing trend with only two turning points, in 2011
and 2015, while the affordability trend of the cheap brands presents notable
ups and downs. A U shape observed between 2006 and 2010 suggests that
cheap brands temporarily became less affordable for potential consumers
(primarily low-income people) in this period than in previous years. During
the periods 2003-2006 and 2012-2016, in contrast, cheap-brand affordability
showed a faster rate of increase than the average. CAI values also show the
magnitude of cigarette affordability change. In 2016, for example, cigarettes
were 1.85 times more affordable than in 2001, on average. However, cheap-
brand cigarettes in 2016 were 2.09 times more affordable than in 2001,
indicating that their affordability was increasing faster than the average over
the preceding period.




                                                                                                                 21
     Figure 5: CAI average and CAI cheap brands




     Figure 6 and Figure 7 illustrate the annual growth rates and fixed-base
     growth rates of cigarette affordability for the average and the cheap brands,
     respectively. On average, cigarette affordability increased by 85 percent,
     while the cheap brands’ affordability increased by 109 percent between
     2001 and 2016. There were two years in which, on average, cigarettes were
     less affordable than the previous year. This happened in 2011 and 2015. The
     cheaper brands, in contrast, present a fluctuating annual change, as well as a
     dramatic fixed-base growth rate.

     Figure 6: IPC average annual growth rate and fixed-base growth rate




22
                                                                  Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




Figure 7: IPC cheap brands annual growth rate and fixed-base
growth rate




The trend of cigarette affordability depends on the relative magnitude of
the income change and price change. As illustrated in Figure 8, on average,
cigarette affordability increases when the annual growth rate of nationwide
per capita disposable income exceeds the annual growth rate of weighted-
average cigarette price, as happened in most years between 2001 and 2016.
On the other hand, when the annual growth rate of weighted-average price
outpaces the annual growth rate of nationwide per capita disposable income
(which happened in 2011 and 2015), cigarette affordability decreases. So an
effective tobacco tax policy must evaluate cigarette affordability regularly,
and regular tax increases should be applied to make sure that the nominal
price of cigarettes increases by more than the sum of the inflation rate and
the real per capita income growth rate.

Figure 8: Annual growth rate of income, annual growth rate of price,
and CAI average




                                                                                                             23
     The Affordability Elasticity of Demand
     The theory of price elasticity of demand suggests that people will generally
     demand more of a product as the price decreases, assuming other factors
     (such as incomes, the prices of other substitute goods, and people’s tastes)
     are kept constant (Blecher et al. 2004). More precisely, the price elasticity of
     demand gives the percentage change in quantity demanded in response to a
     one percent change in price. It is generally accepted that, on average, a price
     rise of 10 percent would be expected to reduce demand for tobacco products
     by about 4 percent in high-income countries and by about 8 percent in
     low- and middle-income countries (World Bank 1999). Most estimates of the
     price elasticity of demand from the large literature on high-income countries
     fall into the relatively narrow range from -0.25 to -0.50, with many clustering
     around -0.40. In contrast, estimates from the much smaller literature on
     low-income and middle-income countries suggest that demand in these
     countries is more responsive to price than demand in high-income countries,
     with most estimates in the range from -0.50 to -1.00 (Chaloupka 2000).

     However, as mentioned above, price and income level will affect cigarette
     consumption simultaneously. In the same way that changes in prices (rather
     than the level of prices) are more useful as a tobacco control tool, changes
     in cigarette affordability (rather than the level of cigarette affordability) are
     expected to drive changes in cigarette consumption over time (U.S. NCI and
     WHO 2016).

     In the context of this study, the relation between cigarette consumption
     and cigarette affordability will be illustrated by the affordability elasticity of
     demand, defined as the percentage change in cigarette consumption in
     response to a percentage change in the RIP. This explains how consumption
     will change along with RIP changes. Equation (5) is used to quantify the
     magnitude of the relation between cigarette affordability and consumption.




     where consumption represents the cigarette consumption in year t, using
     consumption data from the China Tobacco Yearbook (STMA); RIPt represents
     the Relative Income Price in year t; and ε_t is the error term. According to the
     definition of price elasticity, β is the estimator of the affordability elasticity of
     demand. Using ordinary least squares, β is estimated at -0.601 (95 percent
     confidence interval -0.716 to -0.487; P value=0.000; R2=0.901). This suggests
     that if there is a 10 percent increase in the RIP (i.e., equivalent decrease in
     cigarette affordability), cigarette consumption will decrease by 6.01 percent.
     On average, the estimated affordability elasticity of demand in China is -0.60,


24
                                                                     Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




suggesting that a 10 percent increase in cigarette affordability will bring a 6
percent increase in cigarette consumption. Figure 9 describes the correlation
of affordability elasticity and cigarette consumption in China. 2015 saw
cigarette consumption in China declining for the first time in two decades.
This is particularly due to the tax adjustment, along with a 10 percent price
increase in 2015. Other factors contributing to reduced consumption included
municipal smoke-free legislation that affected workplaces and public spaces
in Beijing and other cities, as well as the government’s anti-corruption efforts.

Figure 9: Cigarette consumption, IPC average, and RIP average




Global Ranking of Cigarette Affordability
Blecher’s study ranks cigarette affordability measured by RIP (the percentage
of per capita GDP required to buy 100 packs of cigarettes) among 70 countries
between 1999 and 2001. China ranked as the fifth-least-affordable country
among 70 counties examined, indicating that cigarette affordability in China
at that time was at a very low level compared with other nations (Blecher
et al. 2004). In 2014, WHO calculated average RIP for 168 countries with
available data. At that time, among all countries studied, China ranked as the
45th-most-affordable country for cigarette use (WHO 2015). Figure 10 ranks
cigarette affordability for 70 countries (66 countries overlap with Blecher’s
country sampling) based on WHO’s published RIP data (WHO 2015). China’s
cigarette affordability ranks 26th-highest among the selected 70 countries. On
average, cigarettes are far more affordable in HICs than in LMICs (Blecher et
al. 2004, U.S. NCI and WHO 2016). Note, however, that while China is an UMIC,
the current level of cigarette affordability in China is higher than that of many
HICs. Moreover, within just two decades, China has jumped from the fourth-


                                                                                                                25
     quartile affordable-country group to the second-quartile affordable-country
     group. The growth rate of cigarette affordability in China ranks number one
     among all observed countries (U.S. NCI and WHO 2016).



     Figure 10: Cost of 100 packs of cigarettes as percentage of per capita
     GDP, 2014




     SOURCE
     WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2015. China data is calculated by the authors for the
     year 2015. Country income group classification based on World Bank Analytical Classifications for
     2014 (World Bank 2014).



26
                                                                     Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




Main findings from this study include the following:
(1) Cigarettes have become more affordable in China between 2001 and
2016, because income gains have outpaced cigarette price increases.
Average-price cigarettes are 1.85 times more affordable in 2016 than in 2001,
while cheap-brand cigarettes have become 2.09 times more affordable
over the same period. Cheap-brand cigarettes showed a higher level of
affordability than average-price categories throughout the period 2001-2016,
because cheap-brand prices have remained extremely low.

(2) Changes in cigarette affordability drive changes in cigarette consumption
over time. A 10 percent increase in cigarette affordability will result in a 6
percent increase in cigarette consumption in China.

(3) Its current level of cigarette affordability makes China the 45th-most-
affordable country for cigarette smoking among 168 countries. In just two
decades, China has moved from the fourth-quartile affordable-country
group to the second-quartile affordable-country group, as China’s cigarette
affordability has surged with the fastest growth rate in the world.

All these findings suggest that it is imperative for Chinese policy makers to
make a shift from price-based policy solutions to affordability-based policy
solutions, with the aim of making cigarettes less affordable.



Discussion

Increasing the tax on tobacco products is arguably the most effective
method of curbing the prevalence and consumption of these products.
Tobacco control advocates have long promoted higher excise taxes, leading
to higher cigarette prices, as a means of reducing cigarette consumption.
Between 2001 and 2016, the weighted nominal average cigarette price in
China rose by 218 percent, from 4.12 RMB per pack in 2001 to 13.09 RMB
per pack in 2016. Meanwhile, the weighted real average cigarette price rose
by 121 percent. However, these price increases did not result in tobacco
use reduction, as cigarette consumption in China increased by 40 percent
during this period (Figure11). This happened because China experienced
rapid economic growth during these years. The country’s per capita GDP has
increased at an average annual rate of 10 percent for the last two decades.
Rapid economic growth increases people’s purchasing power substantially.
As their income increases, smokers find cigarettes becoming more affordable.
For this reason, affordability instead of price should be the focal concern for
Chinese policy makers.


                                                                                                                27
     Figure 11: Trends in cigarette price, affordability, and consumption




     Our results show that cigarettes have become more affordable in China
     over time. In particular, cheap cigarettes primarily targeted to lower-income
     smokers have shown a higher affordability level along with relatively greater
     affordability increases than other price categories of cigarettes, which are
     mainly targeted to average-income smokers. From a policy perspective, the
     trends outlined above support the following recommendations:


     (1) The increasing affordability trend means that there is ample room to
     raise tobacco taxes and prices. China will need to design and implement
     regular tax increases to make sustained progress on tobacco control and
     public health.


     (2) The extremely low price of cheap cigarette brands calls for raising the
     specific tax substantially in the context of future tobacco tax increases.
     Authorities may also wish to establish a minimum price for cigarettes,
     to ensure that cheap cigarettes become less affordable over time. This is
     particularly relevant for protecting vulnerable smokers, such as youth and
     people with low incomes.




28
                                                                         Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




(3) Greater attention should be paid to ensure that growth in cigarette
excise taxes and prices consistently outpaces income growth. In order to
maximize public health gains, policy makers may consider introducing
index management by considering affordability in benchmarking excise
tax increases. This policy strategy is implementable, particularly given the
relation between cigarette affordability and cigarette consumption revealed
in this study: that a 10 percent increase in cigarette affordability will result in
a 6 percent increase in cigarette consumption. Policy makers may also wish
to note that, given rapid income growth in China, sharp increases in China’s
tobacco taxes to keep ahead of rising incomes may disturb cigarette price
equilibriums between China and its less rapidly growing neighbors.
Increased efforts may thus be required to contain potential cigarette
smuggling problems.


The unprecedented economic growth of the past three decades has created
great opportunities and brought significant achievements for China and
the Chinese people. People’s standard of living has improved substantially,
as 730 million Chinese people have escaped from extreme poverty since
1990. Impressive economic growth, along with government policies crafted
to improve the incomes and livelihoods of the poorest, have enabled this
extraordinary progress (Hofman 2016). Yet these economic gains have
brought new tobacco control challenges. Economic growth and associated
increases in income can weaken tax-based and price-based tobacco control
measures designed to reduce tobacco use. Stronger tobacco control
measures, including effective tobacco tax policies leading to a reduction
in cigarette affordability, are imperative to reduce both the prevalence of
smoking in the population and cigarette consumption.




                                                                                                                    29
References

1. Adioetomo, S.M., T. Djutaharta, and Hendratno. 2005. “Cigarette           18. National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2017. “Statistical
Consumption, Taxation, and Household Income: Indonesia Case                  Communiqué of the People’s Republic of China on the 2016 National
Study.” Economics of Tobacco Control Paper No. 26, Washington, DC:           Economic and Social Development.” http://www.stats.gov.cn/english/
World Bank.                                                                  PressRelease/201702/t20170228_1467503.html.

2. Blecher, E.H., and C.P van Walbeek. 2004. “An International Analysis      19. Nigar, N., S. Michal, D. Jeffrey, et al. 2016. “The Trend in
of Cigarette Affordability.” Tobacco Control 13: 339–346.                    Affordability of Tobacco Products in Bangladesh 2009-2015: Evidence
                                                                             from ITC Bangladesh Surveys.” The International Tobacco Control
3. Blecher, E.H., and C.P van Walbeek. 2009. “Cigarette Affordability        Policy Evaluation Project.
Trends: An Update and Some Methodological Comments.” Tobacco
Control 18:167-75.                                                           20. OECD. 2012. “Inequality: Recent Trends in China and Experience
                                                                             in the OECD Area.” http://www.oecd.org/globalrelations/
4. Chaloupka, F.J., T.W. Hu, K.E. Warner, R. Jacobs, and A. Yurekli. 2000.   keypartners/50146214.pdf (accessed April 3, 2017).
“The Taxation of Tobacco Products.” In Tobacco Control in Developing
Countries, edited by Prabhat Jha and Frank J. Chaloupka. Oxford:             21. Rodríguez-Iglesias, G., M. González-Rozada, B.M. Champagne, and
Oxford University Press.                                                     V. Schoj. 2015. “Real Price and Affordability as Challenges for Effective
                                                                             Tobacco Control Policies: An Analysis for Argentina.” Rev Panam Salud
5. Chinese Center for Disease Control and Prevention. 2015. 2015             Publica 37(2): 98–103.
Chinese Adults Tobacco Survey Report. Beijing.
                                                                             22. Scollo, M. 1996. “The Big Mac Index of Cigarette Affordability.”
6. China State Tobacco Monopoly Administration. China Tobacco                Tobacco Control 5: 69.
Yearbook. Beijing: China Economic Publishing House.
                                                                             23. U.S. National Cancer Institute and World Health Organization.
7. Guindon, G.E., S. Tobin, and D. Yach. 2002. “Trends and Affordability     2016. The Economics of Tobacco and Tobacco Control. National
of Cigarette Prices: Ample Room for Tax Increases and Related Health         Cancer Institute Tobacco Control Monograph 21, NIH Publication
Gains.” Tobacco Control 11: 35-43.                                           No.16-CA-8029A, Bethesda.

8. Herd, R. 2010. “A Pause in the Growth of Inequality in China?” OECD       24. WHO (World Health Organization). 2014a. “Guidelines for the
Economics Department Working Paper No.748. Paris: OECD.                      Implementation of Article 6 of the WHO FCTC.” WHO, Geneva. http://
                                                                             www.who.int/fctc/guidelines/adopted/Guidelines_article_6.pdf.
9. Herd, R., V. Koen, and A. Reutersward. 2010. “China’s Labour
Market in Transition: Job Creation, Migration and Regulation.” OECD          25. WHO (World Health Organization). 2014b. WHO Tobacco Tax
Economics Department Working Paper No. 749. Paris: OECD.                     Simulation Model (TaXSiM). Last update: http://www.who.int/
                                                                             tobacco/economics/taxsim/en/.
10. Hersch, J. 2000. “Gender, Income Levels, and the Demand for
Cigarettes.” Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 21:263.                         26. WHO (World Health Organization). 2015. WHO Report on the
                                                                             Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2015: Raising Taxes on Tobacco. Geneva:
11. Hofman, B. 2016. “China’s Role in Efforts to Eradicate Poverty.”         WHO.
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/opinion/2016/10/17/chinas-
role-in-efforts-to-eradicate-poverty.                                        27. World Bank. 1999. Curbing the Epidemic: Governments and the
                                                                             Economics of Tobacco Control. World Bank, Washington, DC.
12. Hu, T. W., Z. Z. Mao, J. Shi, and W.D. Chen. 2008. Tobacco taxation
and its potential impact in China. Paris: International Union Against        28. World Bank Analytical Classifications for 2014. 2014. https://
Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.                                               datahelpdesk.worldbank.org/knowledgebase/articles/906519-world-
                                                                             bank-country-and-lending-groups.
13. Hu, T. W., Z. Z. Mao, J. Shi, and W.D. Chen. 2010. “The Role of
Taxation in Tobacco Control and its Potential Economic Impact in             29. Xie, Y., and X. Zhou. 2014. “Income Inequality in Today’s China.”
China.” Tobacco Control 19(1): 58-64.                                        Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(19): 6928-6933.

14. Kan, M.Y. 2007. “Investigating Cigarette Affordability in 60 Cities      30. Marquez, P.V., and R. Zheng. 2016. “China’s 2015 tobacco tax
Using the Cigarette Price-Daily Income Ratio.” Tobacco Control 16:           adjustment: A step in the right direction” World Bank Group Blogs,
429-432.                                                                     November 9, 2016. Available at:
                                                                             English version: https://blogs.worldbank.org/health/china-s-2015-
15. Lal, A., and M. Scollo. 2002. “Big Mac Index of Cigarette                tobacco-tax-adjustment-step-right-direction
Affordability.” Tobacco Control 11: 280-286.                                 Chinese version: http://blogs.worldbank.org/voices/ch/china-s-2015-
                                                                             tobacco-tax-adjustment-step-right-direction
16. McCall, L., and C. Percheski. 2010. “Income Inequality: New Trends
and Research Directions.” Annual Review of Sociology 36: 329–347.

17. National Bureau of Statistics of China. 2012. http://www.stats.gov.
cn/english/pressrelease/201201/t20120130_72113.html.




30
Cigarette Affordability in China: 2001 – 2016




                                           31
