INDONESIA SOCIAL
ASSISTANCE REFORM
PROGRAM

Fiduciary Systems Assessment




                               i
                                                          Table of Contents
I.     Executive Summary .......................................................................................................................... 1
II.    Introduction ....................................................................................................................................... 2
III.   Assessment of Program Fiduciary Systems .................................................................................... 3
       (i)      Legal Framework .................................................................................................................... 3
       (ii)     Planning and Budgeting.......................................................................................................... 4
       (iii) Treasury Management ............................................................................................................ 4
       (iv)     Accounting and Financial Reporting ..................................................................................... 6
       (v)      Procurement Profile of the Program ..................................................................................... 7
       (vi)     Procurement Methods for Social Assistance Program ........................................................ 7
       (vii) Evaluation and Award Criteria ............................................................................................. 8
       (viii) Procurement Organization and Capacity ............................................................................. 8
       (ix)     Procurement Performance ..................................................................................................... 8
       (x)      Internal Controls ..................................................................................................................... 9
       (xi)     Program Audit ....................................................................................................................... 11
       (xii) External Audit ....................................................................................................................... 11
       (xiii) Transparency ......................................................................................................................... 12
       (xiv) Complaint Handling .............................................................................................................. 12
IV.    Fiduciary Risk Assessment ............................................................................................................. 14
V.     Fiduciary Inputs for Program Action Plan................................................................................... 14




                                                                                                                                                           ii
I.    Executive Summary

1.        The Fiduciary System Assessment (FSA) of the Program has concluded that, subject to the
implementation of the Program Action Plan to mitigate the identified risks, the overall fiduciary
framework is adequate to support Program implementation and to achieve the desired results. The
FSA comprised an assessment of the fiduciary risks relating to: (i) procurement; (ii) financial management;
and (iii) governance (including fraud and corruption risks) relevant to the Program. The overall fiduciary
risk is rated as Substantial.

2.      The assessment has confirmed that the program has satisfactory arrangements to identify and
capture program expenditures by organization, function, program, and activities using the Government
budget classification and chart of accounts. There are three major expenditures for the program: i)
Conditional Cash Transfers; ii) Consultants/Facilitators fees; and iii) Fee for CCT transfer. The main
program expenditure is CCT providing cash transfer to beneficiaries. PMU transfers the fund to
beneficiaries through PT. Post Indonesia or through Commercial (Government) Banks. The Post Office and
the commercial bank in Jakarta will distribute the beneficiaries list to all post office Payment points or bank
representatives at local level. The beneficiaries withdraw the fund at nearest post office or nearest bank
branch. Ministry (MOSA) financial statement are prepared and budget execution reports can be prepared
for the program. Since PKH is a major program for MOSA, this is always part of the audit sample for
external audit due to the size of the program. PMU can compile the program expenditures, especially for
CCT expenditures from facilitators at sub-district level. The facilitators submit a reconciliation reports to
PMU after each payment.

3.       The procurements during the last three year processes were generally carried out in timely
manner. The procurement carried out by MoSA is governed by the Presidential Regulation (Perpres) No.
54/2010 on Government Procurement, last amended through Perpres No. 4/2015, and its technical
guidelines and operational technical provisions for electronic procurement. The Perpres sets out the main
principles which aim to make procurement efficient, effective, transparent, open, competitive, fair, and
accountable, which is in line with the fundamental principles of public procurement. The Program does not
envisage any large value contracts that could exceed the OPRC Threshold. The procurement under the
program is expected to involve the procurement of goods and services other than consulting services. The
total procurement expenditure is expected to be around 2% of total program expenditure and will be carried
out through competitive bidding.

4.      Like most CCT program, PKH particular implementation challenges from a governance and
anti-corruption perspective. It is large in scope, with 6 million beneficiaries and a high volume of
financial transactions. It is politically high-profile and engages multiple government actors at the national
and sub-national levels. And by targeting the poorest of the poor, project locations are often in remote and
inaccessible areas, exacerbating implementation challenges and increasing risk.

5.       The assessment identified the following key risks: The external auditors have expressed a
disclaimer on the 2015 financial statements of MOSA stating that the flow of funds could not be traced
adequately to the end beneficiaries and that reasonable assurance was lacking on the ending balance in post
office accounts. The main risks are: (a) lack of an automated system to record and reconcile data of
payments to beneficiaries; (b) inadequate follow up on external audit findings; (c) need to improve program
internal controls; (d) addressing interim mitigation measures until MIS implementation; (e) absence of
complaint handling mechanism could be a deterrent to bidder’s participation in bidding; (f) Risk of
Noncompliance to Bank’s list of debarred/temporarily suspended firms; and (g) Interference or errors in
the payment process and (h) Detection Risks.


                                                                                                             1
6.       Mitigation Measures: These are proposed to be mitigated through: (a) implementation of an MIS
to capture detailed data at beneficiary level; (b) monitoring of implementation of external auditor
recommendations with support of the Inspector General of MOSA; (c) instituting periodic internal audit of
the program; and (d) enforcing timely submission of payment realization reports by facilitators including
confirmation of receipt of payments by beneficiaries; (e) MOSA To develop a procurement complaint
handling mechanism, consistent with Government regulations; (f) MOSA to put in place a mechanism so
as to ensure that the ULPs at each of procurement process checks and records in the file that the
recommended firm is not on the Bank’s list of debarred and temporarily suspended firms. (g) The recent
move towards delivering payments through cash cards can help mitigate most of the concerns regarding
payment disbursements to the correct beneficiaries and improve liquidation process, and mitigate the risk
of facilitators “taxing” beneficiaries (h) In addition to existing controls already in place in MOSA, it i s
recommended to PT. Post’s internal audit unit and MoSA IG to have selected verification of payments to
beneficiaries during the audit assignment

7.      Fiduciary inputs for Program Action Plan: Based on fiduciary assessment, the following areas
are considered for compliance/institutional strengthening as part of Program Action Plan: (a) Develop an
Integrated Management Information System which include information on payment realization; (b) To take
follow up action on BPK audit findings and recommendation; (c) to conduct internal audit of the Program
by IG, MOSA; (d) Enforcing timely submission of payment realization reports by facilitators (including
confirmation that beneficiaries have received the fund) during transition to MIS to improve internal
controls.

II.     Introduction

8.      This is an assessment of the fiduciary arrangements of Government of Indonesia’s PKH
Program in accordance with the World Bank’s OP/BP 9.0 to determine suitability of the application
of the Program for Results (PforR) instrument and to mitigate fiduciary risks of the proposed
Program. This document contains summary findings on the Fiduciary Systems Assessment (FSA). In
accordance with "PforR Financing Interim Guidance Notes" a FSA was carried out that evaluated the
fiduciary systems pertaining to the Program to determine whether they provide reasonable assurance that
the Program funds will be used for their intended purpose.

9.      The objective of the proposed World Bank operation is to enhance the results of the PKH
CCT program by supporting coverage expansion, strengthening delivery system, and improving
coordination with other complementary social programs. The proposed Program would be a US$ 200
million loan from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development using a PforR lending
instrument, and would be implemented over a period of four years (2017-2021). The disbursement of funds
under the PforR modality will be linked to DLIs tied to three result areas: i) Expanding coverage and
improving equity of the CCT program; ii) Strengthening the program delivery system to improve efficiency,
transparency, and accountability; and iii) Improving access to complementary services by the CCT
beneficiaries.

10.     Program fiduciary risks are substantial. The government has existing fiduciary controls that will
be used for the Program. However, the Program entails a rapid expansion of the CCT program in a short
span across the country and in scope of beneficiaries. The design of the CCT is very complex given the
release of grants to beneficiaries in scattered areas and challenging locations. In addition, review of the
2015 audited financial statements of MoSA showed that the auditors rendered a disclaimer opinion to the
financial statements with significant observations on the CCT program.



                                                                                                          2
11.      The FSA concluded that, subject to the implementation of the Program Action Plan to
mitigate the identified risks, the overall fiduciary framework is adequate to support Program
implementation and to achieve the desired results. The FSA comprised an assessment of the fiduciary
risks relating to: (i) procurement; (ii) financial management (FM); and (iii) governance (including fraud
and corruption risks) relevant to the Program. The objective of the FSA is to provide a reference that can
be used to monitor fiduciary systems performance during the Program implementation and identify actions,
as needed, to enhance those systems.

12.      The overall objective of the assessment is to ascertain whether the program systems provide
reasonable assurance that the financing proceeds will be used for intended purposes. The assessment
is conducted with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness, transparency, and
accountability and whether the systems are adequate to achieve its expected objectives and results within
their specific areas. In particular, it reviews the capacity of the implementing agency to manage the program
which include to plan, budget, execute, record, control, and produce timely, relevant, and reliable financial
information. It examines whether the Program expenditure framework is comprehensive, clearly defined,
and part of the borrower’s regular FM processes. It also identifies the key strengths and weaknesses of the
system which may have an impact on the achievement of the overall PDO. Procurement systems,
procedures and policies are also reviewed in detail to cover each step of the procurement cycle – planning,
tendering, evaluation, and award and contract management.

13.      The FSA has been carried out through a review of documents, regulations, review of procurement
and financial records, collection and analysis of data, interviews with MoSA’s staff in various function, i.e.
commitment officer (Pejabat Pembuat Komitmen/PPK), payment unit, inspector general, field facilitator,
district consultant, provincial consultant, procurement committee, planning staff, PT Pos Indonesia’s
officers (VP and PKH Manager).

III. Assessment of Program Fiduciary Systems

(i)     Legal Framework

14.      Program Keluarga Harapan (PKH) is a conditional cash transfer program. It is a national program
and implemented since 2007. PKH is implemented by multiple agencies at national as well as local level.
The program implementation is coordinated by Program Management Unit (PMU) under DG SAF, MoSA.
In order to implement PKH, there are three laws which form the basis for public financial management
(PFM) framework: i) Law no 17 year 2003 on State Finance; ii) Law No. 1 year 2004 on State Treasury;
and iii) Law no 15 year 2004 on State Financial Management and Accountability. A new structure of MOSA
is based on Presidential Decree No. 46 year 2015.

15.     The procurement of goods, works, consultant services and non-consultant services carried out by
MoSA is governed by the Presidential Regulation (Perpres) No. 54/2010 on Government Procurement, last
amended through Perpres No. 4/2015, and its technical guidelines and operational technical provisions for
electronic procurement. The Perpres sets out the main principles which aim to make procurement efficient,
effective, transparent, open, competitive, fair, and accountable, which is in line with the fundamental
principles of public procurement. The Regulations provide for use of competitive procurement methods as
the default requirement, while non-competitive methods may be used for very small value procurement and
under certain circumstances and conditions described in the Regulations. Foreign firms are allowed to
participate in bidding for contracts estimated to cost more than IDR 20 billion (equivalent to USD 1.5
million) for goods and non-consulting services; however given the values and the geographically dispersed
implementation of the contracts that are expected to be procured under the Program, it is unlikely that
foreign bidders would be interested or suitable for participating in bidding for the contracts.

                                                                                                            3
16.      The use of the LPSE e-procurement system is mandated for procuring contracts exceeding IDR 200
million (equivalent to US$ 16,000). A wide range of Standard Bidding Documents are available for use by
the procuring agencies. Dedicated procurement services units (ULPs) are required to be established for
carrying out the procurement in each agency. The results of contract award are also required to be published
in a national website. Government officials and local private sector suppliers and consultants are familiar
with the existing procurement framework. The Perpres also include provisions for handling complaints,
resolution of disputes, as well as remedies for breaches in integrity during the procurement process. The
Government is currently in the process of preparing a new procurement regulation which will replace
Perpres No. 54/2010 with the aim to further simplify and streamline the procurement procedures.

(ii)    Planning and Budgeting

17.     The planning and budgeting process is assessed as adequate and the risk is moderate. The program
covered 3 million families in 2016 and plans to cover 6 million in 2017. MoF needs to double the budget
to cover more beneficiaries. There is a risk that the government does not have enough budget to cover more
beneficiaries. Currently the government revenue has been declining. Inadequacy of budget availability
encouraged the government to find other resources, including tax amnesty program and overseas financial
resources such as the external donor finances.

18.      PKH is included in the government plan as part of poverty reduction program. The program is
budgeted annually like other government program. After decision on overall budget ceiling for the next
fiscal year in June, MOSA prepares the program budget in July and submits to Ministry of Finance (MoF)
for budget consolidation as other government programs. MoSA discusses the budget with relevant
commission in the Parliament (DPR) during August-September. At the end of October, the Consolidated
MoSA’s budget work plans (RKA-KL) and final budget ceilings (broken down by organizational unit, type
of expenditure, function, program and activity) are approved by a full session of the DPR and adopted as
the draft Annual Budget Law (RAPBN).

19.     MoF issues circulars setting out definitive budget ceilings in November. Each Line Ministry (LM),
including MoSA then prepares its definitive budget work plan and discusses with the Directorate General
of the Budget (DG Budget) at the MoF. These discussions cover the definitive LM budget work plan and
supporting documents, including Terms of Reference (ToR) and the Expenditure Plan (RAB). Then DG
Budget approves the Budget per Work Unit document (SAPSK) and submits this to the Directorate General
of the Treasury (DG Treasury) at the MoF.

20.      Following the issuance Annual Budget Law (UU APBN) in December, a Presidential Decree
(Perpres) is issued setting out the details of the budget as approved by DPR. Based on this Perpres and
SAPSK, the LM prepares the budget authorization documents (DIPA). The LM submits these to the DG
Budget which will be endorsed and forwarded to DG Treasury. The DIPAs are approved by DG Treasury
and signed by echelon 1 officials in the LM. Once the DIPAs have been approved, the LM prepares budget
detail or Operational Instructions (POK), which are internal operational guidelines for the work units that
elaborate on what is contained in the LM Budget Work Plan for the next fiscal year. Due to limited
resources, PKH has not covered yet all the poorest people.

(iii)   Treasury Management

21.     The treasury management system for the program is adequate. The system has reasonable time to
transfer the fund from the treasury office to the third parties or to the beneficiaries through Post
Office/Government Banks at reasonable time. There is a risk on payment delay if PMU submits incomplete


                                                                                                          4
documents. A check list of required supporting documents helps PMU to submit the documents to KPPN
completely.

22.      The program follows existing government treasury system. A new treasury system (SPAN) has
been working effectively since 2015. Once the budget document (DIPA) is effective, the commitment
officer (PPK) in MoSA can execute the budget and enter into commitments with third parties. In term of
CCT fund, there are two methods of fund flow: 1) Post Office and 2) Government Banks for cashless
method.

23.     The PPK enters into commitments and signed a contract with a third party. PMU signs a contracts
with PT Pos Indonesia and some government banks (Member of Himbara) to distribute the money to end
beneficiaries. After signing the contracts, the flow of funds begins. PPK submits a payment request (SPP)
to MoF Treasury Office (KPPN) through a payment officer (PPSPM). The PPSPM reviews and verifies
the SPP and supporting documents. After reviewing the documents, the PPSPM issues a payment order
(SPM) to the KPPN (Treasury Office).

24.     KPPN reviews the SPM and checks whether the SPM is made under the relevant DIPA and is
supported by adequate budget balance. The KPPN then issues a payment order/instruction (SP2D) to
Government Treasury Account (GTA). The GTA transfers the funds directly to the third parties (for CCT
fund to Post Office and some government banks). KPPN has one working day standard for processing
SPMs when all documents are correct and complete. KPPN processes in 1-3 days in practices. The line
ministry (MoSA) can monitor the payment process on-line through Treasury website. Below is the diagram
depicting the flow of fund mechanism for the CCT.

                                Figure 1: PKH Flow of Fund Mechanism
                                              CCT - P K H
                                       Flow of Fund Mechanism

                                                    3
                        Government                                 Treasury Office
                      Treasury Account        payment order            KPPN
                                        4                                          2
                            Fund Transfer                                   payment
                                                                             request
                                                     1
                        Post Office                                   PMU PKH
                     Government Banks            Contracts             MOSA
                                        5
                              Operational
                                 Transfer
                                                    6
                     Post Payment Unit                            End-Beneficiaries
                       Bank Branches          Disbursement

25.     PMU issues a standing instruction once the Post/Government Banks in Jakarta have received the
fund. After getting the instruction, Post/Banks instruct the lowest Post Office/Bank Branches ( Cabang) to
pay/transfer the money to the beneficiary within a certain period. All recipients in one area (village or

                                                                                                        5
community) normally withdraw the money on the same date at nearest Post Office. The recipients can
withdraw the money any time if they received the fund in the government bank. The recipient normally
withdraws the full amount. If the recipient does not withdraw the money three times after receiving the
fund, the beneficiaries account becomes a dormant account at the post office. All remaining balance,
including dormant account should be refunded to Government Treasury Account.

(iv)    Accounting and Financial Reporting

26.      As part of government program, PKH uses government accounting and reporting system (SAI) to
record the overall program expenditures as well as its line item. SAI application may produce the financial
reports on a regular basis quarterly, semesterly, and annually. The government has been following accrual
basis of accounting since FY 2015. However, the accounting records for PKH is maintained at aggregate
expenditure levels instead of details of expenditures to individual end users. In order to record individual
end user expenditures, MoSA has developed simple excel based stand-alone records. The system records
transactions to individual recipients by name, address and amount.

27.     PMU signed a contract with PT Pos Indonesia (Indonesian Post Company) and some government
banks to distribute the funds to end beneficiaries. Based on PMU instruction, the post office/government
banks pays/transfer the beneficiaries in four tranches annually. In order to monitor the fund distribution,
PMU hired about 25 thousand facilitators. The main roles of facilitators are to monitor fund distribution at
sub-district level and to check beneficiaries’ compliance to the eligibility conditions.

28.     The government banks have adequate system to transfer the CCT fund through cashless method to
beneficiaries account. Banks’ coverage is one of weakness, especially at the remote area. It may take time
before the banks have adequate coverage area. The Post Office covers area where the banks has not covered.

29.       The facilitators receive the beneficiaries’ list and monitor the program implementation when the
beneficiaries receive the fund. There is sufficient reconciliation between facilitator and Post’s record at sub-
district level after each payment realization. These reconciliation reports are submitted to PMU Jakarta by
email with copy to district and provincial PIUs. PMU Jakarta compiles the consolidated report manually
which increases the accounting and reporting risks. It creates some discrepancies in the report compilation
due to mistakes in posting figures. Currently, the PMU does not have adequate monitoring system on report
compilation. There is no early warning system or red flag on payment realization. In addition, PMU does
not have a feature for tracking record errors. This makes it difficult for PMU to monitor payment realization
and balance refunded from the Post.

30.      The Post Office has adequate system to produce payment realization report through web bases
system. Post system is able to monitor payment status at each post office in all levels. Post provides payment
realization reports to the PMU regularly. PMU may also access some information through on-line system.
Since Post’s report is more reliable, PMU uses these reports as basis for payment realization reports.

31.      It is noted that BPK, as external auditor, raised some issues on the payment status such as dormant
account, overpayment and remaining balance from current and previous fiscal years. As PMU does not
have adequate accounting and recording system for PKH, we noted that BPK used Post Office report as a
reference to the fund remaining balance, instead of PMU’s report. There is a plan to develop an integrated
management information system for PKH which include information on payment realization. In the interim,
we recommend that PMU should enforce discipline to all facilitators to submit timely payment realization
reports in agreed format. PMU should exercise a financial penalty such as allowance deduction to
facilitators for late submission of reports. PMU may explore using short message (SMS) gateway on data



                                                                                                              6
collection for a while prior to implementation of a new management information system (DLI-MIS
enhancement).

(v)     Procurement Profile of the Program

32.      The procurement expenditure under the Program represents only a small fraction of the total
Program value. During the period 2013 to 2015, the annual procurement spend varied between IDR 93
billion (approx. equiv. to US$ 7 million) to IDR 131 billion (approx. equiv. to US$ 10 million). The share
of procurement in the annual Program value ranged between 1.9% to 2.6% during this period. In 2015, a
total of 6 contracts were awarded by MoSA under the PKH program, ranging between USD 16,000 to USD
7.2 million per contract, the largest contract being for the services/transaction fee for distribution of the
fund which represents about 83% of the total annual procurement expenditure, while the remaining smaller
value contracts were for supply of supporting equipment for facilitators (uniforms, bags, etc.), IT equipment
and related services (data base maintenance and upgrading IT application), rental of network, printing and
distribution of PKH cards. The Program does not envisage any large value contracts that could exceed the
OPRC Threshold. Also, contracts for civil works and consultant services are not expected under the
Program.

(vi)    Procurement Methods for Social Assistance Program

33.      In practice, MoSA applies competitive bidding methods under Perpres No. 54/2010 to all
procurement processes under the Program and using the SPSE e-procurement system. In accordance with
the Perpres, all contracts for Goods and other services with an estimated cost more than IDR 5 billion
(approximately equivalent to US$ 385,000) were procured by MoSA following public bidding method
which requires advertising of the bidding notice for at least 7 working days. This includes the largest value
contract procured annually by MoSA (approx. US$ 7.2 million equivalent, representing 83% of the total
annual procurement expenditure in 2015) for the services/transaction fee for distribution of cash transfer
funds. MoSA followed the public bidding competitive method even though each year only one bid was
received from the Government’s Postal Department, PT Pos Indonesia, which is likely due to the nature of
the contract as the distribution of funds to large number of beneficiaries at the local level across the whole
country requires the service provider to be licensed for providing financial services and have experience in
providing social assistance services with an extensive network of nation-wide branches, including in remote
rural areas. The selection of a Government agency, in this case PT Pos Indonesia, a State Owned Enterprise
(Persero) reporting to the Ministry of SOEs, is considered to be appropriate for provision of the fund
distribution services under the Program. The contract for supporting equipment for facilitators (i.e. uniform
and bags, approx. US$1.1 million equiv., representing 12% of the total annual procurement expenditure in
2015) was also procured through public bidding method.

34.      For the remaining smaller value contracts of non-complex nature with an estimated cost between
IDR 200 million (equivalent to US$ 16,000) and IDR 5 billion (equivalent to US$ 385,000), MoSA
followed the simplified competitive bidding method which requires advertising of not less than 3 working
days. This includes procurement of IT equipment and related services, renting of network, and printing and
distribution of PKH cards, which cumulatively represents about 5% of the total procurement expenditure
in 2015.

35.      While MoSA also engages a large number of individuals as Facilitators under the Program, the
recruitment of the Facilitators is carried out by MoSA based on the Government’s staff recruitment
framework, and thus for the purpose of the Bank financed program the recruitment of Facilitators will
continue to be carried out in accordance with the Government’s applicable staff recruitment procedures an d
is not a procurement activities and hence not considered in this assessment.

                                                                                                            7
36.     Based on the data provided by MoSA, all contracts for goods and non-consultant services under
the Program in 2015 were procured through competitive methods, with 95% of the contracts by value
procured through the public bidding method and 5% through simplified bidding method.


                               Simplified
                                Bidding
                                  5%



                                                          Public
                                                         Bidding
                                                           95%




                       Figure 2. Procurement Expenditure by Method for Year 2015

(vii)    Evaluation and Award Criteria

37.      The procedures for qualification, evaluation and award are relevant and non-discriminatory. The
pass/fail evaluation under Perpres 54/2010 criteria was mostly used by MoSA for the procurement of
goods/other services, while scoring evaluation system and life time economic value evaluation system are
applied for complex procurement goods/other services.

(viii)   Procurement Organization and Capacity

38.     The procurement process of goods and other services under the Program is carried out in the central
procurement unit at MoSA’s head office (Unit Layanan Pengadaan/ULP). The procurement is required to
be carried out by procurement accredited staff in the ULP, whose certification is valid for three years and
can be extended by the National Public Procurement Agency, LKPP, if they are still working as
procurement staff. MoSA’s ULP in the Head Office currently consists of 34 procurement accredited staff,
while another 62 procurement accredited staff are working in MoSA’s regional offices across the country.
The ULP in the head office has been managing all procurement packages (works/goods/other services and
consulting services) under the Program, and its current staffing level and capacity is considered adequate
for meeting the continuing procurement needs of the Program.

(ix)     Procurement Performance

39.      The information provided by MoSA on the procurement processes of contracts awarded over the
last three years indicates that the time period allowed for bid submission is consistent with the requirements
of the Perpres as 8–16 days were provided for public bidding and 6–11 days for simplified bidding. The
level of competition, in terms of number of bidders submitting bids, generally ranged from 3–4 bidders per
bidding package, while a much larger number of firms (12-62) registered in the LPSE e-procurement system
and viewed the bidding documents. However, in the case of the largest contract for services/transaction fee
for distribution of the fund, there was only one bid received from PT Pos Indonesia, which as explained

                                                                                                            8
earlier is likely due to the particular nature of these services which the postal department seems to be
strongly positioned. MoSA took between 12–24 days for public bidding and 8 – 15 days for simplified
bidding from advertisement to contract award, and a further 2–11 days from contract award to contract
signing, which indicates that the procurement processes were carried out in a timely manner.




Figure 3. Timelines from Advertisement to Bid Submission and Number of Bids Received (2013 – 2015)




                Figure 4. Registered Bidder and Number of Bids Received (2013 – 2015)

40.     Though the contract implementation data for past three years was not readily available during the
assessment, MOSA informed that normally there are no major cost or time overruns during the contract
execution.

(x)     Internal Controls

41.       The internal control system at the national level follows existing government system. Government
issued a Government Regulation No. 60/2008 and adopted COSO as its control framework in August 2008.
BPKP has collaborated with the Inspector General (IG) MoSA to ensure they are providing support to
MoSA in strengthening controls. There is no study yet on the effectiveness of COSO implementation in
MoSA. The risk relating to internal controls is substantial and can be mitigated through steps discussed
later in this section.

42.      PKH beneficiaries list is based on Unified Data Base (UDB). The UDB is Indonesia’s social
registry that is currently managed by poverty reduction unit (TNP2K), under Office of the Vice President.
PMU, MoSA prepares the list and distributes it to social unit (Dinas) at local government as well as the

                                                                                                        9
payment agent (Post Office and the government banks). The list has information included by name,
identification number and address of beneficiaries.

43.      Dinas at local level, works together with program facilitators to cross-check the eligibility and
inform the beneficiaries for further processes on the cash method. The Post Office Jakarta will create
beneficiaries’ account in the system and distribute the list to all post payment units t hrough district post
offices. The post payment unit will pay the fund to beneficiaries on a certain date. The post payment will
only pay to the beneficiaries who are included in the system. The Post Office runs a web based system to
monitor the payment process.

44.     The government banks in Jakarta will transfer the fund directly to beneficiaries’ account for the
cashless method. The beneficiaries withdraw the fund at the nearest branch. This method just started at the
end of FY 2016. The government banks have adequate internal control and transfer the fund through online
system. One of the risk in this method is changing of beneficiaries’ condition/status after the transfer has
been done. The program mitigates the risk through facilitator who verify and conduct recertification to the
beneficiaries.

45.      The PMU monitors the payment process through facilitators at sub-district level. The facilitators
assist and ensure that the right beneficiaries receive the fund at the right time and the right amount. Internal
control at the lowest level is adequate. The recipient list is prepared and verified by two different agencies.
Sub-district facilitators ensure that the post payment pay the fund to the right beneficiaries. The facilitators
also conduct crosscheck whether the beneficiaries are eligible for future payments. Any movement or
condition changes should be reported to PMU Jakarta for the next list preparation.


46.      Inspector General (IG) of MoSA plays a role as internal auditor of the program. The IG also
supervises and monitors the follow up actions of external audit findings. IG’s assignment mostly involves
conducting compliance audits on the operational aspects of MoSA included the PKH Program. IG audit
reports are mainly submitted to the Minister. There is no audit assignment from IG to PKH in FY 2016. IG
has limited assignment on facilitation which includes payment reconciliation. IG has planned to conduct an
internal audit assignment of PKH in FY 2017. The audit will focus to accounting and reporting of PKH
payment.

47.      Based on BPK audit report, there are some internal control issues on PKH implementation,
especially on monitoring and reporting of funds transfer to the end-beneficiaries. PMU need to improve the
monitoring and reporting system at national level. PMU should use management information system,
instead of manual system. The current manual system does not have adequate internal controls to monitor
payment processes over 400 district in Indonesia. The MIS is expected to also include feature that allows
facilitators to input information certifying receipt of fund by beneficiaries, the amount, and the date of the
receipt. Such inputs can be aggregated at PMU level to allow better monitoring on funds receipts by each
beneficiary. Implementation of better MIS will reduce the risk and improve monitoring and reporting
system in the program. An improved MIS is expected in FY 2018 (DLI on MIS enhancement). Controls
over payment to beneficiaries are also expected to be improved by switching to cashless payment method
to beneficiary families (DLI no. 2).

48.      To improve control prior to the implementation of the MIS, we recommend PMU to enforce
discipline to all facilitators to submit timely payment realization reports in agreed format, including
confirmation that beneficiaries have received the fund. PMU should exercise a financial penalty such as
allowance deduction to facilitators for late submission of reports. PMU may also explore the use of short
message (SMS) gateway on data collection.


                                                                                                             10
(xi)    Program Audit

49.      As PKH is a major program in MoSA, BPK has conducted performance audit of the program for
FY 2010-2014. The performance audit report was issued on 27 January 2016. The issues raised by the
auditor included: 1) the need to enhance the role of MOSA on data base management; 2) inadequate budget
to cover significant eligible participants; 3) inadequate budget sharing from local government; 4)
insufficient indicator on selecting the target; 5) verification not accordance with the agreed regulation; 6)
payment delay in some locations; and 7) inadequate recertification of end beneficiaries.

50.      MoSA has conducted follow up action on BPK audit findings and recommendation. However, the
mission noted that some actions have not completed and need further follow up, i.e. inadequate budget
allocation is still exist due to limited budget availability at the central as well as at local level.



(xii)   External Audit

51.     Based on Law 15 year 2014, BPK as Indonesia Supreme Audit Institution has a mandate to audit
all the government agencies, including MoSA. BPK has achieved many good results in public sector
auditing area. It is pointed by peer review reports from Netherland SAI in July 2009 and Poland SAI in
April 2014.

52.      BPK audits MoSA financial statement annually. Since the PKH program has more than one third
of MoSA budget, BPK always covers PKH expenditures in its financial audit scope. BPK expressed
disclaimer opinion on MoSA financial statement for period ending December 31, 2015. One major
qualification is that the flow of fund could not be traced adequately to the end beneficiaries and that
reasonable assurance was lacking on the ending balance at the post’s account. The ending balance was IDR
804.8 Billion that raised by BPK. Post has refunded 98% of BPK’s findings to the treasury account. In order
to solve the issue, PMU plans to enhance the management information system which include payment
realization reports.

53.      There is a dispute between BPK and Post on flow of fund mechanism. BPK advises that Post must
transfer the fund directly from the PKH special account. On the other side, Post uses its business practices
by using operational account to transfer the fund to end-beneficiaries. The operational account is used for
all Post operational purposes and not just for PKH payments. Therefore, the auditor could not trace the fund
to the end-beneficiaries through operational account. MoSA has reviewed the contract agreement with PT
Pos on January 5, 2017 and clarify the right and obligation of both parties.

54.     MoSA has conducted follow up action on BPK audit findings and recommendation. The mission
has received the status follow up during the appraisal. However, there are some findings that the follow up
action has not completed yet, i.e. MIS enhancement which will improve the internal control system. MOSA
IG monitors the audit follow up action and provide the status of follow up to BPK regularly. BPK just
launched in February 2017 web-based monitoring system on the audit findings’ follow up action. Beside
IG MOSA, BPK now can monitor the status follow up action directly from the web.

55.     MOSA plans to improve management information system that includes reporting system on the
payment realization. An improved MIS will make the payment reconciliation at national level easier and
provide more reliable financial reports. The system is expected to have some features which include tracing
flow of fund to beneficiaries adequately (DLI on MIS enhancement). Since PKH is a primary program for
the ministry, the Bank requires financial audit of the ministry, instead of program audit. The external


                                                                                                          11
auditor, BPK will include the program in the ministry audit assignment and share a copy of the audit report
to the Bank.

56.     The procurement process at MoSA is also audited by BPK and the assessment noted that there are
no audit finding in the procurement process.

(xiii)   Transparency

57.     Based on Law No. 14 year 2008 regarding Transparency of Public Information, every Public
Information is open and accessible by every User of Public Information. An exception to the Public
Information is information that is restrictive and limited. Every Public Information Applicant shall be able
to obtain Public Information fast and promptly at low cost and in a simple manner.

58.      The exception is when it is classified as confidential information pursuant to the Law, ethics, and
the interest of the public; based on an examination in terms of the consequences that occur if the information
is provided to the public; and after careful consideration that covering up Public Information can protect a
larger interest rather than opening it or vice versa.

59.     Line Ministry (LM) may use electronic and non-electronic media as facilities to disseminate the
information. However, it is not clear whether LM should provide the information actively, or passively
(only on demand basis). There is no monitoring and evaluation from Ministry of Information whether LM
follows the law and regulation on transparency of public information.

60.      It is noted that MoSA provides some basic information regarding PKH in the ministry website. The
information is not detailed on budget amount, location and end user information. TNP2K as government
agency for acceleration on eliminating poverty, provides more information on the program than MoSA’s
web. Some local governments (LGs) made a complaint on availability of PKH information, since the LGs
need to provide budget sharing to the program as well as some questions raised by poor families who did
not get PKH. It is also noted that PKH posters are limited to local government offices. In order to improve
transparency, there is a plan to make PKH information more open and accessible to all stakeholders. PMU
plans to improve its communication strategy at central as well local level, develop monitoring and
evaluation system, and strengthen complaint handling mechanism. PMU expects that PKH will be more
transparent by implementing this action plan (result matrix and indicator on transparency).

61.      Procurement plans and bidding opportunities are publicly disclosed in Sistem Informasi Rencana
Umum        Pengadaan/Information       System     for    Procurement     Planning    (SIRUP)    website
(https://sirup.lkpp.go.id/sirup). The bidding reference number, package description, procuring agency,
owner estimate, and location are published in the SIRUP’s website. Bidding information, from
advertisement to award information, including bidding schedule, name of registered bidders, quoted and
evaluated prices, and bid evaluation are publicly disclosed in SPSE e-procurement system. Contract award
information is also published in the national website of the public procurement agency which is freely
accessible to the general public.

(xiv)    Complaint Handling

61.       The Perpres includes provisions allowing bidders to submit complaints on the procurement
process, and the LPSE e-procurement system also allows complaints to be submitted through the system.
During the procurement assessment, MoSA staff informed that procurement related complaints have rarely
been received in the contracts awarded during the last three years, and in case of receipt of such complaint
it is forwarded to the concerned ULP for action. There does not seem to be an established system in place


                                                                                                           12
in MoSA for redressal of procurement related complaints, and this is an area which can be further
strengthened under the Program.

(xvi)   Fraud and Corruption

62.      Like most CCT program, PKH particular implementation challenges from a governance and anti-
corruption perspective. It is large in scope, with 6 million beneficiaries and a high volume of financial
transactions. It is politically high-profile and engages multiple government actors at the national and sub-
national levels. And by targeting the poorest of the poor, project locations are often in remote and
inaccessible areas, exacerbating implementation challenges and increasing risk.

63.      The potential major vulnerabilities of PKH along with potential mitigation measures are
Interference or errors in the payment process. The program has two main exposures on fraud and corruption
payment risks, especially at the lowest level. The main risk is illegal deduction of the payment from the
Post payment officer and facilitator. Beside internal control procedures in the PT Pos Indonesia, PKH has
set up complain handling mechanism that recipients can report and submit any issue on the payment
process. The PT Pos Indonesia includes regular staff rotation and supervision to the post payment unit into
PT Pos Indonesia internal control procedures. The recent move towards delivering payments through
cashless method can help mitigate most of the concerns regarding payment disbursements to the correct
beneficiaries and improve liquidation process, and mitigate the risk of “taxing” beneficiaries. Since the
cashless method transfers the fund to beneficiaries account directly.

64.      Detection Risks: For a big program like PKH, detection risk will continue to be a challenge as
some level of fraud and corruption is inevitable because of the sheer scale of coverage. Some factors
contributing to this risk are: a) funds not targeting eligible beneficiaries; b) eligible beneficiaries being
excluded from the list of recipients; c) possible delays of funds transfers to beneficiaries; d)
incomplete/inaccurate database of beneficiaries; e) influential beneficiaries receiving more payments; and
f) failure of beneficiaries to notify the program of change of their circumstances or failure of the program
to act on this information. In order to mitigate these risks, many controls are in place. The recipient list is
prepared and verified by two different agencies. Sub-district facilitator will ensure that the post/banks pays
the fund to the right beneficiaries. The facilitator also cross-checks whether the beneficiaries are eligible
for the future payments. The Post Office has also set up internal control procedures which includes regular
staff rotation and supervision of the post payments from the district post office. Control over payment to
beneficiaries are also expected to be improved by switching to cashless payment method to beneficiary
families (DLI no. 2). It is also recommended to Post’s internal audit unit and MoSA IG to have selected
verification of payments to beneficiaries during the audit assignment. In addition, PKH has set up complaint
handling mechanism that recipients can report any issue on the payment process. (DLI standardize and
improved GRS). Moreover, the beneficiaries or others may raise the issue to other grievance resolution
system, such as Ombusman, On-line community complaints (LAPOR), internal/external auditor and anti-
corruption commission (KPK).

65.     Non Compliance to Bank’s debarred/ temporarily suspended firm: The assessment revealed
that MOSA complies with LKPP’s blacklisted firms. The Bank discussed and shared the Guidelines on
Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for Results Financing (ACG) with MoSA
which applies to the entire Program. The Bank and MOSA also discussed MoSA’s obligations under the
ACG for the Program to monitor and comply with the Bank’s list of debarred/temporarily suspended firms.
The mechanism in MoSA for enforcing the Bank’s debarred/temporarily suspended firms will be discussed
and agreed with MoSA during appraisal.




                                                                                                            13
IV. Fiduciary Risk Assessment

66.     The overall Fiduciary Risk is Substantial.

 Risk                                        Mitigation Measure
 Lack of automated system to record and      Implementation of MIS enhancement to captured detail data
 reconcile data of payments to               at beneficiary level
 beneficiaries
 Inadequate follow up on external findings  Monitoring of implementation of external auditor
                                            recommendations with support of the Inspector General (IG)
                                            MoSA
 Need to improve program internal Instituting periodic internal audit of the program
 controls
 Addressing interim mitigation measures Enforcing timely submission of payment realization reports
 until MIS implementation                   by facilitators including confirmation of receipt of payments
                                            by beneficiaries
 Absence      of     compliant     handling MoSA to develop a procurement complaint handling
 mechanism could be a deterrent to mechanism consistent with Government regulations
 bidder’s participation in bidding
 Risk of noncompliance to Bank’s list of MoSA to put in place a mechanism so as to ensure that ULPs
 debarred/temporarily suspended firms       at each of procurement process checks and records in the file
                                            that the recommended firm is not on the Bank’s list of
                                            debarred and temporarily suspended firms
 Interference or errors in the payment The recent move towards delivering payments through
 process                                    cashless method can help mitigate most of the concern
                                            regarding payment disbursements to the correct
                                            beneficiaries and improve liquidation process and mitigate
                                            the risk of “taxing” beneficiaries
 Detection risks                            In addition to existing controls already in place in MoSA it
                                            is recommended to PT Pos Indonesia’s internal unit and
                                            MoSA IG to have selected verification of payments to
                                            beneficiaries during the audit assignment


V.    Fiduciary Inputs for Program Action Plan

67.     Based on fiduciary assessment, the following areas are considered for compliance/institutional
strengthening as part of Program Action Plan: (a) Enhancement on Management Information System which
include information on payment realization; (b) To take follow up action on BPK audit findings and
recommendation; (c) To conduct internal audit of the Program by IG, MOSA; (d) Enforcing timely
submission of payment realization reports by facilitators (including confirmation that beneficiaries have
received the fund) during transition to MIS to improve internal controls.




                                                                                                       14
