Report No. 87


South Asia Region, Education Global Practice

Study on Demand for Skilled Labor in Unregistered
MSMEs of India

January 2017




Discussion Paper Series
South Asia Region, Education Global Practice




        Study on Demand for Skilled Labor in
              Unregistered MSMEs of India
                              January 2017




Discussion Paper Series
Discussion papers are published to communicate the results of the World Bank’s work to the development
community with the least possible delay. The typescript manuscript of this paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate to formally edited texts. Some sources cited in the
paper may be informal documents that are not readily available.

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the views of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank and its affiliated organizations,
or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the Governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in the work do not imply any judgement
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries
             Authors




          Shabnam Sinha

Lead Education Specialist, World Bank




           Kartik Pental

       Consultant, World Bank
                                       Acknowledgements




The study was initiated as a part of the research that the World Bank has undertaken while conceptualizing
the ‘Skill India Mission Operation’ project to understand the demand for skilled labor in the unregistered
MSME sector and how addressing the same can enhance business productivity. The study findings have
been refined based on valuable feedback provided by Frederico Gil Sander, Senior Country Economist,
India.

The authors thank the entrepreneurs and employees who participated whole heartedly in the study,
providing valuable inputs and insights. Without their support and cooperation, this study could not have
happened.
                                            Table of Contents

List of tables                                                                    Page 1

List of figures                                                                   Page 2

Foreword                                                                          Page 4

About the report                                                                  Page 5

Executive Summary                                                                 Page 6

Background                                                                       Page 11

Census 2006-07 – Data points of significance                                     Page 14

 Definition of MSMEs                                                              Page 14

 Size and nature of the unregistered MSME sector                                  Page 14

 Unregistered MSMEs and socio-economic profile of owners                          Page 15

 Economic significance of unregistered MSMEs                                      Page 16

Findings from Chhattisgarh                                                       Page 18

 Growth of unregistered MSMEs and the nature of their operations                  Page 18

 Employment generated by unregistered MSMEs and profile of employees              Page 20

 Unregistered MSMEs current demand for skilled labor                              Page 22

 Current source of skills training for employees                                  Page 27

 Benefits of formal skills training for unregistered MSMEs and their employees    Page 27

 Formal skills training needs of entrepreneurs running unregistered MSMEs         Page 28

 Economic importance of supporting the unregistered MSME sector                   Page 30

 Importance of targeting business clusters for skills training                    Page 31

 The need for supporting unregistered MSME sector                                 Page 32

Extrapolated national estimates                                                  Page 35

Recommendations                                                                  Page 39

Annexure I: State wise extrapolations                                            Page 40

Annexure II: Study approach and methodology                                      Page 62
                                                        List of Tables
Table 1: Distribution of sector and sub-sector of operations of unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh....................... 19

Table 2: Number of employees engaged by unregistered MSMEs; disaggregated by level of skills and gender ........ 20

Table 3: Women employees as a percentage of total employee base; disaggregated by sector of operation .............. 21

Table 4: Skilled employees as a percentage of total employee base; disaggregated by sector of operation ................ 21

Table 5: Change in percentage of skilled employees in the workforce; disaggregated by sector of operation ............ 21

Table 6: Estimates for current requirement of skilled employees; disaggregated by sector and gender ..................... 23

Table 7: Salary differential between unskilled & formally skilled staff; gender disaggregated .................................. 28

Table 8: Sector disaggregated investment estimates for unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh .................................. 30

Table 9: Sector disaggregated estimates for change in profit margins of unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh ........ 31

Table 10: Gender disaggregated estimates for credit requirement and credit worthiness ............................................ 34

Table 11: Sector disaggregated estimates of number of unregistered MSMEs – national estimate ............................ 36

Table 12: Salary differential between unskilled & formally skilled staff; gender disaggregated – national estimate . 37

Table 13: State wise approximation of number of unregistered MSMEs .................................................................... 40

Table 14: State wise approximation of number of unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs ................................. 41

Table 15: State wise approximation of number of unregistered service sector MSMEs ............................................. 42

Table 16: State wise approximation of number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs ........................................... 43

Table 17: State wise approximation of percentage of women-owned unregistered MSMEs ...................................... 44

Table 18: State wise approximation of employment generated by unregistered MSMEs ........................................... 45

Table 19: State wise approximation of employment generated per unit by unregistered MSMEs .............................. 46

Table 20: State wise approximation of number of women employed by unregistered MSMEs .................................. 47

Table 21: State wise approximation of number of skilled employees at unregistered MSMEs ................................... 48

Table 22: State wise approximation of the number of skilled employees required at unregistered MSMEs ............... 49

Table 23: State wise approximation of skilled women employees required at unregistered MSMEs ......................... 50

Table 22: State wise approximation of skilled labor force demand to be met by new labor force participants ........... 51

Table 25: State wise approximation of investments made over the last five years by unregistered MSMEs .............. 52

Table 26: State wise approximation of current credit requirement of unregistered MSMEs ....................................... 53

Table 27: State wise approximation of age differential between unskilled and skilled labor force participants ......... 54

                                                                    1
                                                            List of Figures
Figure 1: Number of unregistered MSMEs in India – census estimates ...................................................................... 14

Figure 2: Distribution of unregistered MSMEs across rural and urban markets – census estimates ........................... 15

Figure 3: Percentage of women-owned unregistered MSMEs in India – census estimates ......................................... 15

Figure 4: Percentage unregistered MSMEs operating out of low-income states – census estimates ........................... 16

Figure 5: Ownership of unregistered MSMEs disaggregated by social groups – census estimates ............................. 16

Figure 6: Employment generated disaggregated by scale of operation – census estimates ......................................... 17

Figure 7: Employment generated disaggregated by scale of operation – census estimates ......................................... 17

Figure 8: Year of inception or business disaggregated by nature of business ............................................................. 18

Figure 9: Profile of business owner; disaggregated by gender .................................................................................... 19

Figure 10: Percentage of women in the employee base; disaggregated by gender of owner ....................................... 22

Figure 11: Percentage of businesses currently searching for skilled employees; disaggregated by sector .................. 22

Figure 12: Percentage of skilled labor force requirement to be met by new labor force participants .......................... 23

Figure 13: Business outlook for the upcoming financial year ..................................................................................... 24

Figure 14: Unregistered MSMEs preference of profile of prospective employees; disaggregated by sector .............. 24

Figure 15: Barriers to finding and recruiting suitable skilled employees .................................................................... 25

Figure 16: Percentage of owners reporting an interest in sending their employees for training .................................. 25

Figure 17: Employers’ preferred model for investing in employees’ formal skills training ........................................ 26

Figure 18: Percentage of employers expecting productivity gains from finding suitably skilled employee ............... 26

Figure 19: Level of difficulty in retaining formally skilled employees; disaggregated by sector of operation ........... 27

Figure 20: Source of structured skills training for existing skilled employees working at unregistered MSMEs ....... 27

Figure 21: Entrepreneurs perspective on the business impact of hiring skilled employees ......................................... 28

Figure 22: Level of awareness about the existence of Entrepreneurship Development Institutes (EDIs) ................... 29

Figure 23: Types of formal skills training(s) required by entrepreneurs managing unregistered MSMEs .................. 29

Figure 24: Current source for entrepreneurial skills training; disaggregated by sector of operation ........................... 30

Figure 25: Percentage of unregistered MSMEs operating out of business clusters; disaggregated by sector .............. 31

Figure 26: Entrepreneur’s perspective on the benefits of operating out of a business cluster ..................................... 32

Figure 27: Percentage of entrepreneurs reporting being aware of government scheme(s) supporting MSMEs .......... 33

                                                                         2
Figure 28: Source of capital obtained through external sources of finance; disaggregated by gender ........................ 33

Figure 29: Number of unregistered MSMEs (millions) – national estimate ................................................................ 35

Figure 30: Profile of business owner; disaggregated by gender – national estimate ................................................... 35

Figure 31: Total employment generated by unregistered MSMEs – national estimate ............................................... 36

Figure 32: Women’s share in employee base of unregistered MSMEs – national estimate ........................................ 36

Figure 33: Gender disaggregated analysis of demand for skilled employees – national estimate ............................... 37




                                                                    3
                                                Foreword
The past decade has witnessed the Indian economy growing within an overall economically constrained
global environment. The country has done well in reducing the gap between urban and rural areas and
progressed towards improving its standing on various socio-economic indicators. Between 1993 and 2011,
the government has been successful in reducing the incidence of poverty from 46.1 percent to 21.3 percent.
The annual growth in consumption per capita of the bottom 40 percent has almost reached levels similar to
the average annual growth in consumption per capita for the country as a whole.

As of today, about 54 percent of the country’s population is below 25 years of age and by 2022 the average
of workforce participants in India would be 29 years. The Government has estimated that as of 2015, about
170 million non-farm based workforce participants would be in the age group of 15 to 45 years of age and
would need access to appropriate skills trainings. The corresponding estimate for the farm based workforce
stands at about 128 million. Additionally, over the next seven years, a total of about 105 million individuals
will enter the workforce and would need to access channels for formal skills training. Therefore, by 2022,
the Government needs to provide about 400 million individuals with access to formal skills training.

Sustaining the Indian growth story would require the country to sustain the shift from a farm based to
industry driven economy. Much of the growth experienced over the past two decades has come from large
scale service sector undertakings. However, absorbing the country’s large workforce into productive non -
farm activities can only be possible if the country was to realize its ambition of strengthening and expanding
the manufacturing sector. It is well documented that the MSME sector employs bulk of non-farm based
labor force in India. However, the last census of MSMEs was conducted in 2006-07 and there are no official
estimations available for the skills development and training needs of entrepreneurs and employees in this
space.

This study addresses the existing data/information gap; providing valuable inputs towards the preparation
of the ‘Skill India Mission Operation’ project. Unregistered MSMEs in India are estimated to have engaged
more than 77.7 million labor force participants; are noted to be inclusive in terms of the profile of owners
and employees; are concentrated in the rural markets; and are currently looking for about 38 million skilled
employees (including skilling of 28.2 million existing employees. Further, there is a strong correlation
between engagement of skilled labor and business productivity. Approximations suggest that every one
percent increase in skilled labor improves business profitability by around 0.4 percent.

The study findings highlight the pivotal role that the unregistered MSME sector will play in shaping India’s
economic growth. The sector is best positioned to support the transition of labor from farm based to non-
farm based work. In this sense, has the potential to inform the investments and efforts being made towards
strengthening the relevance, reach and impact of the government’s Skill India Mission.

I hope this study will be useful for academics, policy makers and people interested in skill development
sector in India.

                                                                                              Keiko Miwa
                                                                                          Practice Manager
                                                                                         South Asia Region
                                                                                  Education Global Practice
                                                                                    The World Bank Group

                                                      4
                                          About the Report
This report seeks to highlight the economic importance of unregistered Micro Small and Medium
Enterprises (MSMEs) in India and ascertain their role in the job market. It attempts to summarize the
sector’s demand for skilled labor and entrepreneurial skills training.

The report opens with an executive summary of key findings and a background explaining the context in
which it has been prepared and the research objectives it seeks to fulfil. The next section of the report
presents key insights derived from the analysis of data collected through the Unregistered MSMEs census
of 2006-07 and the associated extrapolations made by the government in 2013-14. This section discusses
the size, scale and profile of the unregistered MSME sector along with estimates of the employment
generated by the sector.

This is followed by a section on insights from field based research in Chhattisgarh. It utilizes primary data
to estimate how the unregistered MSME sector has grown in the state; how its profile and scale has
evolved since the census of 2006-07; the size of the labor force engaged by unregistered businesses in
Chhattisgarh; the sector’s demand for skilled labor; its preference for formally skilled/certified
employees; the wage gains that employees can expect to derive from obtaining formal skills certification;
its contribution to the state economy; and the skills training needs of entrepreneurs.

The next section of the report builds on the findings of the first two sections to estimate and present
national level aggregates for the growth of the unregistered MSME sector, the quantum of labor force
employed by unregistered MSMEs in India, the sector’s demand for skilled labor and the wage benefits
that employees can derive from attaining formal skills certification.

National aggregates presented in this section have been estimated through extrapolation of data from the
unregistered MSME census of 2006-07. This is the most recent and holistic data source available as the
next unregistered MSME census is currently in the planning and data collection phase. Primary data from
the low-income state of Chhattisgarh has been used to adjust/control the extrapolations made using the
2006-07 census data. Extrapolations have been made based on gross state domestic product per capita,
change in gross state domestic product per capita, female labor force participation estimates and change in
female labor force participation estimates. It is encouraging to note that the extrapolations made under
this study are similar to those made by the government in 2013-14 (where such comparison is possible).

The report closes with a set of recommendations directed at strengthening policy and programming
response to the skills training needs of unregistered MSMEs in India. It presents ideas that different tiers
of governance, skills training providers and skill development agencies can leverage upon to realize the
objectives of the ‘Skill India Mission.’

State level estimates for key data points are given in Annexure I of the report and Annexure II presents
the approach and methodology used to structure the field based research carried out in Chhattisgarh.




                                                      5
                                           Executive Summary

                              Size and Sector Profile of Unregistered MSMEs




Number of unregistered MSMEs 2006-07 (in thousands)         Number of unregistered MSMEs 2016-17 (in thousands)


             Over the past decade, the number of unregistered micro, small and medium (MSME) enterprises in
             India has increased by 97.8 percent. As of today, there are more than 38.7 million informal businesses
             in the country.



             Micro enterprises account for 99.8 percent of unregistered MSMEs in the country and the rest of the
             0.2 percent is accounted for by businesses with small scale of operations. This presents a need for
             policy measures and support programs which can help micro enterprises in expanding their operations.



             As per the unregistered MSMEs census of 2006-07, 52.6 percent of businesses in the country were
             operating in the manufacturing sector. Over the last decade, this percentage has dropped to 32.7
             percent; highlighting the importance of initiatives directed at reviving the manufacturing sector.



             As per the unregistered MSMEs census of 2006-07, most of the unregistered MSMEs (60.2
             percent) are operating out of rural areas. This percentage is expected to have increased further over
             the last decade.



                                                        6
                               Unregistered MSMEs and Social Inclusion




Number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs 2006-07          Number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs 2016-17


             The unregistered MSME sector has 4.7 million women-owned setups which account for 12.1 percent
             of the total number of businesses. Over the past decade, there has been a three percentage point
             increase in women’s share in ownership.



             Low income states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and Uttar
             Pradesh) of India account for 33.9 percent of unregistered MSMEs. Supporting/incubating micro and
             small businesses in these states could help in improving access to labor force opportunities.



             Businesses owned by individuals from Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST) and Other
             Backward Classes (OBC) account for more than 60 percent of unregistered micro and small scale
             setups in the country.



             Diversity in the ownership profile of unregistered MSMEs also reflects in their employment base.
             Entrepreneurs belonging to marginalized groups/communities are more open to including members of
             their community/group in the business workforce.



                                                      7
                         Employment Generated by Unregistered MSMEs




Employment generated 2016-17 (in thousands)                    Women’s share in employment 2016-17


         The unregistered MSME sector is providing employment to about 77.7 million labor force participants.
         The number of job opportunities in the sector have doubled over the past decade and this is largely due
         to the setting up of new businesses.



         The unregistered MSME sector is providing employment to about 10 million female labor force
         participants (12.9 percent of the total labor force in the unregistered MSME sector).




         When compared to service sector units, manufacturing setups are employing more labor force
         participants per unit. It is a cause of concern that overall aggregate employment per unregistered
         MSME has remained unchanged over the past decade (2 employees per unit).



         Growth in the number of unregistered service sector MSMEs has outpaced the rate of growth of
         unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs. Thus, the manufacturing sector’s share in the employment
         generated by unregistered MSMEs has been reduced to below 40 percent.



                                                    8
                                Unregistered MSMEs Demand for Skilled Labor




Skilled labor engaged by the sector 2016-17 (in thousands)       Sector’s requirement for skilled labor 2016-17 (in thousands)


               It is estimated that 6.7 million of the labor force working at unregistered MSMEs is considered skilled
               by owners/entrepreneurs. This translates into less than 8.6 percent of the unregistered MSME
               workforce being skilled.



               Unregistered MSMEs are currently looking for close to 38 million skilled employees. About 28.2
               percent of this is expect to be fulfilled by new market entrants; with the rest being met by skilling of
               existing employees. This puts the sector in an ideal position to support the ‘Skill India Mission’.



               Unregistered MSMEs are searching for more than 5.6 million skilled women employees. This
               translates into about 15 percent of the sector’s overall demand for skilled employees and could be
               crucial to the gender inclusion agenda of the ‘Skill India Mission’.



               Among businesses that are currently looking for skilled employees, more than 68 percent of
               manufacturing units and 46 percent of service sector setups associate greater value to candidates who
               have attained formal certification (preferably from a government managed or recognized centre).



                                                             9
         Economic Impact of Skills Training Targeted at Unskilled Unregistered MSMEs




Salary increment for skilled employee (INR/month)         Salary increment for skilled woman employee (INR/month)


           A formally skilled employee working at an unregistered MSME can expect to earn a wage which is up
           to 2.5 times more than what an unskilled employee would draw for his/her work. In absolute terms, at
           the national level this could translate into an incremental wage of almost 6,000 per month.



           There is evidence suggesting that access to skills training can reduce gender based wage inequality. At
           the national level, an unskilled women employee earns less than 60 percent of the wage drawn by an
           unskilled male employee. This difference educes to 5 percent in the case of skilled employees.



           More than 63 percent of entrepreneurs believe that finding the skilled employees that they are
           searching will positively impact their business productivity. Analysis reveals that every one percent
           increase in skilled labor improves business profitability by around 0.4 percent.



           Over the past five years, unregistered MSMEs have invested more than USD 76.2 billion in the Indian
           economy. The sector has a credit requirement of more than USD 43.4 billion and addressing this need
           can help in the further expansion and consolidation of unregistered MSMEs.



                                                     10
                                                Background
India is a lower-middle-income country with a gross domestic product (GDP) per capita of USD 1,581.6 in
2015 and an active labor force of 500 million.1 The percentage of poor in India has reduced from 45.3
percent in 1993-94 to 21.9 percent in 2011-12.2 During the same period, India’s share in the percentage of
poor in the world has also decreased; clearly highlighting that India’s progress in this space has outpaced
other developing countries.

However, a considerable part of the population continues to be vulnerable to slipping below the poverty
line. This vulnerability is primarily due the high incidence of informality in the labor market with most
labor force participants working in informal/unorganized sectors with limited/or no job security. In many
cases their jobs security is dependent on external market conditions, weather patterns, seasonal demand etc.
more than 70 percent of the workforce is employed by firms with fewer than 10 employees, about 82 percent
work without a written job contract,3 and more than 75 percent have no access to any social security
benefits. There has been a gradual decline in female labor force participation rate. As of 2014-15, only 31
percent of women participate in the labor force, down by 12–14 percentage points since 2004–2005.4 As a
result there has been a gradual decrease in the number of earning members in families.

The most vulnerable tend to live in India’s villages. This is seconded by the fact that poverty rates tend to
drop from 27 percent in small villages to about 6 percent in urban cities. Further, the job market is
characterized by inequality of opportunities as individuals from marginalized groups have access to a lesser
number of opportunities. There are considerable interstate variations in per capita income and the rate of
reduction of poverty is not comparable to the rate at which the Indian economy has grown.

Further, although India’s unemployment rate is relatively low, the labor force is characterized by high
underemployment, a large informal sector, and low female labor force participation.

Labor force challenges in a young, transitioning economy

India has gradually transitioned from being an agrarian market to a manufacturing and services driven
economy. This shift has resulted in major changes in labor force participation. Many have moved from the
farm sector to non-farm sector jobs. Most of the new jobs are now being created in the non-farm sector.
The shift from agriculture to other sectors of the economy has affected the skills mix required by the labor
market, reducing the demand for unskilled workers. It is anticipated that there will be further reduction in
the share of the agriculture and low-skilled occupations, while there will be a significant increase in the
share of occupations requiring skilled labor. About 298.3 million members of the current farm and nonfarm
sector workforce5 will need to be skilled, re-skilled, and/or up-skilled to increase labor productivity.



1
  World Bank data
2
  Poverty and shared prosperity report, India (World Bank)
3
  Fourth Annual Employment and Unemployment Survey Report (2013–2014); Labor Bureau, Ministry of Labor
and Employment, Government of India.
4
  Chatterjee, U., Rinku Murgai, Ambar Narayan, and Martin Rama. 2016. Pathways to Reducing Poverty and
Sharing Prosperity in India: Lessons From The Last Two Decades . Washington, DC: World Bank.
5
  According to the National Policy for Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (2015) released by the Ministry of
Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE).

                                                       11
Another prominent and unique characteristic of the Indian labor force is that at present, more than 54 percent
of its total population is younger than 25 years of age. Current demographic estimates indicate that over the
next two decades, approximately 12 million youth (age group 15–29 years) will enter the labor market every
year. These young people will need skills required to find employment in a rapidly transforming economy.

Low skill levels in the Indian labor force and limited opportunities beyond secondary
education

India’s growth and competitiveness are constrained by the low skill levels of its population. A range of
surveys finds that labor productivity is low and that the supply of skilled labor remains inadequate. 6 The
unavailability of quality skilled labor is becoming a major impediment to attracting investments. Only 2.3
percent of the total workforce in India has undergone formal skill training.7

Opportunities to acquire further education and/or job-specific skills at the end of secondary education are
limited. Only about 10–15 percent of youth can access long-term institutional SD programs; most of the
remainder join the labor market on completion of basic or secondary education as opportunities for further
training to acquire job-specific skills are limited.

Ambitious government plans to transform economy

Supporting the growth and expansion of the Indian economy and catering to the labor market aspiration of
the country’s youth requires the availability of suitable job opportunities and improvements in the quality
of the labor force.

To stimulate demand for labor (in particular skilled labor) the government has recently initiated the ‘Make
in India’ campaign. The campaign has set high priorities for consolidating and expanding the manufacturing
sector. This stimulus is expected to rapidly expand the country’s skilled labor requirements.

To complement this to major ‘demand’ side impetus, India’s 12th Five Year Development Plan (2012–
2017) calls for concomitant and substantial reforms to the supply side, in education and training programs.
The government has set a target of providing high quality skills training opportunities to about 400 million
labor force participants. A target that it wishes to realize by 2022.

Current skills training landscape and the dearth of short term skills training opportunities

Opportunities to acquire job-specific skills are currently provided through long term training programs
structured as diploma or degree courses. These courses ae important but will not cater to the bulk of the
industry’s demand which will exist in the form of a need for semi -skilled labor. Therefore the focus needs
to shift towards strengthening short-term skills training programs (3–12 months or up to 600 hours)
provided by various ministries, state governments, industry associations, employers, and private sector
training providers.



6
    World Bank Enterprise Survey, 2014.
7
    MSDE. 2015b. National Skill Development Mission: A Framework for Implementation. New Delhi.

                                                       12
The value of investing in short-terms skills training programs is summarized by a meta-analysis done by
Fares and Puerto (2009), who through a review of 345 studies/evaluations of short-term training programs
in 90 low-, middle-, and high-income countries, concluded that graduates of quality skills training programs
can enhance business productivity by up to 53 percent.

Insufficient involvement of MSMEs in skill development programs

As per the Ministry of Small and Medium Enterprises, Government of India, MSME account for about 37.4
percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of India. They provide employment to more than 80 million
labor force participants and contributed 44.7 percent of the country’s total exports in 2014 -15.8 It is
characterized by micro and small scale setups which are mostly working with unskilled employees.

Unregistered MSMEs tend to oeprate out of rural markets and the sector is well positioned to absorb the
labor force exiting the agriculture sector. Ths skills training needs of employees working at unregistered
MSMEs can largely be fulfilled through short-term programs. Further, it is suggested that formal skills
training can significantly impact the wages that employees can earn within the unregistered MSME sector.
In turn, improving the participation of skilled labor force in the unregistered MSME sector can positively
impact its producitivity.

Most unregistered MSMEs are owned by individuals from marginalized groups (such as Scheduled Caste,
Scheduled Tribe and Other Backward Commuities). This coupled with their primarily rural positioning,
highlights their potential for facilitating greater inclusion in the Indian growth story.

Unavailability of data on skilled labor in the unregistered MSME sector

The unregistered MSMEs census of India 2006-07 is the most recent dataset available for analysis.
However, the census does not dwell into many aspects which can help in determining initiatives/support
that can help in consolidating and expanding the operation of unregistered MSMEs.

Very little is known about the type/nature of employment provided by these businesses; the engagement of
skilled labor at unregistered MSMEs; and the demand for skilled labor at unregistered MSMEs. These
informal businesses employ many labor force participants and understanding their demand for skilled labor
can help in realizing the objectives of the Skill India Mission.

This report seeks to address this data/information gap through a sample survey of unregistered MSMEs in
Chhattisgarh and followed up on the same with broad national level extrapolations that can support policy
ideation and administrative planning.




8
    MSME Annual report, 2014–2015

                                                    13
                        Census 2006-07: Data Points of Significance
Definition of MSMEs

As per the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006, the term MSME refers to all
enterprises engaged in production of goods pertaining to any industry specified in first schedule of Industrial
Act, 1951 and other enterprises engaged in production and rendering of services subject to below mentioned
limiting factor of investment in plant & machinery and equipment respectively.

  • Micro enterprises are businesses where the investment in plant and machinery does not exceed INR
    2.5 million

  • Small enterprises are businesses where the investment in plant and machinery is more than INR 2.5
    million but does not exceed INR 50 million

  • Large enterprises are businesses where the investment in plant and machinery is more than INR 50
    million but does not exceed INR 100 million

Size and nature of the unregistered MSME sector

The unregistered MSMEs Census of 2006-07 is the most recent and reliable dataset available for
understanding the nature and scale of these businesses. As per the census, there were 19.9 million
unregistered MSMEs in the country; an increase of 117 percent over the numbers recorded at the time of
the unregistered MSMEs census of 2001-02. Micro enterprises accounted for 99.8 percent of unregistered
businesses in the country and the rest of the 0.2 percent were found to be setups with small scale of
operations.

Figure 1: Number of unregistered MSMEs in India – census estimates




 2006-07                                                                              19.9




 2001-02                                      9.2



           0                5                 10                 15                 20                25


More than 60.2 percent of the unregistered MSMEs in the country were operating out of rural areas; an
almost 3.5 percentage point increase over the 2001-02 census.




                                                      14
Figure 2: Distribution of unregistered MSMEs across rural and urban markets – census estimates




                                 39.8%




                                                                     60.2%



                                 Rural                                 Urban

The unregistered MSME sector has about 1.8 million women-owned businesses (9.1 percent of businesses).
However, it is a cause of concern that the presence of women entrepreneurs in the unregistered MSMEs
sector had reduced between 2001-02 and 2006-07. The 2001-02 census reported that 10.2 percent of
unregistered MSMEs in India were women-owned.

Figure 3: Percentage of women-owned unregistered MSMEs in India – census estimates




    2006-07                                                                       9.1%




    2001-02                                                                                  10.2%



          0.0%          2.0%             4.0%          6.0%           8.0%           10.0%           12.0%


Unregistered MSMEs and socio-economic profile of owners

The importance of unregistered MSMEs as a medium for facilitating economic growth and creating
employment opportunities is seconded by the fact that low income states9 in India account for about 33.9
percent of informal micro and small businesses.




9
 The seven low income states of India are Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan and
Uttar Pradesh

                                                      15
Figure 4: Percentage unregistered MSMEs operating out of low-income states – census estimates



                                                                                  33.9%




                                         66.1%



                                    Low-income states                                     Others


Further, socially backward groups own majority of the unregistered MSMEs in the country. Supporting
these businesses can play a pivotal role in achieving shared prosperity and inclusive growth in India.
Businesses owned by individuals from scheduled caste communities account for 12.8 percent of
unregistered MSMEs operating out of rural areas and 9.2 percent of setups operating out of urban areas.
Businesses owned by individuals from scheduled tribe communities account for 7.1 percent of unregistered
MSMEs operating out of rural areas and 2.3 percent of setups operating out of urban areas. The
corresponding estimates for individuals from other backward classes are 48.0 percent and 42.7 percent
respectively.

Figure 5: Ownership of unregistered MSMEs disaggregated by social groups – census estimates


               9.2% 2.3%                    42.7%                                            45.8%
 Urban


                12.8%        7.1%                       48.0%                                        32.1%
  Rural



          0%       10%          20%       30%       40%         50%         60%      70%           80%       90%   100%
                        SC                   ST                       OBC                      Others


Economic significance of unregistered MSMEs

As per the census of 2006-07, the unregistered MSME sector provided employment to 40.9 million labor
force participants. 57.3 percent of the employment generated was based out of rural areas. Unregistered
micro enterprises accounted for 99.2 percent of employment generated by the sector; with the rest being
accounted for by unregistered small scale setups.




                                                                16
Figure 6: Employment generated disaggregated by scale of operation – census estimates

                                            0.8%




                                                              99.2%


                               Micro                                  Small

As of 2006-07 manufacturing enterprises accounted for 58.5 percent of employment generated by the
sector.

Figure 7: Employment generated disaggregated by scale of operation – census estimates




                                41.5%




                                                                58.5%


                            Manufacturing                               Services

The unregistered MSME sector contributed USD 555.9 billion in gross output. Setups based out of rural
markets accounted for 56.2 percent of the gross output generate with the rest of the 43.8 percent coming
from businesses operating out of urban markets. Micro enterprises’ share in the total gross output
generated by the sector stood at 87.9 percent; with the rest coming from small scale setups. Further, 68.0
percent of the gross output was contributed by manufacturing setups. Unregistered service sector MSMEs
contributed the remaining 32.0 percent.




                                                    17
                                   Findings from Chhattisgarh
Growth of unregistered MSMEs and the nature of their operations

As per the last unregistered MSME census of India, as of 2006-07, there were 278,000 informal MSME
businesses in Chhattisgarh. Over the past decade, this number is noted to have grown significantly and as
of 2016-17 is estimated to stand at 528,000 unregistered MSMEs. During this decade, the growth rate of
the service sector has outpaced the growth rate for the manufacturing sector. This is suggested by the fact
that 61.6 percent of existing unregistered service sector MSMEs in Chhattisgarh have been established post
completion of the last unregistered MSME census. The corresponding figure for unregistered
manufacturing sector MSMEs is much lower and stands at 25.5 percent. As a result, as of 2016-17, the
service sector accounts for 60.6 percent (about 340,000) of unregistered MSMEs in the state. During the
same period, the Indian economy has also experienced growth that has been primarily driven by the service
sector. In this sense, the growth trajectory of the unregistered MSME sector in Chhattisgarh closely
emulates the growth pattern observed at a National level.

Figure 8: Year of inception or business disaggregated by nature of business


                              38.4%                                     61.6%
       Services


                                             74.5%                                      25.5%
 Manufacturing


                  0%   10%     20%     30%      40%        50%   60%     70%      80%     90%    100%
                             Before 2009                             After 2009

It is encouraging to note that the pace at which the number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs has
grown has outpaced the growth rate for men-owned businesses. The former has grown by about 217 percent
between 2008-09 and 2016-17. As a result, the share of women-owned unregistered businesses has
increased from 4.3 percent to 7.2 percent. Discussions with women entrepreneurs suggest that this change
is largely due to two primary factors. Firstly, the gradual increase in women’s participation in education
and their progression to higher levels of learning has to some extent empowered them to take an
entrepreneurial route to workforce participation. Secondly, even though overall women’s workforce
participation rates have gone down, there are more women customers/buyers in the market. Even though
this shift is largely for the demand of goods and services particularly directed towards women/girls; it has
led to the emergence of a number of women-owned businesses which specifically cater to this segment of
customers.




                                                      18
Figure 9: Profile of business owner; disaggregated by gender


                                                   92.8%                                         7.2%
 2015-16


                                                   95.7%                                         4.3%
 2008-09


           0%    10%      20%       30%      40%      50%      60%      70%       80%      90%     100%

                            Men-Owned                              Women-Owned

An analysis of the sub-sector of operation of unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh reveals that
manufacturing sector businesses tend to be concentrated in the food processing industry, furniture &
furnishing industry, handloom & handicrafts industry, gems & jewelry industry, and stationary and paper
products industry. On the other hand, service sector businesses tend to be concentrated in the retail industry,
repair & maintenance services’ industry, tourism & hospitality industry and beauty & wellness industry.

Table 1: Distribution of sector and sub-sector of operations of unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh

                        Sector/Sub-Sector                              Percentage           Absolute (000)
                                               Manufacturing
 Construction Material & Building Hardware                                  2.2 percent                   11.6
 Food Processing Sector                                                    10.2 percent                   53.9
 Furniture & Furnishing Industry                                            8.4 percent                   44.4
 Handlooms & Handicrafts                                                    5.3 percent                   28.0
 Gems & Jewelry                                                             5.5 percent                   29.0
 Leather & Leather Goods Industry                                           1.7 percent                    9.0
 Textile & Clothing Industry                                                2.1 percent                   11.1
 Stationary & Paper Products                                                4.0 percent                   21.1
 Total                                                                    39.4 percent                  208.0
                                                   Services
 Beauty & Wellness                                                          4.0 percent                   21.1
 Education & Skill Development Services                                     0.5 percent                    2.6
 IT & ITES Sector                                                           0.7 percent                    4.8
 Retail Sector                                                             38.0 percent                 200.6
 Tourism, Hospitality & Trade Sector                                        5.2 percent                   27.5
 Repair & Maintenance                                                      12.0 percent                   63.4
 Total                                                                    60.6 percent                  320.0




                                                      19
A gender disaggregated analysis of the primary sectors of operation clearly highlights the gender gap in the
sectors and sub-sectors in which women operate. In the manufacturing space, almost all women-owned
businesses are operating in the food processing and handloom & handicraft sub-sectors. Few businesses are
operating in the textile and clothing sub-sector.

In the service sector space, almost all women-owned businesses are operating in the beauty & wellness
space and the education & skill development services sub sector (mostly running informal remedial/bridge
education centers). There are a few women entrepreneurs in the retails sub sector but again are primarily
dealing in products directed towards women/girls.

Employment generated by unregistered MSMEs and profile of employees

On an average, an unregistered manufacturing sector MSME in Chhattisgarh is employing 2.1 employees.
The corresponding statistic for unregistered service sector MSMEs is 1.6 employees. This amounts to
437,000 employees in the manufacturing space and 512,000 employees in the service sector space. Thus, it
is estimated that unregistered MSME in Chhattisgarh are employing close to one million workforce
participants. At this point it is important to understand that the informal sector is also characterized by high
levels of disguised employment. On an average, an unregistered MSME in Chhattisgarh is informally
employing a family member (mostly) or friend. It is more common to find a woman/girl from the family
working under such an arrangement. Very little or no salary is paid to family members or friends who are
disguised employed in the business. The rewards of their effort are eventually accounted for in the overall
profit generated through the business. The same is largely considered the family’s collective earning.
However, it is evident that these disguised employees do not necessarily have an active say in their
household’s economic decisions. Many of them however have gained considerable experience which when
coupled with formal skills training (and a willingness on their part) can help them in accessing economically
gainful employment.

It is a point of concern that only about 117,000 of the employees working for unregistered MSMEs in
Chhattisgarh have received some form of structured skills training. Further, it is important to note that
women employees only account for 217,000 of the total employee base. The former is largely due to a
general ignorance towards the value that formal skills training can add to their profile; helping them in
gaining access to higher wages. The latter is pretty much in line with the overall women’s workforce
participation rate in India.

Table 2: Number of employees engaged by unregistered MSMEs; disaggregated by level of skills and gender

         Nature of Activity          Women Employees            Number of Employees      Skilled Employees
                                              Average per setup
 Manufacturing                                         0.46                     2.10                      0.21
 Services                                              0.38                     1.60                      0.23
                                                  Total (000)
 Manufacturing                                             96                   437                          44
 Services                                               122                     512                          74
 Total                                                  217                     949                        117

                                                      20
The employment estimates suggest that women employees account for 21.9 percent of the workforce being
employed by unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs and for 23.8 percent of the workforce being
employed by unregistered service sector MSMEs. However, these estimates do not include women who are
disguised employed in their family businesses. Including them in the estimation exercise would return a
relatively higher figure.

Table 3: Women employees as a percentage of total employee base; disaggregated by sector of operation

 Manufacturing                                                                                    21.9 percent

 Services                                                                                         23.8 percent

 Total                                                                                            22.9 percent

Further, it is a matter of concern that only 10 percent of employees working at manufacturing sector setups
and 14.4 percent of employees working at service sector setups reported having ever received any form of
structured skills training. Further, discussions with employees as well as employers clearly highlight the
quality of skills training received by these individuals. Most of them believe that the skills training received
were not of much utility. They reported that, the training received was not of the desired quality as it had
very little focus on practical learning. Thus, not many of those who have received skills training in the past
experienced much of a change in the income they were drawing as workforce participants. When asked to
choose whether private or government managed institutions provide better quality of skills training; the
respondents presented a mixed opinion. While some said that skills training programs being run at
government managed institutions are superior in quality and content; other felt that skills trainings being
provided by private institutions are more useful as they carry a higher focus on experiential learning and
practical experience. Herein, it is important to note that respondents’ opinion was found to be highly
dependent on the type of skills training under consideration.

Table 4: Skilled employees as a percentage of total employee base; disaggregated by sector of operation

 Manufacturing                                                                                    10.0 percent
 Services                                                                                         14.4 percent
 Total                                                                                            12.4 percent

Despite the government’s focus on skilling the country’s workforce, unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh
only reported a three percentage points increase in the proportion of their workforce which had completed
some form of formal, structured skills training. While this change is estimated to be 5.2 percentage points
in the manufacturing sector space; it is fairly low and estimated to be only 1.5 percentage points in the
service sector space.

Table 5: Change in percentage of skilled employees in the workforce; disaggregated by sector of operation

 Manufacturing                                                                            5.2 percentage points
 Services                                                                                 1.5 percentage points
 Total                                                                                  3.0 percentage points




                                                      21
The need to promote and support women owned unregistered businesses is highlighted by the fact that as
of 2016-17, 63 percent of employees at women-owned unregistered MSMEs were women. The
corresponding statistic for men-owned unregistered MSMEs stood much lower at 25 percent. Interactions
with women entrepreneurs reveal that this is largely due to the nature of their business. As mentioned earlier
most of the women-owned unregistered MSMEs are engaged in businesses which are directed towards
women customers. Therefore, they tend to hire more women employees who can engage with women
customers. Further, many women entrepreneurs reported that they prefer to hire women employees as male
employees tend to undermine their position in the business. They find women employees to be more
reliable; and find them to be more respectful of the employment opportunity provided to them.

Figure 10: Percentage of women in the employee base; disaggregated by gender of owner

 100%

  80%
                              63%
  60%

  40%
                                                                              25%
  20%

   0%
                     Women-owned business                             Men-owned business


Unregistered MSMEs current demand for skilled labor

The low percentage of skilled labor in the workforce of unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh is more of a
function of supply side factors related to the unavailability of skilled labor (largely due to the non-
availability of formal/quality; affordable short terms skills training programs). As of 2016-17, 32.3 percent
of unregistered MSMEs in the state were looking for at least one skilled employee. The demand for skilled
labor seems to be higher in the services sector where about 35.6 percent of service sector businesses are
currently looking for skilled employees.

Figure 11: Percentage of businesses currently searching for skilled employees; disaggregated by sector

 100.0%
  90.0%
  80.0%
  70.0%
  60.0%
  50.0%
  40.0%                                              35.6%                           32.3%
                      27.3%
  30.0%
  20.0%
  10.0%
   0.0%
                  Manufacturing                      Services                        Total




                                                     22
It is estimated that the unregistered MSME sector in Chhattisgarh is currently looking to find and absorb
close to 374,000 skilled employees. Out of this, the sector is currently looking for 86,000 skilled women
employees. The service sector accounts for majority of this requirement and is currently looking for 260,000
skilled employees. The corresponding figure for manufacturing sector setups stands at 114,000 skilled
employees.

Table 6: Estimates for current requirement of skilled employees; disaggregated by sector and gender

             Sector                             Current requirement of skilled employees (000)
     Manufacturing                                                                                               114
     Services                                                                                                    260
     Total                                                                                                       374
     Total (Women)                                                                                                86

A further disaggregation of the demand for skilled employees suggests that about 17.6 percent10 (66,000)
of the requirement is expected to be fulfilled by new job market entrants; with the rest being met through
the skilling of existing employees.

Figure 12: Percentage of skilled labor force requirement to be met by new labor force participants


                                                                     17.6%




                                        82.4%


                      New Labor Force Participants                 Existing Labor Force Participants


It is possible that the current estimates of the demand for skilled labor are an understatement as most
entrepreneurs reported a positive outlook for the year ahead. They reported an expectation that the
subsequent year would bring in higher sales, margins and profitability. As a result, it is possible that
unregistered MSMEs’ capacity to absorb skilled employees is higher than the direct estimates obtained
from entrepreneurs. At the same time, it is encouraging to note that most of the entrepreneurs believe that
business expansion would have to necessarily be accompanied by a corresponding increase in the number
of skilled resources in their workforce. They believe that they would need skilled resources to branch into
new services/products and to consolidate any expansion of operations.




10
  The figure being estimated through data on number of new employees required by unregistered MSMEs. Given
that the number of new employees required is a fraction of the total demand for skilled labor. It can be assumed that
employers will prefer that their new employees are all skilled professionals.

                                                            23
Figure 13: Business outlook for the upcoming financial year



                                           78.2%                                          6.7%        15.1%




  0%        10%        20%        30%         40%       50%         60%         70%      80%          90%       100%

                       Positive                       Indifferent                        Negative


Discussions with the men/women managing unregistered MSMEs reveal that they prefer to higher
employees with some or the other form of skills training. The manufacturing sector seems to attach more
importance to formal certification; while the service sector stresses more on experiential learning/training.
Further, even in the scenario where the manager prefers to hire staff with formal certification, they prefer
to employ workforce participants with on the job experience of using those skills. This is primarily because
the owners/managers suspect that current skills training programs are quite theoretical and lack practical
exposure. They feel that such exposure can only come in if training programs include apprenticeship
opportunities and/or practical classes/components.

Figure 14: Unregistered MSMEs preference of profile of prospective employees; disaggregated by sector


                                  39.6%                                34.6%                  16.8%         9.0%
       Services


                                   43.3%                         17.8%                25.3%             13.6%
 Manufacturing


                  0%     10%      20%         30%     40%        50%      60%     70%         80%     90%       100%

       Indifferent       Skilled on the job         Formal certification & experience         Formal certification


Only 26.2 percent of entrepreneurs/managers reported that it is easy to find suitably skilled employees.
More than majority reported that they face challenges in finding and recruiting suitably skilled employees
as they cannot pay compensation/benefits which are commensurate with the prospective employee’s
expectations. They believe that this is largely a function of the limited supply/availability of formally skilled
and certified resources.




                                                            24
Figure 15: Barriers to finding and recruiting suitable skilled employees

                                 3.0%   2.0%                          Lack of job Security
                  26.2%
                                                                      Lack of capacity building opportunities

                                                                      Compensation and benefits related
                                                                      factors
                                                                      Lack of motivation/drive due to absence
                                                 51.5%                of employee engagement
                  17.3%
                                                                      Not difficult to find skilled employees



While most of the businesses are struggling to find suitably skilled employees, very few are open to the
idea of enrolling their employees in formal skills certification programs. Only 9.8 percent of owners of
unregistered service sector MSMEs and 8.3 percent of owners of unregistered manufacturing sector
MSMEs reported an interest in sending their employees for formal skills certification programs. Given the
current level of availability of skilled labor in the state, most entrepreneurs believe that they would not be
able to retain the employee(s) they send for formal training. They feel that the employee(s) will find higher
enumeration at another business and leave their current employment. Therefore, it is unwise to invest any
time or resources in training the existing manpower working at their business.

Figure 16: Percentage of owners reporting an interest in sending their employees for training


                       9.8%                                   90.2%
       Services


                   8.3%                                      91.7%
 Manufacturing


                  0%      10%   20%     30%      40%        50%   60%           70%   80%       90%      100%

                                  Yes                                      No

Most viewed skill up-gradation as the employee’s responsibility. However amongst the entrepreneurs who
reported an interest in enrolling their employees in such programs, 73.4 percent reported that they are open
to a cost sharing model for paying for their employees’ skills training fee. Some are willing to pay the
employee a reduced salary if he/she is ready to work part time while attending the program. Others, are
willing to pay the training fee; requiring the trainee to bear any private cost involved with attending the
training program. These are generally the cases where the employee would be enrolled in a full time skills
training initiative.




                                                       25
Figure 17: Employers’ preferred model for investing in employees’ formal skills training


                           16.8%
                                                                                      Cost Sharing Model


                      9.8%
                                                                                      Employee Initiative


                                                        73.4%
                                                                                      Employer Funded



Entrepreneurs’ lack of willingness to send their employees for formal skills training and certification is
surprising given that about 58.3 percent of them report that they expect to derive direct economic benefits
from engaging resources who hold formal certification in the skill set that the business is currently looking
for. They justify their unwillingness on the grounds that they expect that their employee will leave for a
higher remunerating job once he/she completes a formal certification program. Hence, it is economically
unwise to support them in undertaking formal certification whilst they are still working for the company.

Figure 18: Percentage of employers expecting productivity gains from finding suitably skilled employee



                             58.3%                                            41.7%




  0%       10%       20%       30%       40%      50%       60%       70%      80%         90%     100%

                                   Yes                                 No


Their inhibition is largely based on their past experience of engaging formally skilled and certified workers.
Many businesses reported that they have found it difficult in retaining formally skilled employees. This is
especially true for businesses operating in the services sector space where about 44.9 percent of
entrepreneurs/managers reported that they have faced difficulties in retaining a formally skilled employee.




                                                     26
Figure 19: Level of difficulty in retaining formally skilled employees; disaggregated by sector of operation


                                  44.9%                                         55.1%
        Services


                        17.1%                                      82.9%
  Manufacturing


                   0%    10%     20%      30%     40%        50%    60%      70%        80%     90%        100%

                                   Yes                                     No


Current source of skills training for employees

About 63.2 percent of current employees who have (at some point in their career) completed a structured
skills training program attended a training being offered/managed by a private institution/agency. Another
26.3 percent attended structured trainings provided by cooperatives. Only, 5.3 percent of existing skilled
employees reported having attended a structured short term training course offered/managed by the
government (central or state). Many also reported having attended informal trainings organized by private
companies supplying to or procuring from the business. These short term informal trainings are largely
linked with a particular product or service. Companies tend to organize these trainings from the perspective
of motivating entrepreneurs and employees to prioritize the positioning and sales of their products/ services.
In other cases, they are organized to ensure that businesses are able to comply with the company’s
procurement norms/policies.

Figure 20: Source of structured skills training for existing skilled employees working at unregistered MSMEs


                                                                   Through Cooperatives
                                                   26.3%

                                                                   Through Government Institutions/agencies



                                                        5.3%       Through Not for Profit Institutions/agencies
                    63.2%
                                                    5.2%
                                                                   Through Private Institutions/agencies



Benefits of formal skills training for unregistered MSMEs and their employees

An increase in the percentage of formally trained/skilled workforce participants is expected to lead to a
corresponding increase in business productivity and profitability. Owners’ of unregistered MSMEs second
this observation and about 63.4 percent of them claim that their business has benefitted from the hiring of
skilled resources. This might be in terms of increase in sales/revenue, enhanced profitability, reducing
operating costs, or a combination of these factors. This perception is further validated by the fact that the
study found a fair degree of correlation between percentage increase in skilled employees in the business’

                                                        27
and percentage change in business profitability. The correlation statistic stands at 0.42 and clearly highlights
the value that businesses and in turn the economy can derive from an increase in number of formally skilled
resources in the workforce.

Figure 21: Entrepreneurs perspective on the business impact of hiring skilled employees



                                 63.4%                                            36.6%




  0%        10%      20%        30%       40%      50%       60%       70%       80%       90%       100%

                                   Yes                                   No


Further, employers must be deriving economic benefits from engaging formally skilled labor as they are
clearly willing to offer higher wages to those with formal skills certification. More importantly, an analysis
of the impact that formal skills’ training has on an employee’s salary reveals that formal skills certification
decreases the wage differential between men and women. So while an unskilled fresher female workforce
participant is expected to draw an income that is 54.7 percent of the income being draw by her male
counterpart; this differential reduces to 96.6 percent once a women workforce participant acquires a formal
skills certification.

Table 7: Salary differential between unskilled, on the job experienced and formally skilled staff; gender
disaggregated

   Gender                       Type of Employee                           Average Monthly Wage (INR)
 Female        Unskilled Fresher                                                                         3,090
 Female        On the Job Experienced                                                                    3,300
 Female        Certified, Skilled Professional                                                           7,725
 Male          Unskilled Fresher                                                                         5,640
 Male          On the Job Experienced                                                                    5,900
 Male          Certified, Skilled Professional                                                           8,000

Formal skills training needs of entrepreneurs running unregistered MSMEs

Entrepreneurial skills training is another aspect which can help in further improving the scale and
profitability of unregistered MSMEs’ operation. Formal, structured training programs that directly respond
to the learning and development needs of entrepreneurs owning/managing informal businesses can provide
them with the knowledge required to realize these aforementioned benefits. However, only 8.4 percent of
entrepreneurs are aware of the existence of Entrepreneurship Development Institutes (EDIs) which provide
such type of training programs.



                                                      28
Figure 22: Level of awareness about the existence of Entrepreneurship Development Institutes (EDIs)



       8.4%                                                   91.6%




  0%          10%       20%       30%           40%         50%         60%    70%         80%         90%      100%


                                      Yes                                       No

The need to improve upon the general level of awareness about the existence of EDIs and overall access to
entrepreneurial training programs is further highlighted by the type of skills training programs that
entrepreneurs wish to enroll in. Most of the entrepreneurs are interested in skills training programs centered
on business expansion, product diversification, sales & marketing and obtaining credit linkages.

On the other hand, there are a few entrepreneurs who are interested in trainings centered on book keeping
& financial management, obtaining statutory clearances, inventory management and the use of IT in
business management. Their preference for certain types of trainings should not be treated as them have a
good footing on trainings that are less desired. It is rather a function of their current scale of operations and
business expectations/aspirations. As an example, not many are looking for structured training programs
on IT in business management. However, this is largely because most believe the same to be irrelevant for
their business (due to scale of operation or nature of business).

Figure 23: Types of formal skills training(s) required by entrepreneurs managing unregistered MSMEs

                                                16%                                 84%
Usage of IT in management of business
                                                      30%                                 70%
                Inventory management
                                                       35%                                 65%
                    Statutory Clearances
                                                       37%                                 63%
 Book keeping & financial management
                                                            48%                                  52%
               Obtaining credit linkages
                                                             50%                                 50%
                    Sales and Marketing
                                                              55%                                 45%
                 Product diversification
                                                                    70%                                 30%
                     Business expansion

                                           0%    10%    20%       30%   40%   50%    60%    70%    80%       90% 100%
                                      Yes                                       No

                                                              29
The need for improving awareness about and access to EDIs is further highlighted by the fact that none of
the entrepreneurs who had attended a formal skills training initiative in the past, reported attending a
training organized by the government (or its departments/institutions). More than 65 percent of
entrepreneurs reported having received some form of training support from private corporations (that were
either their customer or supplier). The rest reported having received skills training support from
NGOs/CSOs working towards promoting micro and small enterprises. The latter set mostly comprises of
women entrepreneurs.

Figure 24: Current source for entrepreneurial skills training; disaggregated by sector of operation


                                          65.9%                                      34.1%
         Services


                                          67.0%                                      33.0%
 Manufacturing


                    0%   10%   20%      30%       40%        50%   60%    70%      80%       90%      100%
                           Private Corporation                           NGO/CSO


Economic importance of supporting the unregistered MSME sector

While manufacturing sector growth has remained rather sluggish, considerable investments in the services
sector have helped in ensuring that the unregistered MSME sector remains significant within the Indian
growth story. Over the past five years, unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh have invested about 0.75
billion in the economy. Of this investment, 80.6 percent has come from informal service sector
undertakings. Given the number of unregistered businesses in the state, this translates into an approximate
investment of USD 1,415 per entity. Further, these businesses provide employment to almost a million
workforce participants.

Table 8: Sector disaggregated investment estimates for unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh

      Sector                                Investment made in 5 years (USD Billion)
 Manufacturing                                                                                           0.145
 Services                                                                                                0.604
 Total                                                                                                   0.749

The profitability of these businesses has also improved over a period of time and the same is clearly paving
the way for increased investments and a larger employee base. The improvements in profit margins clearly
suggest that the provision of appropriate entrepreneurial skills training programs and improved access to
formally skilled employees can help these informal businesses in joining the formal economy and/or in
expanding their scale of operations.




                                                        30
Table 9: Sector disaggregated estimates for change in profit margins of unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh

     Sector                                   Change in profit margin over 5 years
 Manufacturing                                                                           4.0 percentage points
 Services                                                                                3.7 percentage points

Importance of targeting business clusters

Any initiative or program that seeks to support entrepreneurs and employees with formal skills training (or
with other business support) should internalize the economies of scale that can be achieved by targeting
business clusters. Business clusters are expected to be more common to the manufacturing sector and this
notion is seconded by the fact that about 42.1 percent of the manufacturing sector unregistered MSMEs in
Chhattisgarh are operating out of business clusters.

It is also interesting to note that 26.2 percent of service sector unregistered MSMEs in the state are also
operating in clusters. Herein these clusters could be of remedial education (coaching) classes, IT services
setups, beauty parlors & salons etc.

Figure 25: Percentage of unregistered MSMEs operating out of business clusters; disaggregated by sector


                        26.2%                                      73.8%
       Services


                                42.1%                                      57.9%
 Manufacturing


                  0%   10%      20%     30%     40%        50%   60%       70%     80%     90%     100%

                                  Yes                                  No

Approximately 89.0 percent of the manufacturing sector unregistered MSMEs operating out of business
clusters and 59.4 percent of service sector unregistered MSMEs operating out of business clusters reported
that they are benefitting from operating out of a cluster. Around 89.4 percent of businesses reported that
they are benefitting from cluster level sharing of market knowledge and business insights. Further, 74.5
percent of businesses reported that operating out of a cluster provides them with improved access to
customers. More importantly, 53.9 percent of businesses reported that operating out of a cluster helps them
in finding suitable, skilled employees. This clearly highlights the opportunity for developing cluster
based/targeted formal skills training initiatives.




                                                      31
Figure 26: Entrepreneur’s perspective on the benefits of operating out of a business cluster


                                                           14.2%                         85.8%
 Improved access to skill based trainings for employees
                                                                24.8%                      75.2%
           Improved access to capital (formal sources)
                                                                25.5%                      74.5%
                                 Shared transport cost
                                                                27.7%                       72.3%
             Improved access to production machinery
                                                                    46.8%                        53.2%
                          Improved access to suppliers
                                                                        52.3%                       47.7%
    Improved access to public amenities/infrastructure
                                                                        53.9%                       46.1%
                 Improved access to skilled manpower
                                                                        56.0%                       44.0%
                        Improved access to manpower
                                                                            74.5%                        25.5%
                         Improved access to customers
                                                                                 89.4%                      10.6%
    Sharing of market knowledge and business insights

                                                          0%        20%         40%        60%        80%        100%
                                     Yes                                         No


The need to support the unregistered MSME sector

It is expected that over the coming five years; farm based mechanization and the influx of skills &
technology in farming will reduce the percentage of the workforce that will be engaged in the agriculture
sector. The sector is already stressed by a large quantum of its workforce working as disguised employees.
A larger share of unregistered MSMEs operates out of rural areas and these businesses will have to play
pivotal role in absorbing resources from the agriculture sector. The sector has grown fairly rapidly and is
expected to continue to do so. Over the coming year, about 53.5 percent of the unregistered MSMEs in
Chhattisgarh plan to invest in their business. With an average per unit investment of USD 1,800 the sector
is expected to invest a cumulative of USD 0.51 Billion over the next financial year.

Only 19.1 percent entrepreneurs are aware about the existence of any schemes that seek to support the
setting up and expansion of MSMEs. Very few reported having made any attempts to make use of any of
the schemes that they were aware about. Most entrepreneurs believe that the procedure for participating in
the schemes would be complex or that their business did not carry the scale or profile that the government
would be interested in.




                                                               32
Figure 27: Percentage of entrepreneurs reporting being aware of government scheme(s) supporting MSMEs


                           19.1%                                          80.9%
              Total
                       10.1%                                         89.9%
           Services
                                   35.2%                                          64.8%
     Manufacturing

                      0%   10%        20%     30%       40%        50%     60%         70%      80%     90%     100%

                                       Yes                                         No


Nearly 33.0 percent of entrepreneurs (20.0 percent of women entrepreneurs) reported having borrowed
capital for business investment purposes. However, majority reported that they borrowed funds from money
lenders or from their friends and family. This is a cause of concern as money lenders would tend to charge
an adverse interest rate which can in turn impact business sustainability. On the other hand, borrowing from
family members and friends can lead to a partial loss of freedom vis-à-vis business decision making.
Further, there is a difference in the sources from which male and female entrepreneurs borrow from. The
former seem to have greater access to formal sources of finance; while the latter tend to rely more on
cooperatives and self-help groups. This difference can primarily be attributed to the fact that male members
of families tend to have the ownership rights to property and assets which can be used as collateral to secure
a formal loan.

Figure 28: Source of capital obtained through external sources of finance; disaggregated by gender


                                                51.4%                                   37.3%               11.3%
      Men-owned Businesses


                               8.3%                 41.7%                                    50.0%
 Women-owned Businesses


                             0%     10%      20%     30%      40%        50%     60%     70%     80%      90%    100%

          Through Financial Institutions        Friends/Relatives              Money Lenders           Cooperatives

There is a need to support the credit requirements of unregistered MSMEs as the same would help in
business expansion which is crucial for the expansion of the employee base in the sector. Nearly 33.0
percent of women-owned businesses and 17.2 percent of men-owned businesses are currently looking for
external financing for expanding their business operations.

On an average men-owned businesses are looking for an external financing of USD 3,675 and women-
owned businesses are looking for an external financing of USD 1,385.11 On the other hand, an analysis of
the businesses’ balance sheets reveals that on an average, men -owned businesses are worthy of receiving

11
     Requirement as reported by entrepreneurs

                                                              33
credit worth USD 4,075 per business and women-owned businesses are worthy of receiving credit worth
USD 1,050 per business.12 This adds up to a total requirement of USD 427 million against a credit
worthiness of USD 2 Billion (or USD 1.2 Billion if one factors in that banks in India lend up to 60 percent
of cash in hand/income).

Table 10: Gender disaggregated estimates for credit requirement and credit worthiness

                                            Average           Total        Average Credit   Total Credit
                                          Requirement      Requirement      Worthiness      Worthiness
     Men-owned businesses                     USD 3,675        USD 310 M       USD 4,075    USD 1,997 M
     Women-owned businesses                   USD 1,385        USD 17 M        USD 1,050    USD     40 M
     All businesses                           USD 3,510        USD 427 M       USD 3,855    USD 2,037 M




12
     Calculated using data from business balance sheet

                                                          34
                               Extrapolated National Estimates
Research estimates from Chhattisgarh when extrapolated to the National level provide broad
approximations which can suggest the direction in which unregistered MSMEs have developed since the
last unregistered MSME census of 2006-07. State wise extrapolations are presented as annexures.

Since 2006-07, the number of unregistered MSMEs in India have increased from 19.9 million to 38.7
million. During this period, the number of unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs has increased from
10.5 million to 12.7 million. At the same time, the number of unregistered service sector MSMEs has
increased from 9.4 million to 26.0 million.

Figure 29: Number of unregistered MSMEs (millions) – national estimate




 2016-17                                                                               38.7




 2006-07                                            19.9



           -       5.0      10.0      15.0      20.0        25.0    30.0       35.0   40.0       45.0


There has been a marginal improvement in women’s ownership of unregistered MSMEs. As of 2006-07,
12.1 percent of unregistered MSMEs in the country are owned and managed by women; a three percentage
point improvement over the figures reported by the census conducted in 2006-07.

Figure 30: Profile of business owner; disaggregated by gender – national estimate


                                                87.9%                                         12.1%

 2016-17


                                                  90.9%                                        9.1%

 2006-07



                           Men-Owned                               Women-Owned

Most of the growth in the number of unregistered MSMEs has been driven by the service sector. The sector
now accounts for more than majority of the unregistered MSMEs in the country. The number of
unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs has increased from 10.4 million in 2006-07 to 12.7 million in
2016-17. During the same period, the number of unregistered service sector MSMEs has increased from
9.4 million to 26 million.



                                                       35
Table 11: Sector disaggregated estimates of number of unregistered MSMEs – national estimate

       Sector                       2006-07                                      2016-17
 Manufacturing                                     10.4 million                                   12.7 million
 Services                                           9.4 million                                   26.0 million

Extrapolations suggest that the overall employment generated by unregistered MSMEs has increased from
40.5 million in 2006-07 to 77.7 million in 2016-17. However, it is important to note that the average
employment per unit has remained stagnant at two employees. This highlights the need to support
unregistered MSMEs to consolidate and expand their operations.

Figure 31: Total employment generated by unregistered MSMEs – national estimate




 2016-17                                                                                   77.7




 2006-07                                             40.6




Women’s share in the employee base of unregistered MSMEs stands at 12.9 percent with most of the
women employees working at businesses owned and operated by women entrepreneurs.

Figure 32: Women’s share in employee base of unregistered MSM Es – national estimate


                                                            12.9%




                                  87.1%


                         Female Employees                           Male Employees


Of the 77.7 million labor force participants working at unregistered MSMEs, 6.7 million can be considered
skilled employees (either formally certified or trained on the job). However, the sector needs another 38.1
million skilled employees (many of whom are currently working in the sector). Of this demand, 28.2 percent
(more than 10 million) is expected to be met by skilled labor market entrants; with the rest being met
through the upskilling of existing employees.

Increasing the share of skilled labor in the unregistered MSME sector and providing training support to
entrepreneurs will help in further expanding and consolidating businesses. With the government of India

                                                    36
having estimated that a large number of workers will exit the farm sector by 2022, the growth of
unregistered MSMEs (most of which are operating out of rural markets) will play a pivotal role in absorbing
these workers.

A gender disaggregated analysis of the demand for skilled employees at unregistered MSMEs reveals that
about 15 percent of the requirement is for skilled women employees.

Figure 33: Gender disaggregated analysis of demand for skilled employees – national estimate

                                                            14.8%




                                    85.2%



                          Female Employees                           Male Employees


A gender disaggregated extrapolation of wages drawn by unskilled, on the job experienced and certified,
skilled professionals highlights the benefits that the labor force working at unregistered MSMEs can derive
from formal skills training. The differential is especially large in the case of women employees and
underlines the need for inclusion in state supported skills training programs.

While an unskilled women employee expects to draw a monthly wage of about INR 4,000 per month, the
corresponding figure for a certified, formally skilled women employee is almost INR 10,000. Similarly,
while an unskilled male employee expects to draw a monthly wage of about INR 7,200, the corresponding
figure for a certified, skilled male employee is about INR 10,000.

Table 12: Salary differential between unskilled, on the job experienced and formally skilled staff; gender
disaggregated – national estimate

   Gender                       Type of Employee                          Average Monthly Wage (INR)
 Female        Unskilled Fresher                                                                         3,942
 Female        On the Job Experienced                                                                    4,210
 Female        Certified, Skilled Professional                                                           9,856
 Male          Unskilled Fresher                                                                         7,196
 Male          On the Job Experienced                                                                    7,528
 Male          Certified, Skilled Professional                                                          10,207

Apart from creating employment, unregistered MSMEs also invest in the economy. Mostly, these
investments remain unnoticed as the they are small in value and because the unregistered MSMEs operate
outside the formal economy. However, over the past five year, unregistered MSMEs in India have invested
close to USD 76.2 billion at an average of USD 1,970 per unit. They can be a source of channelizing further



                                                      37
investments into the economy. As of today, the unregistered MSMEs in India have a credit requirement of
close to USD 43.5 billion at an average requirement of about USD 1,125 per unit.




                                                  38
                                          Recommendations
Model curriculum and teaching learning packs: The unregistered MSME sector can play a crucial role
in realizing the objectives of the ‘Skill India Mission’. However there is a need to understand the skilled
labor needs of these informal setups. Basis this understanding, there is a need to develop (and approve)
model curriculum and corresponding teaching-learning modules/packs.

Understanding the needs of unregistered MSMEs: Planning at state skill development missions and skill
gap assessments at a district level need to be cognizant of the need to cover the MSME (especially
unregistered MSME) sector.

Developing sector specific occupational standards: Many unregistered MSMEs are finding it difficult to
recruit and retain skilled employees. The informality of operations and the corresponding informality in
contracting/employment terms tends to act as an impediment. The government may want to develop sector
specific occupational standards to address this issue.

Cluster based targeting of skills trainings: It is well known that manufacturing setups to tend cluster
together to bring economies of scale and greater synergy to their operations. However, the study suggests
that such clustering is also quite common with unregistered service sector undertakings. Efforts towards
district level skill gap assessments (and subsequent planning) should seek to identify clusters of businesses
as this would allow for focused targeting of skills training.

Exploring cost sharing models for skills training of existing employees: There is a huge demand for
skilled labor in the unregistered MSME sector and most employers looking for employees attach
considerable value to formal certification. A part of this demand is expected to be catered to by existing
unskilled employees in the unregistered MSME workforce. Only 10 percent entrepreneurs are willing to
finance their employees skills training. This is largely because many expect to face difficulties in retaining
these employees after they complete their training. More entrepreneurs can be encouraged to finance their
employees skills training and certification if contractual agreements/bonds can be agreed upon between the
training providers, entrepreneurs and employees.

Developing strong linkages between training providers and unregistered MSMEs: It is easier to place
trainees in registered, medium and large scale setups. However, the bulk of employment in the non-farm
sector is concentrated in the unregistered MSME sector. Training providers should be incentivized to
improve tie-ups with unregistered MSMEs; placing trainees at these setups. However, this relationship will
need to be structured under a strong monitoring arrangement as one of the parties in the placement process
would be an unregistered/informal setup.

Identifying entrepreneurial skills training needs: District level skill gap assessments and subsequent
planning should also encompass entrepreneurial skills training needs. Supporting the learning, development
and incubation of unregistered MSME entrepreneurs can help in expanding and consolidating the sector.
This in turn will have a positive impact on the sector’s gross output, profitability, employment and wages
offered.




                                                     39
                            Annexure I: State wise extrapolations
Table 13: State wise approximation of number of unregistered MSMEs


             State                          2006-07                                 2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                             1,490,000                            2,995,540
 Arunachal Pradesh                                            25,000                                44,285
 Assam                                                       214,000                               414,694
 Bihar                                                       748,000                             1,377,303
 Chhattisgarh                                                278,000                               528,200
 Delhi                                                       175,000                               438,751
 Goa                                                          56,000                               105,154
 Gujarat                                                    1,303,000                            2,936,270
 Haryana                                                     487,000                             1,062,286
 Himachal Pradesh                                            160,000                               284,041
 Jammu & Kashmir                                             118,000                               200,522
 Jharkhand                                                   425,000                               782,312
 Karnataka                                                  1,112,000                            1,902,571
 Kerala                                                     1,294,000                            2,629,051
 Madhya Pradesh                                             1,150,000                            2,061,908
 Maharashtra                                                1,445,000                            3,051,104
 Manipur                                                      44,000                                79,740
 Meghalaya                                                    47,000                                78,725
 Mizoram                                                      10,000                                16,783
 Nagaland                                                     16,000                                19,406
 Odisha                                                      977,000                             1,698,495
 Punjab                                                      966,000                             2,145,896
 Rajasthan                                                   914,000                             1,710,507
 Sikkim                                                         6,000                               13,483
 Tamil Nadu                                                 1,821,000                            3,451,308
 Tripura                                                      26,000                                54,805
 Uttarakhand                                                 200,000                               388,405
 Uttar Pradesh                                              2,234,000                            3,987,917
 West Bengal                                                2,080,000                            4,140,870
 Chandigarh                                                   28,000                                69,642
 Puducherry                                                   13,000                                31,281
 National                                                  19,868,000                           38,701,257

* Number of unregistered MSMEs in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered MSME Census of India.
Number of unregistered MSMEs in 2016-17 is a summation of number of unregistered manufacturing and services
MSMEs (as given on the next page).


                                                      40
Table 14: State wise approximation of number of unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs


             State                           2006-07                                 2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                               724,000                               878,142
 Arunachal Pradesh                                             16,000                                19,406
 Assam                                                        114,000                               138,271
 Bihar                                                        445,000                               539,742
 Chhattisgarh                                                 155,000                               188,000
 Delhi                                                         29,000                                35,174
 Goa                                                           32,000                                38,813
 Gujarat                                                      429,000                               520,335
 Haryana                                                      183,000                               221,961
 Himachal Pradesh                                             102,000                               123,716
 Jammu & Kashmir                                               81,000                                98,245
 Jharkhand                                                    253,000                               306,865
 Karnataka                                                    755,000                               915,742
 Kerala                                                       611,000                               741,084
 Madhya Pradesh                                               720,000                               873,290
 Maharashtra                                                  608,000                               737,445
 Manipur                                                       27,000                                32,748
 Meghalaya                                                     33,000                                40,026
 Mizoram                                                         7,000                                 8,490
 Nagaland                                                      16,000                                19,406
 Odisha                                                       646,000                               783,535
 Punjab                                                       338,000                               409,961
 Rajasthan                                                    526,000                               637,987
 Sikkim                                                          2,000                                 2,426
 Tamil Nadu                                                  1,020,000                            1,237,161
 Tripura                                                       11,000                                13,342
 Uttarakhand                                                  106,000                               128,568
 Uttar Pradesh                                               1,410,000                            1,710,194
 West Bengal                                                 1,037,000                            1,257,781
 Chandigarh                                                      5,000                                 6,065
 Puducherry                                                      3,000                                 3,639
 National                                                   10,444,000                           12,667,561

* Number of unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered
MSME Census of India. Number of unregistered MSMEs in 2016-17 has been arrived at by multiplying 2006-07
census results with the growth rate for unregistered manufacturing sector MSMEs in Chhattisgarh.




                                                       41
Table 15: State wise approximation of number of unregistered service sector MSMEs


             State                            2006-07                                  2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                               766,000                                2,117,398
 Arunachal Pradesh                                              9,000                                   24,878
 Assam                                                        100,000                                 276,423
 Bihar                                                        303,000                                 837,561
 Chhattisgarh                                                 123,000                                  340000
 Delhi                                                        146,000                                 403,577
 Goa                                                           24,000                                   66,341
 Gujarat                                                      874,000                                2,415,935
 Haryana                                                      304,000                                 840,325
 Himachal Pradesh                                              58,000                                 160,325
 Jammu & Kashmir                                               37,000                                 102,276
 Jharkhand                                                    172,000                                 475,447
 Karnataka                                                    357,000                                 986,829
 Kerala                                                       683,000                                1,887,967
 Madhya Pradesh                                               430,000                                1,188,618
 Maharashtra                                                  837,000                                2,313,659
 Manipur                                                       17,000                                   46,992
 Meghalaya                                                     14,000                                   38,699
 Mizoram                                                        3,000                                    8,293
 Nagaland                                                            -                                       -
 Odisha                                                       331,000                                 914,959
 Punjab                                                       628,000                                1,735,935
 Rajasthan                                                    388,000                                1,072,520
 Sikkim                                                         4,000                                   11,057
 Tamil Nadu                                                   801,000                                2,214,146
 Tripura                                                       15,000                                   41,463
 Uttarakhand                                                   94,000                                 259,837
 Uttar Pradesh                                                824,000                                2,277,724
 West Bengal                                                 1,043,000                               2,883,089
 Chandigarh                                                    23,000                                   63,577
 Puducherry                                                    10,000                                   27,642
 National                                                    9,418,000                             26,033,496

* Number of unregistered service sector MSMEs in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered MSME
Census of India. Number of unregistered service sector MSMEs in 2016-17 has been arrived at by multiplying 2006-
07 census results with the growth rate for unregistered service sector MSMEs in Chhattisgarh.




                                                        42
Table 16: State wise approximation of number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs


             State                           2006-07                                  2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                              111,000                                 341,109
 Arunachal Pradesh                                             6,000                                   23,790
 Assam                                                        20,000                                   66,597
 Bihar                                                        47,000                                 249,832
 Chhattisgarh                                                 12,000                                   38,030
 Delhi                                                        19,000                                 105,550
 Goa                                                          10,000                                   88,622
 Gujarat                                                      57,000                                 319,870
 Haryana                                                      16,000                                   24,182
 Himachal Pradesh                                             11,000                                   22,602
 Jammu & Kashmir                                              12,000                                   13,039
 Jharkhand                                                    24,000                                   55,635
 Karnataka                                                   186,000                                 401,678
 Kerala                                                      231,000                                 667,174
 Madhya Pradesh                                              106,000                                 269,921
 Maharashtra                                                  85,000                                 242,245
 Manipur                                                       1,000                                    3,479
 Meghalaya                                                    16,000                                   44,255
 Mizoram                                                       1,000                            Not Available
 Nagaland                                                      4,000                                    6,380
 Odisha                                                       90,000                                 180,124
 Punjab                                                       78,000                                 109,220
 Rajasthan                                                    55,000                                   89,077
 Sikkim                                                        1,000                                    3,224
 Tamil Nadu                                                  303,000                                 807,327
 Tripura                                                       2,000                                    4,959
 Uttarakhand                                                  15,000                                   21,384
 Uttar Pradesh                                                75,000                                   99,102
 West Bengal                                                 205,000                                 519,404
 Chandigarh                                                    6,000                                   14,644
 Puducherry                                                    2,000                                    6,119
 National                                                   1,806,000                               4,685,585

* Number of unregistered women-owned MSMEs in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered MSME
Census of India. Number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs in 2016-17 has been arrived at by multiplying
2006-07 census results with the change in women-owned MSMEs in Chhattisgarh and a ratio of female labor force
participation rate in each state upon the female labor force participation rate in Chhattisgarh.




                                                       43
Table 17: State wise approximation of percentage of women-owned unregistered MSMEs


             State                           2006-07                                  2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                               7.45%                                    11.4%
 Arunachal Pradesh                                           24.00%                                    53.7%
 Assam                                                        9.35%                                    16.1%
 Bihar                                                        6.28%                                    18.1%
 Chhattisgarh                                                 4.32%                                    7.20%
 Delhi                                                       10.86%                                    24.1%
 Goa                                                         17.86%                                    84.3%
 Gujarat                                                      4.37%                                    10.9%
 Haryana                                                      3.29%                                     2.3%
 Himachal Pradesh                                             6.88%                                     8.0%
 Jammu & Kashmir                                             10.17%                                     6.5%
 Jharkhand                                                    5.65%                                     7.1%
 Karnataka                                                   16.73%                                    21.1%
 Kerala                                                      17.85%                                    25.4%
 Madhya Pradesh                                               9.22%                                    13.1%
 Maharashtra                                                  5.88%                                     7.9%
 Manipur                                                      2.27%                                     4.4%
 Meghalaya                                                   34.04%                                    56.2%
 Mizoram                                                     10.00%                             Not Available
 Nagaland                                                    25.00%                                    32.9%
 Odisha                                                       9.21%                                    10.6%
 Punjab                                                       8.07%                                     5.1%
 Rajasthan                                                    6.02%                                     5.2%
 Sikkim                                                      16.67%                                    23.9%
 Tamil Nadu                                                  16.64%                                    23.4%
 Tripura                                                      7.69%                                     9.0%
 Uttarakhand                                                  7.50%                                     5.5%
 Uttar Pradesh                                                3.36%                                     2.5%
 West Bengal                                                  9.86%                                    12.5%
 Chandigarh                                                  21.43%                                    21.0%
 Puducherry                                                  15.38%                                    19.6%
 National                                                     9.09%                                    12.1%

* Number of unregistered women-owned MSMEs in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered MSME
Census of India. Number of women-owned unregistered MSMEs in 2016-17 has been arrived at by multiplying
2006-07 census results with the change in women-owned MSMEs in Chhattisgarh and a ratio of female labor force
participation rate in each state upon the female labor force participation rate in Chhattisgarh.




                                                       44
Table 18: State wise approximation of employment generated by unregistered MSMEs


             State                              2006-07                                     2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                                 3,464,000                                 7,692,888
 Arunachal Pradesh                                                82,000                                    150,404
 Assam                                                           447,000                                    873,089
 Bihar                                                          1,595,000                                 3,856,287
 Chhattisgarh                                                    468,000                                    949,000
 Delhi                                                           567,000                                  1,580,014
 Goa                                                              86,000                                    107,519
 Gujarat                                                        2,195,000                                 4,360,061
 Haryana                                                         841,000                                  1,807,239
 Himachal Pradesh                                                206,000                                    349,183
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                 217,000                                    408,126
 Jharkhand                                                       824,000                                  1,530,821
 Karnataka                                                      2,204,000                                 3,859,233
 Kerala                                                         2,667,000                                 4,503,664
 Madhya Pradesh                                                 1,731,000                                 3,790,183
 Maharashtra                                                    2,451,000                                 5,249,121
 Manipur                                                         138,000                                    173,287
 Meghalaya                                                       104,000                                    119,025
 Mizoram                                                          30,000                                     42,726
 Nagaland                                                        100,000                                    110,498
 Odisha                                                         2,186,000                                 3,863,900
 Punjab                                                         1,403,000                                 2,696,920
 Rajasthan                                                      1,488,000                                 3,319,122
 Sikkim                                                           56,000                                    158,942
 Tamil Nadu                                                     3,843,000                                 8,122,541
 Tripura                                                          53,000                                    100,758
 Uttarakhand                                                     351,000                                    696,063
 Uttar Pradesh                                                  5,173,000                                 8,905,896
 West Bengal                                                    5,466,000                                11,564,577
 Chandigarh                                                       58,000                                     94,581
 Puducherry                                                       25,000                                     54,581
 National                                                      40,552,000                                77,671,969

* Employment generated by MSMEs in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered MSME Census of
India. Employment generated by unregistered MSMEs in 2016-17 has been arrived at by multiplying 2006-07
census results with the change in employment generated by unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh and a ratio of
change in per capita gross state domestic product for each state upon the change in per capita gross state domestic
product for Chhattisgarh.



                                                          45
Table 19: State wise approximation of employment generated per unit by unregistered MSMEs


             State                              2006-07                                   2016-17

 Andhra Pradesh                                                      2.3                                        2.6
 Arunachal Pradesh                                                   3.3                                        3.4
 Assam                                                               2.1                                        2.1
 Bihar                                                               2.1                                        2.8
 Chhattisgarh                                                        1.7                                        1.8
 Delhi                                                               3.2                                        3.6
 Goa                                                                 1.5                                        1.0
 Gujarat                                                             1.7                                        1.5
 Haryana                                                             1.7                                        1.7
 Himachal Pradesh                                                    1.3                                        1.2
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                     1.8                                        2.0
 Jharkhand                                                           1.9                                        2.0
 Karnataka                                                           2.0                                        2.0
 Kerala                                                              2.1                                        1.7
 Madhya Pradesh                                                      1.5                                        1.8
 Maharashtra                                                         1.7                                        1.7
 Manipur                                                             3.1                                        2.2
 Meghalaya                                                           2.2                                        1.5
 Mizoram                                                             3.0                                        2.5
 Nagaland                                                            6.3                                        5.7
 Odisha                                                              2.2                                        2.3
 Punjab                                                              1.5                                        1.3
 Rajasthan                                                           1.6                                        1.9
 Sikkim                                                              9.3                                      11.8
 Tamil Nadu                                                          2.1                                        2.4
 Tripura                                                             2.0                                        1.8
 Uttarakhand                                                         1.8                                        1.8
 Uttar Pradesh                                                       2.3                                        2.2
 West Bengal                                                         2.6                                        2.8
 Chandigarh                                                          2.1                                        1.4
 Puducherry                                                          1.9                                        1.7
 National                                                            2.0                                        2.0

* Employment per unit in 2006-07 has been obtained from the 4th Unregistered MSME Census of India.
Employment generated per unit in 2016-17 has been arrived at by multiplying 2006-07 census results with the
change in employment generated by unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh and a ratio of change in per capita gross
state domestic product for each state upon the change in per capita gross state domestic product for Chhattisgarh.




                                                          46
Table 20: State wise approximation of number of women employed by unregistered MSMEs

                                                                        Women Employees as a Percentage of
             State                Number of Women Employees
                                                                              Total Employee Base

 Andhra Pradesh                                            1,819,242                                   23.6%
 Arunachal Pradesh                                            37,144                                   24.7%
 Assam                                                       100,186                                   11.5%
 Bihar                                                       300,135                                    7.8%
 Chhattisgarh                                                217,321                                   22.9%
 Delhi                                                        82,770                                    5.2%
 Goa                                                          27,572                                   25.6%
 Gujarat                                                   1,152,899                                   26.4%
 Haryana                                                     112,706                                    6.2%
 Himachal Pradesh                                             75,433                                   21.6%
 Jammu & Kashmir                                              29,117                                    7.1%
 Jharkhand                                                   119,144                                    7.8%
 Karnataka                                                   614,207                                   15.9%
 Kerala                                                      671,831                                   14.9%
 Madhya Pradesh                                              555,943                                   14.7%
 Maharashtra                                                 890,406                                   17.0%
 Manipur                                                      28,011                                   16.2%
 Meghalaya                                                    28,207                                   23.7%
 Mizoram                                                      10,893                                   25.5%
 Nagaland                                                     18,744                                   17.0%
 Odisha                                                      429,886                                   11.1%
 Punjab                                                      146,662                                    5.4%
 Rajasthan                                                   360,996                                   10.9%
 Sikkim                                                       28,468                                   17.9%
 Tamil Nadu                                                1,515,606                                   18.7%
 Tripura                                                      11,110                                   11.0%
 Uttarakhand                                                  70,149                                   10.1%
 Uttar Pradesh                                               426,552                                    4.8%
 West Bengal                                                 946,229                                    8.2%
 Chandigarh                                                    5,851                                    6.2%
 Puducherry                                                    7,570                                   13.9%
 National                                                  9,997,855                                   12.9%

* Percentage of women employees at unregistered MSMEs has been obtained by adjusting the research estimate for
Chhattisgarh by a ratio of each state female labor force participation rate divided by the female labor force
participation rate for Chhattisgarh.




                                                      47
Table 21: State wise approximation of number of skilled employees at unregistered MSMEs

                                                                                Number of Skilled Employees per
             State                    Number of Skilled Employees
                                                                                    Unregistered MSME

 Andhra Pradesh                                                   563,032                                         0.19
 Arunachal Pradesh                                                  7,948                                         0.18
 Assam                                                             40,653                                         0.10
 Bihar                                                             90,962                                         0.07
 Chhattisgarh                                                     117,000                                         0.12
 Delhi                                                            204,114                                         0.47
 Goa                                                               44,591                                         0.42
 Gujarat                                                          602,190                                         0.21
 Haryana                                                          296,744                                         0.28
 Himachal Pradesh                                                  55,444                                         0.20
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                   24,847                                         0.12
 Jharkhand                                                         76,321                                         0.10
 Karnataka                                                        340,835                                         0.18
 Kerala                                                           492,208                                         0.19
 Madhya Pradesh                                                   235,601                                         0.11
 Maharashtra                                                      738,118                                         0.24
 Manipur                                                            6,229                                         0.08
 Meghalaya                                                          9,743                                         0.12
 Mizoram                                                            2,251                                         0.13
 Nagaland                                                           3,182                                         0.16
 Odisha                                                           194,834                                         0.11
 Punjab                                                           420,408                                         0.20
 Rajasthan                                                        235,487                                         0.14
 Sikkim                                                             5,032                                         0.37
 Tamil Nadu                                                       822,323                                         0.24
 Tripura                                                            7,066                                         0.13
 Uttarakhand                                                       84,892                                         0.22
 Uttar Pradesh                                                    317,361                                         0.08
 West Bengal                                                      607,863                                         0.15
 Chandigarh                                                        23,116                                         0.33
 Puducherry                                                         9,843                                         0.31
 National                                                       6,680,239                                         0.17

* Number of skilled employees per unit has been estimated by multiplying the research estimates for Chhattisgarh
with a ratio of each states gross state domestic product per capita and the gross state domestic product per capita for
the state of Chhattisgarh.




                                                          48
Table 22: State wise approximation of the number of skilled employees required at unregistered MSMEs

                                     Number of Skilled Employees                Number of Skilled Employees
             State
                                             Required                         Required per Unregistered MSME

 Andhra Pradesh                                                3,233,603                                          1.1
 Arunachal Pradesh                                                45,649                                          1.0
 Assam                                                           233,476                                          0.6
 Bihar                                                           522,414                                          0.4
 Chhattisgarh                                                    374,000                                          0.7
 Delhi                                                         1,172,268                                          2.7
 Goa                                                             256,094                                          2.4
 Gujarat                                                       3,458,496                                          1.2
 Haryana                                                       1,704,258                                          1.6
 Himachal Pradesh                                                318,427                                          1.1
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                 142,703                                          0.7
 Jharkhand                                                       438,328                                          0.6
 Karnataka                                                     1,957,481                                          1.0
 Kerala                                                        2,826,844                                          1.1
 Madhya Pradesh                                                1,353,104                                          0.7
 Maharashtra                                                   4,239,158                                          1.4
 Manipur                                                          35,774                                          0.4
 Meghalaya                                                        55,958                                          0.7
 Mizoram                                                          12,926                                          0.8
 Nagaland                                                         18,274                                          0.9
 Odisha                                                        1,118,971                                          0.7
 Punjab                                                        2,414,487                                          1.1
 Rajasthan                                                     1,352,445                                          0.8
 Sikkim                                                           28,902                                          2.1
 Tamil Nadu                                                    4,722,760                                          1.4
 Tripura                                                          40,580                                          0.7
 Uttarakhand                                                     487,549                                          1.3
 Uttar Pradesh                                                 1,822,667                                          0.5
 West Bengal                                                   3,491,077                                          0.8
 Chandigarh                                                      132,758                                          1.9
 Puducherry                                                       56,528                                          1.8
 National                                                     38,067,958                                          1.0

* Number of skilled employees required per unit has been estimated by multiplying the research estimates for
Chhattisgarh with a ratio of each states gross state domestic product per capita and the gross state domestic product
per capita for the state of Chhattisgarh.




                                                         49
Table 23: State wise approximation of skilled women employees required at unregistered MSMEs

                                ‘Skilled Women Employees Required’        Number of Skilled Women Employees
             State
                                as a Percentage of Total Requirement                   Required

 Andhra Pradesh                                                 23.7%                                   767,855
 Arunachal Pradesh                                              24.8%                                     11,320
 Assam                                                          11.5%                                     26,902
 Bihar                                                           7.8%                                     40,828
 Chhattisgarh                                                   23.0%                                     86,000
 Delhi                                                           5.3%                                     61,664
 Goa                                                            25.8%                                     65,944
 Gujarat                                                        26.6%                                   918,285
 Haryana                                                         6.3%                                   106,723
 Himachal Pradesh                                               21.7%                                     69,074
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                 7.2%                                     10,223
 Jharkhand                                                       7.8%                                     34,256
 Karnataka                                                      16.0%                                   312,826
 Kerala                                                         15.0%                                   423,435
 Madhya Pradesh                                                 14.7%                                   199,293
 Maharashtra                                                    17.0%                                   722,059
 Manipur                                                        16.2%                                      5,807
 Meghalaya                                                      23.8%                                     13,316
 Mizoram                                                        25.6%                                      3,309
 Nagaland                                                       17.0%                                      3,113
 Odisha                                                         11.2%                                   125,008
 Punjab                                                          5.5%                                   131,846
 Rajasthan                                                      10.9%                                   147,703
 Sikkim                                                         18.0%                                      5,198
 Tamil Nadu                                                     18.7%                                   884,874
 Tripura                                                        11.1%                                      4,493
 Uttarakhand                                                    10.1%                                     49,338
 Uttar Pradesh                                                   4.8%                                     87,658
 West Bengal                                                     8.2%                                   286,825
 Chandigarh                                                      6.2%                                      8,247
 Puducherry                                                     13.9%                                      7,873
 National                                                       14.8%                                  5,621,295

* Percentage of skilled women employees required per unit has been estimated by multiplying the research estimates
for Chhattisgarh with a ratio of each states female labor force participation rate and the female labor force
participation rate for Chhattisgarh.




                                                       50
Table 24: State wise approximation of skilled labor force demand to be met by new labor force participants

                                     Number of New Labor Force               Percentage of Skilled New Labor
             State
                                       Participants Required                   Force Participants Required

 Andhra Pradesh                                                867,636                                      26.8%
 Arunachal Pradesh                                               11,696                                     25.6%
 Assam                                                           32,673                                     14.0%
 Bihar                                                           49,254                                      9.4%
 Chhattisgarh                                                    65,824                                     17.6%
 Delhi                                                         778,528                                      66.4%
 Goa                                                           155,028                                      60.5%
 Gujarat                                                      1,012,554                                     29.3%
 Haryana                                                       679,624                                      39.9%
 Himachal Pradesh                                                88,732                                     27.9%
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                 25,243                                     17.7%
 Jharkhand                                                       61,046                                     13.9%
 Karnataka                                                     500,603                                      25.6%
 Kerala                                                        755,517                                      26.7%
 Madhya Pradesh                                                220,715                                      16.3%
 Maharashtra                                                  1,464,002                                     34.5%
 Manipur                                                          3,989                                     11.2%
 Meghalaya                                                        9,887                                     17.7%
 Mizoram                                                          2,475                                     19.1%
 Nagaland                                                         4,277                                     23.4%
 Odisha                                                        183,237                                      16.4%
 Punjab                                                        675,275                                      28.0%
 Rajasthan                                                     265,799                                      19.7%
 Sikkim                                                          15,400                                     53.3%
 Tamil Nadu                                                   1,606,377                                     34.0%
 Tripura                                                          7,469                                     18.4%
 Uttarakhand                                                   152,122                                      31.2%
 Uttar Pradesh                                                 207,066                                      11.4%
 West Bengal                                                   731,588                                      21.0%
 Chandigarh                                                      62,906                                     47.4%
 Puducherry                                                      25,391                                     44.9%
 National                                                    10,721,933                                     28.2%

* Number of new skilled labor force participants required has been estimated by multiplying the research estimates
for Chhattisgarh with a ratio of each states gross state domestic product per capita and the gross state domestic
product per capita for the state of Chhattisgarh.




                                                        51
Table 25: State wise approximation of investments made over the last five years by unregistered MSMEs

                                       Investment made per unit                     Total Investment made
             State
                                               (USD)                                    (Million USD)

 Andhra Pradesh                                                     2,162                                      6,476
 Arunachal Pradesh                                                  2,064                                         91
 Assam                                                              1,128                                        468
 Bihar                                                               760                                       1,046
 Chhattisgarh                                                       1,418                                        749
 Delhi                                                              5,351                                      2,348
 Goa                                                                4,877                                        513
 Gujarat                                                            2,359                                      6,926
 Haryana                                                            3,213                                      3,413
 Himachal Pradesh                                                   2,245                                        638
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                    1,425                                        286
 Jharkhand                                                          1,122                                        878
 Karnataka                                                          2,060                                      3,920
 Kerala                                                             2,153                                      5,661
 Madhya Pradesh                                                     1,314                                      2,710
 Maharashtra                                                        2,782                                      8,490
 Manipur                                                             898                                          72
 Meghalaya                                                          1,423                                        112
 Mizoram                                                            1,542                                         26
 Nagaland                                                           1,886                                         37
 Odisha                                                             1,319                                      2,241
 Punjab                                                             2,253                                      4,835
 Rajasthan                                                          1,583                                      2,709
 Sikkim                                                             4,293                                         58
 Tamil Nadu                                                         2,740                                      9,458
 Tripura                                                            1,483                                         81
 Uttarakhand                                                        2,514                                        976
 Uttar Pradesh                                                       915                                       3,650
 West Bengal                                                        1,688                                      6,991
 Chandigarh                                                         3,818                                        266
 Puducherry                                                         3,619                                        113
 National                                                           1,970                                     76,238

* Investment made per unit in each state has been approximated by multiplying the research estimates for
Chhattisgarh with a ratio of each states gross state domestic product per capita and the gross state domestic product
per capita for the state of Chhattisgarh.




                                                          52
Table 26: State wise approximation of current credit requirement of unregistered MSMEs

                                      Credit Requirement per unit                  Total Credit Requirement
             State
                                                (USD)                                   (Million USD)

 Andhra Pradesh                                                     1,232                                      3,692
 Arunachal Pradesh                                                  1,177                                         52
 Assam                                                               643                                         267
 Bihar                                                               433                                         596
 Chhattisgarh                                                        808                                         427
 Delhi                                                              3,050                                      1,338
 Goa                                                                2,781                                        292
 Gujarat                                                            1,345                                      3,949
 Haryana                                                            1,832                                      1,946
 Himachal Pradesh                                                   1,280                                        364
 Jammu & Kashmir                                                     813                                         163
 Jharkhand                                                           640                                         500
 Karnataka                                                          1,175                                      2,235
 Kerala                                                             1,228                                      3,227
 Madhya Pradesh                                                      749                                       1,545
 Maharashtra                                                        1,586                                      4,840
 Manipur                                                             512                                          41
 Meghalaya                                                           812                                          64
 Mizoram                                                             879                                          15
 Nagaland                                                           1,075                                         21
 Odisha                                                              752                                       1,278
 Punjab                                                             1,285                                      2,757
 Rajasthan                                                           903                                       1,544
 Sikkim                                                             2,447                                         33
 Tamil Nadu                                                         1,562                                      5,392
 Tripura                                                             845                                          46
 Uttarakhand                                                        1,433                                        557
 Uttar Pradesh                                                       522                                       2,081
 West Bengal                                                         963                                       3,986
 Chandigarh                                                         2,176                                        152
 Puducherry                                                         2,063                                         65
 National                                                           1,123                                     43,463

* Credit requirement per unit in each state has been approximated by multiplying the research estimates for
Chhattisgarh with a ratio of each states gross state domestic product per capita and the gross state domestic product
per capita for the state of Chhattisgarh.




                                                         53
Table 27: State wise approximation of age differential between unskilled and skilled labor force participants

Wage rates have been approximated by multiplying the research estimate for Chhattisgarh with a ratio of each states
gross state domestic product per capita and the gross state domestic product per capita for the state of Chhattisgarh.

                                                   Andhra Pradesh
   Gender                           Type of Employee                            Average Monthly Wage (INR)
  Female        Unskilled Fresher                                                                               4,711
  Female        On the Job Experienced                                                                          5,031
  Female        Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                11,777
  Male          Unskilled Fresher                                                                               8,598
  Male          On the Job Experienced                                                                          8,995
  Male          Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                12,196


                                                  Arunachal Pradesh
   Gender                           Type of Employee                            Average Monthly Wage (INR)
  Female        Unskilled Fresher                                                                               4,498
  Female        On the Job Experienced                                                                          4,804
  Female        Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                11,246
  Male          Unskilled Fresher                                                                               8,211
  Male          On the Job Experienced                                                                          8,589
  Male          Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                11,646


                                                       Assam
   Gender                           Type of Employee                            Average Monthly Wage (INR)
  Female        Unskilled Fresher                                                                               2,457
  Female        On the Job Experienced                                                                          2,624
  Female        Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                 6,142
  Male          Unskilled Fresher                                                                               4,485
  Male          On the Job Experienced                                                                          4,691
  Male          Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                 6,361


                                                        Bihar
   Gender                           Type of Employee                            Average Monthly Wage (INR)
  Female        Unskilled Fresher                                                                               1,655
  Female        On the Job Experienced                                                                          1,768
  Female        Certified, Skilled Professional                                                                 4,138
  Male          Unskilled Fresher                                                                               3,021
  Male          On the Job Experienced                                                                          3,161


                                                         54
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                               4,286

                                            Chhattisgarh
 Gender                       Type of Employee             Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                             3,090
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                        3,300
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                               7,725
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                             5,640
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                        5,900
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                               8,000


                                                  Delhi
 Gender                       Type of Employee             Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                         11,660
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                    12,452
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                           29,150
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                         21,282
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                    22,263
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                           30,187


                                                  Goa
 Gender                       Type of Employee             Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                         10,628
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                    11,350
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                           26,570
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                         19,399
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                    20,293
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                           27,516


                                                 Gujarat
 Gender                       Type of Employee             Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                             5,140
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                        5,489
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                           12,850
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                             9,382
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                        9,815
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                           13,308



                                                   55
                                                 Haryana
 Gender                       Type of Employee                 Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                                 7,001
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                            7,477
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                               17,503
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                             12,779
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                        13,368
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                               18,126


                                            Himachal Pradesh
 Gender                       Type of Employee                 Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                                 4,892
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                            5,225
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                               12,231
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                                 8,930
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                            9,341
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                               12,666


                                            Jammu & Kashmir
 Gender                       Type of Employee                 Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                                 3,106
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                            3,317
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                   7,764
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                                 5,669
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                            5,930
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                   8,041


                                               Jharkhand
 Gender                       Type of Employee                 Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                                 2,445
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                            2,611
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                   6,113
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                                 4,463
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                            4,669
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                   6,330




                                                   56
                                              Karnataka
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               4,490
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          4,795
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                             11,225
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                               8,195
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                          8,573
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                             11,624


                                                 Kerala
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               4,692
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          5,011
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                             11,731
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                               8,565
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                          8,959
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                             12,148


                                            Madhya Pradesh
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               2,864
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          3,058
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                 7,160
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                               5,227
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                          5,468
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                 7,414


                                             Maharashtra
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               6,063
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          6,475
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                             15,158
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                           11,067
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                      11,577
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                             15,698




                                                  57
                                                 Manipur
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              1,958
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         2,091
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                4,895
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,574
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         3,738
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                5,069


                                             Meghalaya
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,102
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         3,313
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                7,755
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              5,662
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         5,923
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                8,031


                                                 Mizoram
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,361
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         3,590
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                8,403
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              6,135
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         6,418
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                8,702


                                                 Nagaland
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              4,109
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         4,389
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                            10,273
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              7,501
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         7,846
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                            10,639




                                                   58
                                                  Odisha
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               2,875
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          3,070
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                 7,188
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                               5,248
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                          5,490
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                 7,443


                                                  Punjab
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               4,910
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          5,244
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                             12,276
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                               8,962
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                          9,376
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                             12,713


                                                 Rajasthan
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               3,450
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          3,685
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                 8,626
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                               6,298
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                          6,588
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                 8,933


                                                  Sikkim
 Gender                       Type of Employee               Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                               9,355
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                          9,991
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                             23,387
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                           17,075
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                      17,862
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                             24,220




                                                    59
                                             Tamil Nadu
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              5,972
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         6,378
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                            14,929
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                          10,900
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                     11,402
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                            15,461


                                                 Tripura
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,231
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         3,451
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                8,078
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              5,898
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         6,170
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                8,366


                                             Uttarakhand
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              5,478
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         5,850
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                            13,695
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              9,999
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                     10,460
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                            14,182


                                            Uttar Pradesh
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              1,995
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         2,130
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                4,986
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,641
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         3,808
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                5,164




                                                   60
                                             West Bengal
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,679
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         3,929
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                9,198
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              6,715
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         7,025
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                                9,525


                                             Chandigarh
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              8,319
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         8,884
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                            20,798
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                          15,184
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                     15,884
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                            21,538


                                             Puducherry
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              7,886
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         8,422
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                            19,716
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                          14,394
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                     15,058
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                            20,417


                                                 National
 Gender                       Type of Employee              Average Monthly Wage (INR)
Female    Unskilled Fresher                                                              3,942
Female    On the Job Experienced                                                         4,210
Female    Certified, Skilled Professional                                                9,856
Male      Unskilled Fresher                                                              7,196
Male      On the Job Experienced                                                         7,528
Male      Certified, Skilled Professional                                            10,207




                                                   61
                    Annexure II: Study Approach and Methodology
Purpose and objectives of the study

The last unregistered MSME census in India took place in 2006-07. Since then there exists very little data
on how this sector has evolved. The census did not include indicators pertaining to skills and qualification
of labor and therefore very little data is available in this space.

  • The study seeks to determine the pace at which the unregistered MSME sector has grown in
    Chhattisgarh since the last unregistered MSMEs census. It also seeks to establish a sector and scale
    wise breakup of the unregistered MSME sector;

  • The study had been commissioned to determine the demand for skilled labor in the unregistered
    sector in Chhattisgarh; as well as the sectors/sub-sectors which account for this demand;

  • The study is directed towards ascertaining the monetary gains that a workforce participant can make
    from completing formal skills training. The study’s scope also included an analysis of the impact
    that a more skilled workforce can have on business productivity;

  • Finally, the study seeks to identify the formal skills training needs of entrepreneurs running
    unregistered setups in the State.

Geographic and stakeholder coverage of the study

The study is centered on the unregistered MSMEs sector in the State of Chhattisgarh. It covers 25 of the
27 Districts in the State and only leaves out the Naxalism affected Districts of Bastar and Dantewada.
Apart from security concerns associated with field based data collection in these two Districts, they were
also left out as they account for less than one percent of the unregistered MSMEs in the State.

The insights presented in this report have been developed based on primary data/information pertaining to
entrepreneurs running unregistered MSMEs; their business; and details pertaining to their workforce.

Approach and methodology

This study has been developed around the data/information collected through a quantitative questionnaire
and the team structured its work on this study by dividing the work to be done into three interlinked
phases. The first phase focused on conducting a review of secondary literature and the development of the
data tool (quantitative questionnaire), the second phase focused on the data collection, and the final phase
consisted of analysis of the data collected and report writing. The steps involved in each of the phases
have been elaborated upon below, and are the backbone of the methodology that has been used to carry
out the “Study on Unregistered MSMEs in Chhattisgarh”.

Desk review

During this phase, the team reviewed secondary literature pertaining to the unregistered MSMEs sector in
India and the skills training landscape in the country. The team collected and analyzed relevant secondary
data. In this sense, the key data sets examined included but were not limited to: latest round of NSSO;


                                                    62
Unregistered MSMEs census of 2006-07 and datasets of various skill gap studies commissioned by
NSDC. Review of this literature and data helped the team in determining an apt sampling plan for the
study; and in developing the quantitative questionnaire used to collect data from the field.

The questionnaire was prepared as a simple input sheet with a corresponding codebook. The field
researchers were expected to select a code corresponding to the response provided by the interviewee and
simply pen in the code (number) (in front of the relevant question number) on the input sheet. The
codebook provided explanations for each question and response. It carried necessary skips and provided
the field researchers with question specific guidelines. This method of developing and deploying a
quantitative questionnaire provided greater clarity to field researchers; helped in recording responses in a
clean and concise manner; provided logistical ease; saved paper; and facilitated easier collation and
cleaning of responses.

Data collection

The phase began with the training of field researchers who collected data from the field. The researchers
were explained the rationale behind asking each question included in the questionnaire; the format to be
used for collecting and recording responses against each question; the GE and HR principles to be kept in
mind while collecting data/information; and the mechanisms the researchers will use to ensure that the
recording sheets are neat and clean. Subsequently, the field researchers collected data based on the
sampling plan given below.

 Stakeholder/Respondent             Sample Size            Confidence Level                P-Value

 Male Entrepreneurs                               600                 95 percent                     0.040

 Female Entrepreneurs                               60                95 percent                     0.125

   • The sample sizes and the corresponding values for statistical significance are valid at a State level.
   • State level sample sizes have been disaggregated to a District level based on the previous
     unregistered MSME census’ results for District wise number of unregistered MSMEs in
     Chhattisgarh.

Data analysis and report writing

During this phase, the data collected from the field was fed into an electronic spreadsheet and
subsequently cleaned using relevant statistical methods. The final electronic sheet was used to generate
graphs and charts that could respond to the key research questions/objectives as set on out by World
Bank. SPSS was used to run analysis against key research hypothesis and the analysis results have been
used to draft this report.

Limitations to the study

  • The research approach and methodology; including the sampling plan; have been developed based
    on the results of the Unregistered MSMEs census of 2006-07. The next census’ results are expected



                                                     63
   to be available around 2019-20. Utilizing these results for planning the sampling plan may provide a
   different sample stratification strategy.

• The questionnaire focuses on unregistered MSMEs. Herein, there are points where a few of the
  ‘micro’ enterprises covered under the study may have been self-employed individuals disguised
  employing members of their family.

• Financial information provided by entrepreneurs has not necessarily been validated through a review
  of their book of accounts (in most cases missing); in most cases, they are approximations provided
  by the entrepreneurs. The same is also true for information related to employee salaries.




                                                 64
