                                                                                                                           



Romania                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                           


                                                                                                   SABER Country Report
EDUCATION MANAGEMENT INFORMATION SYSTEMS                                                                              2016 

      
      
      

  Key Policy Areas                                                                                       Status
    1. Enabling Environment 
         Ministerial Order 5760/2006 established the National Education Database (BDNE), which                     
         became the mandatory system for education data collection in 2006. BDNE later was
         transformed into the Integrated IT System of Romanian Education (SIIIR), which is
         currently used for all data collection, validation, and analysis. A recently signed
         agreement between the Ministry of National Education and Scientific Research (MNESR)
         and the National Institute for Statistics (NIS) has fully institutionalized SIIIR as the sole
         provider of education data in data collection, validation, processing, and dissemination,
         also to be directly integrated with the tertiary education sector by 2017. In accordance
         with the Confidentiality and Data Privacy Law 677/2001, the Romanian Data Protection
         Agency conducted an extensive data protection audit in 2008. It has since established
         EMIS compliance with data protection laws, defining responsibilities, roles, and guidelines
         for the EMIS. EMIS staffing, however, is not yet institutionalized. The hiring and retention
         of highly qualified and skilled human resources remain a substantial challenge and threat
         to the sustainability of the EMIS. EMIS positions tend to lack competitiveness and appeal
         in comparison with the private sector. Moreover, no institutionalized professional
         development and training plans have been set forth by the MNESR.  

    2. System Soundness 
         EMIS architecture and design establish the functionality and operability of the Romanian                  
         EMIS. The system is able to produce quality and timely data but is not yet fully integrated.
         The EMIS would benefit from smart and dynamic features such as feedback mechanisms
         to bridge the information gap between data providers and data users. A fully integrated
         early warning system would enable teachers, parents, and school administrators to
         identify students at risk and ensure timely intervention to improve learning outcomes.
         Additional analytics features of the EMIS may include projections (e.g., student
         population), what-if analysis, and data associations. To ensure full data coverage,
         particular importance should be paid to socially disadvantaged groups, such as Roma,
         because the system currently fails to collect data on them. The EMIS is web-based and
         has been customized employing open-source Oracle BI Discover software. It is
         maintained, audited, and updated on a regular basis by the independent vendor Siveco
         Romania SA. These audits are essential components in ensuring that the system is
         adaptable to change but would benefit from expanding it to include additional smart and
         dynamic analytics features.




      
      
      
      
      
      

3. Quality Data 
     Data collected by the Romanian EMIS are comprehensive but would benefit from                     
     improved accuracy and reliability measures. The data collected cover a wide range of
     important indicators in administrative, human resource, financial, and learning outcome
     data. To ensure timely annual statistics reports, data compliance policies and penalties for
     schools have been put into place. However, the education indicators are often not clearly



     defined, causing conflicting results in, for example, reporting of dropout rates. The initial
     data collection and entry are carried out by administrative staff, who would benefit from
     additional instruction and systematic training to ensure accurate and reliable data (e.g.,
     on school infrastructure). School inspectorates are tasked to track data production
     processes to certify that best practice standards are employed.  

4. Utilization for Decision Making  
     Despite comprehensive and quality data, the EMIS remains closed and underutilized. The           
     system does not foster data access, sharing, and utilization. The establishment of SIIIR
     has improved data sharing, transparency, and access to a certain degree, but more
     efforts should be made, and utilization of the available information remains challenging.
     Policy makers do not yet utilize data for decision making and could benefit from sharing
     data with research agencies to design education policies. Currently an integrated data
     utilization system is not in place for professional development and continuous training for
     teachers and EMIS staff. Moreover, even though schools, teachers, and parents are
     given access to education data in the form of national reports, they are often unable to
     use the data effectively. Once the Electronic National Grade-book System is established
     and operational, it will enable schools to make use of the data collected by the EMIS in
     the context of informed decision making to improve learning outcomes of students. 
  
  
  
  
  
                                                                                     
  




  
  
  
  
  
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Introduction  
The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) is an established tool designed to support 
countries in systematically examining and strengthening the performance of their education systems. 
Part of the World Bank’s Education Sector Strategy, SABER uses diagnostic tools for examining education 
systems  and  their  component  policy  domains  against  global  standards  and  best  practices  and  in 
comparison  with  the  policies  and  practices  of  countries  around  the  world.  By  leveraging  this  global 
knowledge, the SABER tools fill a gap in the availability of data and evidence on what matters most to 
improve the quality of education and achievement of better results. 
 
This  report  discusses  the  results  of  applying  the  SABER–Education  Management  Information  Systems 
(EMIS) tool in Romania. The objectives of this report are to examine the system according to key policy 
areas,  identify  successes  and  challenges  in  the  system,  and  provide  recommendations  to  support  the 
continued advancement of the EMIS in Romania.  

Approach of SABER‐EMIS 
Information is a key ingredient in an effective education system. SABER–EMIS aims to help countries 
improve data collection, data and system management, and data use in decision making. SABER‐EMIS 
assesses  the  effectiveness  of  a  country’s  EMIS,  with  the  goal  of  informing  policy  dialogue  and  helping 
countries better manage education inputs and processes to achieve overall efficiency and strong learning 
outcomes. 
 
A successful EMIS is credible and operational  Figure 1: SABER‐EMIS Policy Areas and Levers 
in  planning  and  policy  dialogue,  as  well  as 
                                                        Policy Areas 
teaching  and  learning.  It  produces  and                            Policy Levers: legal framework, organizational structure 
                                                          Enabling     and institutionalized processes, human resources, 
monitors  education  statistics  within  an             Environment  infrastructural capacity, budget, data‐driven culture 
education  system  and  has  a  multifaceted 
                                                           System      Policy Levers: data architecture, data coverage, data 
structure,  comprising  the  technological  and                        analytics, dynamic system, serviceability 
                                                         Soundness 
institutional  arrangements  for  collecting, 
processing,  and  disseminating  data  (Abdul‐                         Policy Levers: methodological soundness, accuracy and 
                                                        Quality Data  reliability, integrity, periodicity, and timeliness 
Hamid 2014). It is crucial for tracking changes, 
ensuring data quality and timely reporting of  Utilization for   Policy Levers: openness to EMIS users, operational use, 
information, and facilitating the utilization of  Decision Making  accessibility, effectiveness in disseminating findings 
information in decision making.                        Source: Abdul‐Hamid 2014. 
 
The SABER‐EMIS assessment methodology is built on four key policy areas that are essential to an EMIS 
and must be assessed to understand and ultimately strengthen the system. Each policy goal is defined 
by a set of policy levers (actions that help governments reach the policy goal) and indicators (measuring 
the extent to which the policy levers are achieved) (figure 1). 
 
A strong  enabling environment lays the foundation for an effective EMIS. Enabling environment refers 
to the laws, policies, structure, resources, and culture surrounding an EMIS that make data collection, 
management, and access possible. In essence, this policy area is the context in which an EMIS exists. This 
defined  scope  of  an  enabling  environment  builds  on  lessons  learned  from  studies  of  education 
management systems. 
 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                               2 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

System soundness ensures key processes, structures and integration capabilities in an effective EMIS. 
Education data are sourced from different institutions, but all data feed into and make up EMIS. Databases 
within an EMIS are not viewed as separate databases but as part of the whole EMIS. Key aspects of system 
soundness include what data are covered in the EMIS and how they come together in the overarching 
system.  
 
Quality data establish the mechanisms required to collect, save, produce, and utilize information in an 
accurate, secure, and timely manner. Data quality is a multidimensional concept that encompasses more 
than just the underlying accuracy of the statistics produced. It means that not only are the data accurate, 
but that the data address specific needs in a timely fashion. Quality data lay the groundwork for utilization. 
 
An  effective  EMIS  is  utilized  in  decision  Figure 2: SABER Scoring and EMIS Development 
making  by  all  users  (parents,  students, 
                                                                                                                       4 
teachers,  principals,  and  policy  makers) 
                                                                                                               Advanced 
across the education system.  An EMIS needs                                                          3        Comprehensive 
to be used so that measures can be taken to                                                 Established  enabling 
improve  educational  quality.  Accurate                                          2         Enabling          environment, 
information on education sector performance                                 Emerging  environment,            processes, 
                                                                   1                        processes,        structure, data 
                                                                           Basic enabling 
enables the design of more informed policies                  Latent       environment,     structure, data   management, 
                                                                                                              utilization, and 
and  programs.  It  is  imperative  to  understand  Limited enabling  processes,            management, 
                                                                                                              integration in 
                                                                           structure, data  utilization in 
where decision making occurs, if the capacity  environment,                                 place with some   place, with 
                                                         processes,        management,                        intelligent 
to analyze and interpret education data exists,  structure, data  utilization               integration 
                                                                                                              analytics 
and  if  specific  data  are  available  to  inform  management, 
                                                         utilization 
decisions. 
                                                         Source: Abdul‐Hamid 2014. 

Using  the  EMIS  data  collection  instrument, 
policy  levers  are  scored  on  a  four‐level  scale  Figure 3: Policy Intent, Implementation, and Outcomes Cycle,
(latent, emerging, established, and advanced)  with Examples 
to assess the extent to which both policy intent 
                                                          Policies                                   Utilization 
and implementation are achieved (Figure 2).               Vision & Buy‐in                            Processes 
                                                             Standards                                Institutionalization 
Assessing	Policy	Intent	and	                                 Strategy                                 Budget 
Implementation	                                               Documents                                Human Resources 
                                                                                                       Communication 
The  EMIS  assessment  examines  policy  intent 
and the degree to which intended policies are                               Intent             Implementation
effectively implemented on the ground (figure 
3). Intent refers to the way in which the EMIS 
and its overarching purpose are articulated by 
decision  makers  and  documented  in  policies 
and  legislation,  as  well  as  standards  and 
strategy  documents.  Assessing  intent  alone                                        Outcomes
reveals only part of the picture.  
                                                                                Teaching & Learning 
As such, this EMIS assessment also evaluates                                    Management 
policy execution. Implementation refers to the                                  Planning & Monitoring 
                                                                                Transparency 
degree  to  which  intentions  take  place  during 
                                                                                Governance 
the day‐to‐day activities of stakeholders (e.g., 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                3 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

policy  makers,  county  administrators,  principals,  teachers,  and  students).  Implementation  can  be 
observed  through  utilization  of  the  EMIS  by  stakeholders,  budget  allocation,  distribution  of  human 
resources,  availability  of  professional  development  activities,  communication,  and  dissemination  of 
information,  as  well  as  the  extent  of  institutionalization  across  the  system.  Once  policy  intent  and 
implementation are analyzed, the EMIS assessment explores the results of these two key components, 
with a focus on system effectiveness and efficiency, in addition to teaching and learning, and management 
and planning. Strong education systems will ultimately use these outcomes to inform the effectiveness of 
policies  and  education  strategies  and  make  adjustments  as  necessary,  creating  the  cyclical  process 
illustrated in figure 3.  
 
In Romania, EMIS intent and implementation were assessed through desk research and analysis of system 
applications and utilization, as well as interviews with a variety of stakeholders (table 1). 
 
                        Table  1:  Measuring  Policy  Intent  and  Implementation  in 
                        Romania 
                         Policy Intent         Processes             Policy 
                                                                     Implementation 
                          Multiple             Analysis of data     Interviews at 
                           meetings with         quality and           national, 
                           MNESR                 comprehensiveness     district, and 
                          Extensive review   Examination of          school levels 
                           of relevant           professional          including 
                           policies, national    development           policy makers 
                           strategies,           activities            and education 
                           standards, and                              stakeholders 
                           planning 
                           documents 
                          

Methodology	
The EMIS assessment methodology consists of a review of written policies and technical documents as 
well as interviews with key stakeholders across the education system to ensure proper implementation.  
 
Research and investigation for the Romania EMIS assessment took place from August to October 2016. 
The  authors  conducted  a  comprehensive  review  of  policies,  as  well  as  technical  documents  and  other 
background materials. To further examine policy intent and implementation, a series of interviews and 
meetings took place with the following entities: 
    1. Ministry of National Education and Scientific Research 
    2. School Inspectorate 
    3. Teachers and principals in rural and urban areas (in public schools) 
 
                                  




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                  4 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Country Overview 
Before  the  2008  financial  crisis,  Romania  was  Figure  4:  Percentage  Change  of  Real  GDP  Growth  in
among  the  fastest  growing  economies  in  Europe,  Romania	
experiencing  rapid  poverty  reduction.  Growth  has          10
now  returned  and  is  projected  to  be  around  3 
percent  in  the  coming  years.  Before  the  financial 
                                                                 5




                                                             Percent change
crisis,  growth  was  marked  by  a  shift  in  labor 
allocation  from  less  productive  sectors  including 
agriculture  into  higher  productive  sectors  including        0
services and construction. Based on the Europe and                      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
Central Asia regional poverty line of 5 USD per day             ‐5
(in  constant  2005  USD  PPP),  the  poverty  rate 
declined from 2006 to 33 percent. The financial crisis  ‐10
severely  disrupted  poverty  reduction  and  growth,              Source: World Bank 2016.
and the poverty rate did not change from 2008 to 2010. Growth has now resumed and is projected by the 
IMF to be approximately 3 percent for the coming year. Despite the progress made before the financial 
crisis  and  the  resumption  of  growth  since  then,  the  poverty  rate  in  Romania  still  remains  among  the 
highest in the European Union (EU).	 

Romania  like  other  Eastern  European  countries  is                        Table 2: Public Expenditure on Education (2012) 
experiencing  a  rapid  population  decline  emphasizing                      Public              Percent       of  Percent 
the  importance  of  strengthening  the  workforce’s                          Expenditure  on  Government            of GDP 
                                                                              Education           Expenditure 
education  and  skills.  The  United  Nations  predicts 
                                                                              Pre‐primary         0.9%               — 
Romania’s population will decline by approximately 19 
                                                                              Primary             1.5                0.5% 
percent between 2010 and 2050, because of lower birth 
                                                                              Secondary           3.3%               1.1% 
rates  but  also  emigration;  approximately  2.7  million                    Tertiary            2.1%               0.7% 
young workers have migrated to other parts of Europe 
in the past 10 years. Emigrants tend to be higher skilled                     Source: EdStats 2016. 
(World Bank 2014). 

Strengthening  public  administration  is  central  to  the  government’s  Table  3:  Pupil‐Teacher  Ratio 
national  reform  strategies.  Romania’s  public  administration  is  (2012) 
overwhelmed by poor quality public investment, an inconsistent  legal  Pupil‐Teacher Ratio 
framework, poor interministerial relations, poor use and programming  Primary                17.56 
of  EU  funds,  and  ineffective  oversight  of  state‐owned  enterprises.  Secondary        12.27 
                                                                            Source: EdStats 2016. 
Improving  public  financial  management,  tax  regulation,  and 
performance of state‐owned enterprises and reforming the judiciary are key areas of engagement with 
the World Bank. 

As  part  of  Romania’s  efforts  improve  public  administration,  a  series  of  four  strategies  related  to 
education have recently been approved with heavy emphasis on monitoring and evaluation. The sector 
strategies  are  part  of  the  ex‐ante  conditionality  of  an  integrated  approach  to  the  2014–20  EU  fund 
programming period. These strategies cover (1) early school leaving, (2) tertiary education, (3) vocational 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                               5 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

and technical training, and (4) lifelong learning. They coordinate the government’s efforts at achieving the 
Europe 2020 goals. 

Increasing  enrollment,  especially  Table 4: Education Data in Romania (2012–14) 
for  minorities  and  improving                         Absolute      Gross         Percentage  Percentage 
quality  of  education,  are  key                       enrollment    enrollment    of  female  private 
challenges       that     Romania’s                     number        ratio  (both  students       institutions 
education  system  currently  faces.                                  sexes)        (private 
                                                                                    and public) 
Enrollment  rates  for  secondary, 
                                        Pre‐primary     581,144       —             —              2.7% 
pre‐primary,       and     especially 
                                        Primary         807,047       95.5%         48.2%          0.4% 
tertiary‐level  education  have 
                                        Secondary       1,609,259     94.8%         48.4%          1.2% 
grown  since  2000,  although  Tertiary                 578,706       52.3%         53.8%          — 
tertiary  education  has  declined                                                   
since  the  2008  financial  crisis.  Source: EdStats 2016. 
Despite  this  progress,  significant 
disparities in access to education exist. For example, only a small proportion of Roma men and women 
complete  secondary  school,  12  and  6  percent,  respectively  (World  Bank  2015).  Ninety‐five  percent  of 
Roma leave school early. 

Romania  has  made  significant  Figure 5: Percentage of 15‐Year‐Old Students Achieving Minimum 
progress improving learning outcomes  Proficiency in PISA by Domain (Level 2 or Above) 
for  15‐year‐old  students,  as 
measured  in  the  2015  Organisation          75
for  Economic  Co‐operation  and 
                                               50           59 60             60 63 61         59 63 61
Development (OECD) Programme for 
                                           Percentage




                                                         53                                 53
International  Student  Assessment                   47                   46
(PISA) study, but a large  percentage          25
still  do  not  achieve  minimum 
proficiency. Between 2006 and 2015,             0
the  proportion  of  students  who                         Math               Reading           Science
achieved  PISA  level  2  or  higher  in  all                   2006    2009    2012   2015
three        subjects            increased  Source: Based on OECD PISA 2015 data.
substantially.  For  example,  in  2006 
only 46 percent of students attained this basic level of proficiency in reading, but by 2015, 61 percent 
attained this level. Similar improvements occurred in mathematics and science as well. However, more 
than one‐third of Romania’s 15‐year‐olds still do not achieve minimum proficiency. 

A  strong  EMIS  is  needed  to  monitor  and  evaluate  the  education  sector  strategies,  to  contribute  to 
improving  public  sector  management  more  generally,  and  to  help  achieve  the  Europe  2020  goals. 
Monitoring indicators for all four strategies rely on data about education institutions. The role of the EMIS, 
especially for the early school leaving strategy, is central to providing the data needed to measure whether 
the strategy is achieving its goals or not. 	

                                   




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                 6 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Romania EMIS Results 
This section presents the main results of EMIS diagnostics described in the previous sections. Results and 
scores for each policy goal are presented, along with supporting evidence. 

Policy	Area	1:	Enabling	Environment	
Established  
Romania’s  enabling  environment  was  assessed  in  the  following  areas:  (1)  Legal  Framework;  (2) 
Organizational  Structure  and  Institutionalized  Processes;  (3)  Human  Resources;  (4)  Infrastructural 
Capacity; (5) Budget; and (6) Data‐Driven Culture.  

Ministerial  Order  Number  5760/2006  established  the  National  Education  Database  (BDNE)  in  2006, 
which was later upgraded to the Integrated Romania  Education  Information  Technology (IT) System 
(SIIIR),  which  has  recently  become  the  single  data  provider  in  the  education  system.  The  BDNE  was 
introduced in 2005 and became operational following Ministerial Order 5760/2006, which established the 
BDNE as the official system for data collection, validation, and processing. However, in 2013 the BDNE 
was replaced with the Integrated Romania Education IT System (SIIIR), which has been in use since the 
2014/15 school year. Recently, an agreement between the Ministry of National Education and Scientific 
Research  (MNESR)  and  the  National  Institute  for  Statistics  (NIS)  has  been  signed  stating,  among  other 
things, that the SIIIR is the single data provider for the education system. 
 
The organizational structure of the Romanian EMIS is well established and supported by the operational 
manual.  There is a clear workflow and designated staff roles and responsibilities. The EMIS architecture 
facilitates  information  flow  from  the  central  to  the  regional  and  local  levels  as  well  as  vice  versa.  The 
operational manual sent to all school inspectorates and schools requires the nomination of regional and 
local SIIIR administrators and users, who will carry out the tasks outlined in the operational manual. 
 
The system is supported by functional hardware and software. The hardware and software needs of SIIIR 
have been established in the project’s tender documents, such as the Task Book. This process included 
the replacement of almost all paper‐based data collection instruments with digital means, such as SIIIR. 
Currently the Romanian EMIS uses Oracle BI Discoverer software and has a valid support, maintenance, 
and development contract with Oracle until the end of 2016. Internet connectivity is well established in 
Romania, which facilitates the use of digital technology. Even though Romania lacks an official written 
policy for data backup, procedures and processes are in place to manage and archive data.  
 
Backup  procedures  have  been  implemented,  but  they  are  not  yet  fully  institutionalized.  In  general, 
education data are fully archived without a time limit. However, a data backup process is not specified at 
this  point,  and  a  written  policy  is  not  available.  A  standardized  backup  process  would  ensure  the 
availability of data and may be useful to evaluate long‐term education developments. 
 
A draft government decision has been prepared to establish EMIS staff as a distinct unit. The Romanian 
EMIS is not staffed with quality assurance specialists, communications specialists, or data analysts. These 
are  crucial  roles  in  the  EMIS  structure  and  should  be  taken  into  consideration  while  making  staffing 
decisions.  In  August  2016,  a  Government  Decision  Draft  was  written  to  address  this  and  introduce  a 
separate unit for IT within the MNESR. Such a unit would need to be included in the annual education 
budget. 
 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                          7 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

The EMIS is included as a separate item in the in the MNESR annual budget, but a general budgetary 
EMIS framework is still needed. The infrastructure needed to collect and validate data as well as staffing 
are  financed  by  the  MNESR  annual  budget.  The  budget  currently  records  a  separate  budget  for  the 
physical EMIS structure (hardware, software, and technical support) but does not specify EMIS staffing 
expenses or reporting costs (publications, costs of website maintenance, etc.). Maintenance of the EMIS 
system is currently included in the MNESR annual budget. This lack of specificity is not a problem related 
to funds, but rather is more about lack of a general framework for a number of years and more importance 
that should be given to the needs of using the system. 
 
No  provision  is  in  place  for  professional  development  of  EMIS  staff  despite  annual  evaluations. 
According to the standards of the Romanian Labor Code, annual staff evaluations are carried out for all 
EMIS personnel. However, these are not used for targeted professional development and trainings. Only 
some inspectorates organize ad‐hoc trainings in their counties for those responsible for data collection 
and data entry. The National SIIIR Working Group, established in October 2016, is tasked to assess what 
EMIS activities are currently carried out and how to move forward. This also includes the evaluation of 
the need for professional development and learning materials.  
 
Often highly skilled staff are financed by donors. In general, the financing of highly skilled staff has so far 
been  provided  by  donor  agencies,  namely,  the  EU.  Often  IT  specialists  are  paid  on  a  temporary  basis, 
drawing on the funds of ongoing EU operations. Overreliance on donor funds may decrease EMIS financial 
sustainability and can potentially overlook important staff positions that should be filled by such quality 
assurance specialists, communications specialists, or data analysts.  
 
Given the absence of clear professional development and pay level and staffing policies, it is challenging 
to  attract  and  retain  highly  specialized  staff.  Currently  no  policy  is  in  place  regarding  EMIS  staffing 
including number, training, or competencies, and it is currently difficult to attract and retain specialized 
staff because of pay. The payment of IT specialists to staff the system is too low to be competitive with 
the private sector. In addition, the positions are not recognized as professional IT that is cutting edge or 
can bring value‐added to the ministry but rather as part of the general administration of the ministry. 
Financing has not been allocated for staff training or professional development, which often encourages 
staff to look for outside professional opportunities. In fact, in September 2016 EMIS lost a considerable 
amount  of  human  resources.  The  government  aims  to  change  both  the  attractiveness  of  employment 
within the ministry and, thus, attract and retain more specialized staff.  
 
EMIS  data  are  disseminated  to  the  public  only  in  the  form  of  official  reports  and  national  statistics; 
parents are also able to access data about their schools online. Generally, education stakeholders need 
to actively look for education data, which are not automatically supplied by the government. Often the 
available data are in aggregate terms. Sharing EMIS data with other ministries or organizations takes place 
only  with  bilateral  agreements.  Schools  and  parents  do  have  access  to  data  regarding  school 
infrastructure, staffing, and facilities. Parents and teachers can access data about national examinations 
at the individual level. Many countries such as Chile and Cameroon have active education data strategies 
to ensure that all education stakeholders are reached (box 1). 
 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                      8 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
Box 1: Examples of Active Data Dissemination Strategies 
    The Ministry of Education in  Chile  has introduced scorecards for schools to monitor learning improvements. 
    These scorecards are made available to the public and allow for annual school classifications based on student 
    learning outcomes. The schools are grouped according to socioeconomic standards (low or high), rural or urban.  
    Points are awarded based on different indicators such as social, personal, and academic. This allows for a fair 
    comparison between schools, and the best performing schools are rewarded with financial benefits. In addition, 
    these  scorecards  are  made  available  to  the  public  on  the  Ministry  of  Education’s  website.  This  allows 
    stakeholders to search for school results by name or unique school ID number and fosters openness as well as 
    transparency (Bruns, Filmer, and Patrinos 2011). 
     
    Even in countries with low resources, data dissemination strategies are in place. In Cameroon, the Ministry of 
    Education publishes education data on the radio, in the local press, and on television. These are highly effective 
    channels of publication with a deep reach within the population. Many other countries do not make sufficient 
    use of such channels of communication and therefore may forego the chance of reaching some potential data 
    users. Making data available is a crucial aspect in data usage, but just as important is communicating the findings 
    to the general population even if they may not be actively looking for it (UNESCO 2012). 
     

 
 

Policy	Area	2:	System	Soundness		
Established  
Romania’s EMIS soundness was assessed in five critical areas: (1) Data Architecture; (2) Data Coverage; 
(3) Data Analytics; (4) Dynamic System; and (5) Serviceability. 

The architecture for Romania’s EMIS is designed to ensure system functionality. The system is based on 
a clearly defined framework with specifications guiding the structure of all underlying data sources. The 
database is structured according to relational standards and is well documented and secure. The system 
is  based  on  off‐the‐shelf  Oracle  software  that  has  been  customized  and  primarily  managed  by  Siveco 
Romania SA, an independent vendor. The vendor was selected competitively following Romanian Public 
Acquisition Law requirements. The contract with Siveco Romania SA requires monthly maintenance tests 
to ensure data security and confidentiality. These factors establish a sound EMIS and ensure compliance 
with privacy requirements. 
 
The  EMIS  is  dynamic  and  able  to  respond  to  changes  in  data  requirements  and  education  sector 
structure. Stakeholders periodically meet to review the portfolio of education indicators, review existing 
education  reports,  and  identify  new  data  requirements.  The  system  is  able  to  integrate  new  student 
demographic data and changes in school organization as well as other structural changes to the education 
system. The  system can also add new  types of functionalities and integrate  with older versions of the 
database.  However,  the  system  does  not  yet  incorporate  feedback  mechanisms  from  the  local  to  the 
central level and vice versa. Such feedback mechanisms are essential in any well‐functioning EMIS (figure 
6). At the same time, a need is seen for a balance of tracking data at the national and subnational level 
with  support  for  end  users  at  the  local  level  for  better  school  management,  effective  teaching,  and 
assessment of student learning. 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                          9 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

 
    Figure 6: Information Feedback Loop 

                                                                                              Decision making 
                      Data                                                Data               and policy making 
                    collection    Annual                   Data        utilization 
        Schools                   School                validation 
                                  Census                & analysis 
                                                                                             School Census  & 
                                                                                              other outcomes 
      Planning 




                                                                    
                                                                                             and policy actions 
      & design                                     Central             Research/analysis 
      of Census                               Government, Local           Reporting 
                                               Government, & 
                                                School Level 


                                                                   Feedback

    Source: Adapted from Abdul‐Hamid 2014. 

 
The MNESR collects enrollment data, and the Ministry of Public Finance (MoPF) collects financial data; 
both provide data to the NIS. Both ministries collect data relevant to schools, teachers, and students, but 
the  two  databases  remain  unlinked.  Expenditure  data  are  collected  by  the  MoPF  through  its  own 
mechanisms at a very detailed (budgetary) level. Enrollment and other education data are collected by 
the  MNESR.  A  high  benefit  exists  in  combining  the  two  independent  education  databases.  Relating 
learning outcomes to education data provide valuable insights for the allocation of resources. If collected 
properly,  validated,  and  verified,  this  ensures  a  high  level  of  accuracy  informing  on  improvements  to 
student learning outcomes. Both ministries provide their datasets to NIS, which then forwards statistical 
data to the EU. 
 
The EMIS already covers data on students and school facilities, public financing, teachers, and national 
assessments but should be expanded to achieve full education data coverage. The National Evaluation 
and Examination Centre is responsible for the processing and distribution of sensitive documents for the 
national  assessments,  in  cooperation  with  the  Special  Telecommunications  Agency.  Student‐level  data 
include basic demographics such as age and gender as well as data on socioeconomic status and ethnicity. 
Officially, regulation does not yet mandate data collection on socioeconomic backgrounds or ethnicity, 
but the information is habitually collected. Data on student transition rates into higher education are also 
recorded. However, no data on health issues, such as immunization of students, are collected except for 
learning and physical disabilities. A wide range of data on school facilities and infrastructure are collected, 
but data on implementing and achieving milestones in school plans are not. Financial data are collected 
only on government spending; private expenditure information including tuition, grants, donations, and 
other school revenue is not.  
 
The  data  do  not  yet  fully  cover  teacher  data.  Data  are  available  on  teacher  salaries,  experience,  and 
qualifications  but  are  not  collected  on  professional  development  and  trainings.  Schools  and  students 
benefit  directly  from  effective  teacher  training  and  professional  development  plans.  Teachers  are 
instrumental in the classroom and, thus, for learning outcomes. A good example of a functioning system 
is the teacher information system in Bihar, India, which focuses on teacher qualifications and professional 
development (box 2). 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                        10 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

 
Box 2: Teacher Education Management Information System in Bihar, India 
    The East Indian state of Bihar has integrated what was initially a teachers’ attendance monitoring system into 
    a  professional  and  human  resource  development  one.  The  Teacher  Education  Management  Information 
    System (TEMIS) uses modern technology to track teachers’ training and has successfully established a link to 
    the  technology‐based  pre‐service  training.  In  the  future  all  teacher  training  will  be  tracked  through  that 
    system. This provides administrators with more transparency in the teacher selection process for in‐service 
    trainings as well as professional development programs. TEMIS includes data on the teachers’ educational 
    level, professional qualification, and personal history in addition to current school posting, commencement 
    date of teaching service, training status, and foreseeable retirement date. In addition, TEMIS is a longitudinal 
    tracking system of teachers’ qualification and performance.  
     
    Source: World Bank 2015. 

 
The EMIS does not yet collect data on disadvantaged social groups such as Roma. Although the SIIIR 
collects data on students and school facilities, public financing, teachers, and national assessments, data 
on disadvantaged groups, including Roma, are not collected. Given that 95 percent of Roma leave school 
early, these are important data and need to be accounted for in the system architecture. Special attention 
should be paid to disadvantaged communities. 
 
Although capacity to compute and provide descriptive analysis of the EMIS data exists, processes are 
not  established  to  analyze  associations  or  correlations  between  indicators.  The  Romania  EMIS  has 
processes  to  conduct  descriptive  data  analysis  (e.g.,  means  and  totals)  as  well  as  cross‐tabulations  to 
summarize indicators across different values of other indicators. Data interpretation and manipulation 
are generally carried out by the IT in Education unit or manipulated by the maintenance provider, Siveco 
Romania  SA.  Capacity  is  lacking  to  do  more  in‐depth  analysis  including  understanding  the  relationship 
between multiple indicators and forecasting or projections. Professional development and software are 
needed to conduct these analyses. 
 
In  Romania,  no  mechanism  exists  to  flag  potential  issues  or  early  warnings  for  the  performance  of 
students, teachers or schools. The aim of any successful EMIS is to provide education stakeholders with 
the data and information necessary to better learning outcomes for students. An important factor is an 
early  warning  system  that  prevents  students  from  falling  behind  and  tracks  student  progress.  Some 
advanced  systems  such  as  Maryland’s  (box  3)  have  successfully  implemented  an  academic  indexing 
procedure, which identifies and flags students at risk. This is an immensely valuable tool for teachers. 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                 11 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 


 Box 3: Academic Indexing in Maryland 

  Academic indexing supports all education stakeholders in identifying            High Risk 12 students (3.5%) 
  students at risk. The value of data is even apparent at the microlevel.         Medium Risk 35 students 
  For instance, in Maryland a risk index was developed, which identifies          (10.3%) 
  students at risk. The figure to the right illustrates the color coding for      Low Risk 286 students (84.1%) 
  students  at  no  risk,  medium  risk,  and  high  risk.  When  parents  and    No Data Available 7 students 
  students have real‐time access to student learning data, as they do in          (2.1%) 
  Maryland, then they are able to track their own progress and identify 
  deficiencies in their performance early. Just as importantly, teachers 
  may use data to track progress toward Student Learning Objectives. By 
  tracking each of their students’ progress in a computerized system, it 
  is easier to identify and carry out necessary intervention for students 
  at risk. By comparing student records against their classmates, but also 
  longitudinally, support can be given in a more targeted, efficient, and 
  effective  manner.  Principals  and  school  administrators  actively  use 
  data  to  evaluate  teachers,  monitor  school  progress,  and  manage 
  school plans. Policy makers use data to monitor education quality and 
  equity, improve accountability, and gauge effectiveness of policies and 
  programs. 
   
  Source: Provided to authors by Cecil County, 2014. 

 
The Romanian EMIS has not yet established a real‐time procedure to monitor and record student and 
teacher  performance.  To  ensure  student  learning  and  effective  human  resource  allocation,  the  EMIS 
should  focus  on  student  and  teacher  needs.  This  starts  with  implementing  efficient  deployment 
mechanisms for teachers and tracking student learning. Policy makers and school administrators should 
be able to rely on the EMIS to inform them at any point on the academic and professional progress of 
students  and  teachers.  This  data  in  combination  with  school  inspection  data  can  lead  to  direct 
improvements in student learning and course completion rates. 
 
Tracking schools, teachers, and students simultaneously  Box  4:  An  Example  of  How  Regular  Monitoring
identifies  potential  correlations  between  student  Improves Education Outcomes 
learning  and  school  or  teacher  performance.  With  the 
                                                                Howard County in Maryland states that one of 
availability of tracking data, policy makers will be able to  the  key  success  factors  to  improve  student 
answer  the  question  if  there  is  a  link  between  low‐    learning  was  monitoring.  Daily  and  weekly 
performing  schools  and  teachers.  Such  an  EMIS  also  monitoring  (of  students,  teachers,  and 
enables  decision  makers  to  identify  areas  for  schools)  contributed  greatly  to  the 
improvements  and  map  schools  accordingly.  These  achievement  of  a  solid  foundation  for  data‐
indicators  may  be  linked  to  the  achievement  of  driven target setting. The presence of teachers 
milestones  in  individual  school  development  plans.  and  effective  classroom  monitoring  was 
Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  collect  data  on  school,  crucial  in  the  process.  Countries  with  similar 
teacher,  and  student  behavior  even  in  established  capacities may benefit from the experiences in 
                                                                Howard County.  
systems.  Howard  County  in  Maryland,  U.S.A.,  believes 
                                                                Source: Howard County 2015. 
that  monitoring  was  a  key  factor  in  improving  learning 
outcomes (box 4). 
 
 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                        12 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

The  system  may  benefit  from  improvements  in  formal  external  quality  assurance  procedures.  To 
maintain  quality  and  system  soundness,  internal  and  external  reviews  should  be  performed.  The 
International Organization for Standardization Series ISO 9000 framework acts as the backbone of an EMIS 
(figure  7).  Assessing  the  management  of  an  EMIS  system  ensures  the  continuity  of  operations.  More 
specifically,  the  government  is  the  managing  authority  responsible  for  the  system,  which  manages  its 
architecture and infrastructure and the realization of such products as statistical reports. Processes are in 
place  that  focus  on  data  quality,  collection  monitoring,  processing  and  dissemination  of  education 
statistics,  and  inclusion  of  data  quality  in  statistical  planning.  Currently,  Romania  does  not  follow 
internationally  recognized  quality  assurance  measures  such  as  ISO  9000  nor  is  it  subject  to  external 
reviews by auditing or quality management agencies.  
 
Figure 7: Use of ISO 9000 Quality Processes to Assess the Soundness of an EMIS 




    Source: Adapted from ISO 9000 (2016).  

 
 

Policy	Area	3:	Quality	Data		
Established  
The  quality  of  data  captured  by  Romania’s  EMIS  was  assessed  in  four  areas:  (1)  Methodological 
Soundness; (2) Accuracy and Reliability; (3) Integrity; and (4) Periodicity and Timeliness. 

Romania’s EMIS is equipped with operation manuals, but some definitions of indicators could benefit 
from  a  higher  level  of  standardization  and  clarity.  Official  operations  manuals  exist  that  define  the 
system’s specific terminology related to data collection, data management, data fields, indicators, and 
archival procedures. However, not all definitions are clear, resulting in confusion on how to define certain 



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                   13 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

indicators.  Moreover,  some  indicator  definitions  are  missing.  For  example,  SIIIR  has  introduced  new 
modules (e.g., on school infrastructure), which are not accompanied by explanations on how to calculate 
and/or differentiate data (e.g., school areas). In theory, data collectors and data management staff should 
be  aware  of  how  data  are  supposed  to  be  collected  and  defined.  This  should  include  any  differences 
between concepts and definitions used in source data versus the EMIS database. However, in practice this 
is  often  not  the  case,  which  is  why  some  important  indicators  are  not  reliable  and  accurate.  This  is 
particularly true with regard to school dropout rates. Dropout rates are important and are basic indicators 
in any set of education statistics, but the Romanian EMIS fails to accurately calculate these because of a 
lack of a clear definition.  
 
Without  appropriate  systemic  data  training  and  clear  definitions,  data  may  be  conflicted.  Any  error 
made at the data collection and data entry level reduces data quality. Systematic training and instruction 
for data collectors would directly benefit data quality. However, often data collection and entry are done 
by administrative staff with minimal training, which may cause misunderstandings of the definitions. This 
holds particularly true in rural areas, where data entry is often conducted by secretary‐level staff with 
minimal statistical and data entry training. In addition, in large schools—especially in urban areas, where 
the challenge is to input large volumes of data—professional development mechanisms are limited for 
data collectors or statistical staff to enhance the accuracy of the collected data. 
 
Limited communication of the existing data definitions to the data‐collecting units potentially lowers 
data  quality.  In  general,  the  Romanian  education  system  classifications  are  based  on  international 
guidelines,  mainly  those  of  the  EU  and  UNESCO’s  Institute  of  Statistics  International  Standard 
Classification of Education. The MNESR and NIS follow their procedures and methodologies set forth by 
these institutions and their partners. The MNESR and NIS coordinate on data definition because the NIS 
supplies  data  to  European  and  international  statistical  institutes.  In  theory,  Law  Number  677/2001 
prescribes that users are  made aware  in advance of major  changes to methodology, source data, and 
statistical techniques. It is questionable to what extent users are notified of any changes and the depth of 
the reach within the pool of data collectors. 
 
The  government  has  established  data  procedures  aimed  at  ensuring  accuracy  and  reliability,  but 
challenges remain. The design of the data collection instruments is intended to facilitate easy completion 
and enable direct data entry into the SIIIR web‐based front end. Even through a registry of school units 
exists, a request of a list of high schools classified by selected school indicators raised reliability questions 
because of different ways of calculating those indicators at the school level (e.g., average completion rate, 
average passing rate at the Baccalaureate exams) and/or lack of updated information at the school or 
inspectorate level. A common understanding of definitions at the level of all schools is an important step 
toward comprehensive and quality data. Without it, data are likely to be missing and to lower the accuracy 
and reliability of the education statistics. 
 
The Romanian EMIS aims to promote accountability and transparency. Accountability and transparency 
are essential in managing the interplay of different education stakeholders in assigning and identifying 
data responsibilities. The public is aware of and able to access education statistics, which include publicly 
available  documentation  on  how  education  statistics  have  been  collected  and  compiled  and  their 
utilization. In theory, this encourages transparency and accountability, but it is questionable how often 
these data sources are actually used by parents, teachers, policy makers, and education researchers.  
 
The government is in the process of designing extensive data validation for school inspectors. The need 
exists to establish very clear and accurate data validation and verification procedures.  Ensuring quality 



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                     14 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

source data directly improves data quality overall. School inspectors are responsible for data collection, 
validation, and verification, but a lack of clear validation procedures persists. In fact, school inspectorates 
are currently in the process of designing extensive inspection procedures and SIIIR inspection checklists 
for use in schools. The school inspectorates are tasked with tracking which schools have and have not yet 
responded to the data collection requests.  
 
Schools have access to SIIIR, and with the appropriate built‐in data validation mechanisms, a high level 
of data quality can be achieved. Granting data providers (e.g., teachers, school administrators) access to 
education data makes them accountable for the data. Analytical data are entered directly into the SIIIR’s 
web‐based application, and every school is granted access to the system via the internet. It is essential to 
include  built‐in  data  validation  mechanisms  in  the  software  at  the  point  of  data  entry.  For  instance, 
mandatory reviews of entered data before final submission can directly improve data quality.  
 
Penalties are in place in case of disclosure of confidential data, but clear guidelines on ethical behavior 
have not been established. A special focus is placed on privacy and confidentiality measures because they 
are regularly audited given the maintenance contract with Siveco Romania SA. In addition, Law 677/2001 
and the EMIS job contract prescribe penalties if EMIS staff disclose confidential information. However, 
clear  guidelines  are  not  in  place  for  staff  regarding  unethical  behavior  (e.g.,  misuse  of  statistics  or 
alteration  of  statistics)  or  clear  guidelines  about  conflicts  of  interest  for  EMIS  staff.  EMIS  staff  are  not 
protected by an officially endorsed code of professional ethics. There is also no internal or external review 
process  for  research  on  methodology  or  use  of  data;  staff  do  not  attend  conferences  or  publish 
methodological papers. 
 
The  EMIS  is  able  to  produce  timely  education  statistics.  Data  collection  from  schools  is  conducted 
generally twice a year. The data are updated periodically to reflect if students transfer to a new school or 
drop out or if new students enter the system. Final education statistics are disseminated within 6 to 12 
months of the start of the year. The periodicity and timeliness of data appear to be sufficient for data 
users’ needs. 
 
 

Policy	Area	4:	Utilization	for	Decision	Making	
Emerging  
The utilization of Romania’s EMIS was assessed by examining four areas: (1) Openness; (2) Operational 
Use; (3) Accessibility; and (4) Effectiveness in Disseminating Findings. 

THe EMIS in Romania is established, but its data often remain unused.  Any EMIS is only as good as its 
utilization. A well‐functioning EMIS utilizes data at every level of the decision‐making process, starting at 
the  school  and  regional  levels  and  going  all  the  way  to  the  central  level.  In  Romania,  it  is  exactly  in 
education data utilization that the EMIS is still challenged the most. Evidence shows that the data are not 
used by policy makers to introduce data‐based education policy with the ultimate objective to improve 
learning  outcomes  of  students.  Many  Latin  American  countries  have  established  the  utilization  of 
information obtained by an EMIS at the core of any education policy decision (box 5). 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                            15 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Box 5: Data Utilization in Chile 

 Many Latin American countries have successfully established education systems that base their policy decisions 
 on  the  information  and  data  obtained  through  an  EMIS.  Chile  is  at  the  forefront  of  data‐driven  education 
 systems and has institutionalized an education system, where decision making at every level (central, regional, 
 and local) is deeply founded on data. In an educational environment, where most of the schools are privately 
 run, data are crucial to ensure that all schools, private and public, comply with learning standards set for by the 
 central government. Funding for schools is also distributed according to education data. Chile has established a 
 well‐structured  private  school  system  with  an  advanced  voucher  system.  The  vouchers  are  allocated  to 
 individuals, and so the decision on where parents send their children to school has a direct effect on the funding 
 for schools and gives importance to their decisions. For parents to make informed decisions, the Ministry of 
 Education in Chile publishes a school ranking every year, which makes schools comparable for parents. 

 
The MNESR provides access to the EMIS, but the data are not used widely. Access to education data is 
not sufficient. Education stakeholders need to be trained to digest and effectively utilize the data available 
to them from the EMIS. The Romania EMIS focuses on the accessibility of data but not its usage. Indeed, 
data  are  accessible  not  only  to  the  MNESR  administration  but  also  the  school  inspectorate,  regional 
education  offices,  schools,  parents,  researchers,  nongovernmental  organizations,  and  international 
organizations. Some EMIS reports are publicized via the internet and pamphlets on the internet. However, 
no training is provided to EMIS users on how to access and use the system. Effectively, users do not benefit 
from the potential that the EMIS holds. 
 
The  establishment  of  SIIIR  has  improved  data  sharing  and  transparency  but  is  not  automatically 
translated into data utilization.  SIIIR has improved the education governance system by evaluating the 
system and schools. The EMIS provides reports on school performance as well on student performance 
including graduation and transition rates. The Education Status Report is published annually and provides 
an overall evaluation of the education system based on the EMIS, as well as on other sources. Education 
agencies including regional offices and the inspectorate use EMIS data for evaluating schools and for the 
allocation  of  financial  resources  and  teaching  staff.  A  need  is  seen  to  build  additional  capacities  and 
processes at all levels to enable stakeholders to make use of the data. Ideally, capacity building should be 
increased at the school level to help those at the “frontline” of education (teachers, school staff, et al.) 
and nourish a data culture. 

The Romanian government has a data dissemination strategy in place, but it has not yet triggered the 
desired data utilization effect. The strategy involves bulletins and newspapers as well as annual reports. 
Data are disseminated according to a fixed schedule that is also communicated to the public in advance. 
Typically, the release of a comprehensive report is preceded by an informational release, to make it easy 
for the audience to digest the information. The government aims to report data in a manner that is easy 
for the public to understand. Metadata are also collected and disseminated, although not yet updated for 
2016. Data that are not published but nonconfidential are available upon request. Despite the availability 
of data, the utilization remains low. 
 
A general framework of education data sharing at the central level is needed. Data sharing can reap 
benefits far beyond the education system. Education statistics represent valuable information for other 
ministries such as the Ministry of Health and Ministry of Labor. Many Ministries of Education have started 
data‐sharing  initiatives,  which  benefit  a  broad  range  of  stakeholder  groups  (box  6).  In  Romania,  data 
sharing takes place only under individual agreements settled with other institutions and ministries. For 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                            16 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

national reports, the government generally publishes data related to school network, educational areas, 
levels, specializations, and results for national examinations on their website, data.gov.ro. 
 
Although schools use the EMIS to some extent, they are not using it to its full potential. Schools tend to 
use the EMIS for school improvement decisions and for financial management using the EduSal financial 
module in the EMIS. However, they do not use it for allocating resources, to evaluate faculty or student 
progress. They currently do not use it for teacher evaluation or to make teaching decisions or to compare 
their  schools’  academic  performances  to  other  schools,  but  these  will  be  possible  when  Electronic 
National Gradebook System (ENGS) is implemented. 
 
Box 6: Example of Linkages of Education Data with Other Ministries 

    Many countries have started initiatives of data sharing with different ministries. The aim is to utilize data that 
    can be gained through the annual census and other education data sources. For instance, data on vaccination 
    coverage, enrollment in school sports programs, and students’ height and weight can help paint a picture of the 
    overall health of the youth in any given country. For instance, the Fijian Ministry of Education has established a 
    Body Mass Index page to collect data on the height and weight of students. The intent of the initiative was to use 
    this as a vehicle to engage the Ministry of Health and enhance the prospects of data collaboration. Collaboration 
    with the Judicial Ministry, which is responsible for birth certificate IDs, may reflect data on children‐out‐of‐school 
    and possibly introduce a longitudinal tracking system. 

 
Data sharing should be extended to parents and teachers. It is crucial that data sharing be extended from 
the central level to regional and local education stakeholders. Currently, data‐sharing strategies are not 
established with parents and teachers except for the dissemination of general reports and final statistics. 
School administrators, however, are granted access to their own data, actual and historical, in the SIIIR. 
The  system  includes  data  on  school  networks  and  individual  school  such  as  location,  infrastructure, 
facilities, number of teachers, students, and classrooms, but no school performance data. Data on national 
examinations, Grade 8 or Baccalaureate, are published on an aggregate level and can be accessed at the 
individual level by any parent or teacher. Australia is a good example of how individual school data can be 
easily communicated to the public and shared (box 7). 
 
Box 7: Data Access and Usage for All Education Stakeholders 

    In Australia, the mySchool platform (myschool.edu.au) provides education stakeholders, including parents and 
    the  community,  with  the  opportunity  to  compare  and  assess  individual  schools.  The  Australian  Curriculum, 
    Assessment and Reporting Authority calculates an Index of Community Socio‐Educational Advantage score for 
    each  school,  which  is  accessible  online.  The  online  tool  enables  fair  comparisons  between  schools  across 
    Australia and incentivizes teachers, parents, and students to make use of the tool. The website mySchool thus 
    supports data collection, analysis, assessment, and utilization of education data. Access to education data for 
    the broader community raises data awareness and inspires a data‐driven culture at all levels: national, regional, 
    and local. MySchool also provides a detailed analysis of enrollment numbers, student background, and staff. In 
    addition,  the  mySchool  website  also  provides  information  on  financial  resources  and  expenditures  of  every 
    school. The platform is designed to enable education stakeholders to make effective use of the data. 
     
    Source: ACARA 2016. 

 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                             17 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Summary 
Romania  has  established  a  functioning  EMIS  system.  Ministerial  Order  Number  5760/2006  has 
successfully laid the foundation for a legal framework of a National Education Database (BDNE), which 
later  was  developed  into  the  Integrated  Romanian  IT  System  (SIIIR).  Recently  SIIIR  has  been 
institutionalized  through  a  new  agreement  between  the  Ministry  of  National  Education  and  Scientific 
Research and National Institute for Statistics (NIS). The system is well established, supported by a sound 
EMIS  structure,  and  produces  comprehensive  data.  However,  effective  data  utilization  remains 
challenging. 
 
The education data system has been designed to ensure system functionality, but additional features 
such as early warning mechanisms and additional quality assurance procedures should also be included. 
The organizational EMIS structure ensures the production of data that cover a wide range of indicators: 
administrative, financial, human resource, and learning data. However, the EMIS does not yet have the 
ability to track teacher and student attendance or flag potential early warning signs in student, teacher, 
or school performance. The system is dynamic and thus able to respond to changes in demands on the 
education system, but currently lacks effective feedback mechanisms reaching from the central to the 
local level. 
 
The Romanian EMIS produces comprehensive data but may benefit from more accuracy and reliability 
measures. A review and standardization of definitions may be beneficial to ensure that international best 
practices are in place and data can be shared and publicized accordingly. School census data are produced 
at least twice a year and made publicly available within six months. Confidentiality measures are in place, 
but more need exists for clear guidelines on ethical behavior with regard to education data.  
 
This assessment highlighted some areas for improvement in the current EMIS, in particular with regard 
to data utilization.  Timely, accurate, reliable, and useful data should be the base for informed decision 
making, but in Romania data often remain unused. The Romanian EMIS still requires some improvements 
in the area of data utilization. Extensive data sharing is a key component in the data utilization process. 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                18 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Recommendations and Proposed Activities 
This section presents a set of recommendations and proposed activities based on the assessment of the 
EMIS in Romania (table 5).  

Recommendations  and  activities  aim  to  Table 5: Romania EMIS Rankings 
improve  the  overall  EMIS  functionality  in  a                                        Established 
                                                   1. Enabling Environment 
sustainable  and  effective  manner,  to  ensure                                            
better  access  and  use  of  information  for                                           Established 
                                                   2. System Soundness 
decision  making,  planning,  and  student                                                  
learning. Future activities to improve the EMIS                                          Established 
should be strategically designed such that they  3. Quality Data                            
incrementally boost dimensions of the EMIS to                                             Emerging 
a  more  advanced  level,  ultimately  improving  4. Utilization for Decision Making        
overall EMIS functionality in a sustainable and                                                            




effective  manner.  The  Strengths  Weaknesses  Opportunities  Threats  (SWOT)  identification  (table  6) 
summarizes key points from the needs assessment and informs recommendations. 
    Table 6: Romania EMIS SWOT Profile 
                           Strengths                                                    Weaknesses 
     Signed an agreement to fully institutionalize                 Lack of clear definitions resulting in lower quality 
        SIIIR as the main education data system                      data 
     Well‐established enabling environment and                     Slow progress integrating human resources and 
        system soundness                                             financial data with the EMIS 
     Established quality data                                      Lack of collaboration between ministries and 
     A sound web‐based data system with the                         institutions 
        potential for real‐time data                                Lack of professional development plans for EMIS 
     Support and buy‐in from international                          staff 
        organizations, in particular the EU 
                         Opportunities                                                      Threats 
     A sound system with comprehensive data,                       Need for data utilization at every level of the 
        which is ready for utilization                               decision‐making process 
     Expansion of assessment and instructional data                No systematic strategy for country‐wide data 
        programs to closely monitor learning outcomes                utilization training for schools, teachers, and parents 
     Exclusively web‐based applications function                   Lack of appeal and competitiveness of EMIS 
        well with the highly developed internet                      positions in the IT department of the MNESR 
        infrastructure in Romania                                   Lack of information sharing within the government 
     Expanding ministry capacity by creating new                    may prevent important development opportunities 
        units; e.g., the potential for a new IT unit for            Separate data collection on financial data of schools 
        education has been recently discussed                        by the Ministry of Finance requires strict data‐
     Electronic National Grade‐book System (ENGS)                   sharing policies 
        will enable schools to take full advantage of the 
        EMIS 
                                                                                               

	
                                       	




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                  19 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Recommendation	1:	Improving	Data	Utilization	
Romania has established an operational EMIS; building demand for its data presents a key next step. 
The Romanian EMIS produces a wide range of data that are often underused. This assessment emphasizes 
the  need  for  data  utilization  across  the  entire  education  system.  Considerable  opportunity  exists  to 
improve  system‐wide  efficiency,  teaching  practices,  and  student  learning.  The  aim  of  any  EMIS  is  to 
provide reliable, accurate, and useful data for decision‐making process; and an EMIS is only as good as its 
usage.  
 
The  EMIS  would  benefit  from  feedback  loops.  Feedback  loops  ensure  the  connection  between  data 
providers  (e.g.,  teachers,  students,  parents,  and  the  community)  and  data  users  (e.g.,  government, 
education  policy  makers,  teachers,  and  principals).  They  facilitate  data  system  openness  by  granting 
access to a broad spectrum of data users. Information needs to flow from the central to the regional and 
local level and vice versa. Schools, teachers, and parents need to be presented with education data in 
such  a  manner  that  they  can  utilize  the  information  and  improve  learning  outcomes.  The  EMIS  in 
Maryland, U.S.A., provides effective feedback to schools in the form of the School Progress Index. It is also 
used by policy makers to identify schools in need of intervention (box 8). 
Box 8: Feedback to Schools in the Form of the School Progress Index in Maryland, U.S.A. 
 In Maryland, U.S.A., the School Progress Index is a successful feedback mechanism for schools and is utilized on 
 the  central,  regional,  and  local  levels  to  identify  potential  need  for  intervention.  It  evaluates  schools  on  a 
 continuous  scale  based  on  the  variables  of  Achievement,  Growth,  Gap  Reduction,  and  College‐  and  Career‐
 Readiness. It also makes results of each school available publicly via the annual Maryland Report Card, which also 
 contains  demographic  data,  enrollment  and  attendance  rates,  absentee  rates,  student  mobility,  teacher 
 qualifications, and data about students receiving special services. The index identifies schools for intervention, 
 support,  and  recognition,  depending  on  their  progress.  The  state  affords  top‐performing  schools  with  greater 
 flexibility, while lower‐performing schools receive progressively more prescriptive technical assistance, targets for 
 performance, and monitoring. To effectively position schools for success, national, state, and local governments 
 provide  schools  with  data  that  they  can  use  to  benchmark  their  students’  performance  against  student 
 performance metrics at local and national levels, as well as tools to organize and analyze those data.  
  
 Source: MSDE 2012. 

 
Data allow for smart decisions and efficient resource allocation. Data need to be fully integrated into the 
EMIS to allow for strategic planning and efficient utilization. Data offer detailed information on the needs 
of  resources  and  with  a  central  planning  tool,  which  facilitates  the  use  of  scalable  options.  These  will 
improve  efficiency  and  offer  cost  reduction  opportunities,  for  instance,  in  the  area  of  procurement  of 
school  equipment  such  as  computers.  The  possibility  of  effective  and  targeted  strategic  planning  and 
resource allocation underscores the benefits of an EMIS. 
 
High‐quality data are necessary for effective data utilization. Effective data utilization is possible if the 
data  are  reliable,  accurate,  and  useful.  In  Romania,  experience  has  shown  that  reporting  on  different 
indicators at the school level (e.g., average completion rate, average passing rates) can be challenging. 
This clearly indicates a stronger need for clearer definitions to ensure high‐quality data. 
 
A review of current definitions could ensure that they comply with international best practice standards 
and are utilized accordingly. High‐quality data can be obtained by institutionalizing a code or standardized 
definitions and guidelines that ensure the compliance with internationally accepted best practice norms. 
In addition, best practice standards also plan for data utilization and data sharing. The definitions should 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                20 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

be aligned with international standards to ensure their effective utilization and comparability across time 
and potentially also borders. 
 
Capacity  building  is  needed  for  schools  on  how  to  take  full  advantage  of  the  SIIIR  and  ENGS,  when 
implemented.  Although  schools  use  the  EMIS  to  some  extent,  they  do  not  use  it  evaluate  their 
performance with other schools or for informing teaching. The establishment of the ENGS will improve 
the potential for schools to use the data, but capacity building at the school level would help ensure the 
EMIS is fully used; the school level is important because this is the point of contact with student learning. 
The  United  Kingdom  was  set  to  implement  a  similar  database,  enabling  all  education  stakeholders  to 
compare and analyze school performance (box 9). 
 
Box 9: An Example of Plans to Fully Integrate Education Databases and Effective Community Outreach 

 The United Kingdom’s Ministry of Education has set forth ambitious plans to improve data access, sharing, and 
 utilization. First, it aims to unite all eight existing databases to establish a single depository for all education 
 data. It aims to bring “together for the first time school spending data, school performance data, pupil cohort 
 data,  and  Ofsted  [Office  for  Standards  in  Education]  judgments  in  a  parent‐friendly  portal,  searchable  by 
 postcode” (U.K. Department for Education 2012, 22). It means to facilitate comparison between schools and 
 analysis  of  school  performance.  Even  though  the  project  has  been  postponed  and  is  not  yet  operational,  it 
 demonstrates the importance of data access, transparency, and utilization in advanced education systems. 
  
 Source: du Preez 2012. 

 
Opportunities  exist  for  new  mechanisms  to  leverage  the  quality  of  Romania’s  EMIS  that  may  help 
improve  student  educational  outcomes:  (1)  establishment  of  an  “early  warning  system”  to  identify 
children at risk, (2) improve tracking of disadvantaged groups including Roma, (3) longitudinal tracking, 
and  (4)  teacher  training  to  use  EMIS  data  to  improve  teaching.  These  four  mechanisms  build  on  the 
existing EMIS and present opportunity to improve learning outcomes of students using an EMIS. 
 
The  establishment  of  an  “early  warning  system”  to  identify  children  at  risk  of  dropping  out  or  poor 
achievement should be explored. The SIIIR tracks students and their performance across time. Given the 
rich data collected by the SIIIR, an early warning system to help identify and predict future problems in 
the performance of schools, students, and teachers would help policy makers intervene earlier and more 
effectively. An important factor is academic indexing for students at risk. The academic indexing system 
in Maryland, U.S.A., is an excellent example of how early warning signs are identified and communicated 
to teachers, who then have the ability to intervene early to prevent students from dropping out or failing 
courses. 
 
EMIS has the potential to track outcomes of disadvantaged groups including Roma to help improve their 
education  outcomes.  Currently,  SIIIR  does  not  collect  specific  data  on  Roma,  but  given  their  specific 
challenges in the Romanian education system, such data are crucial. Data should be collected and utilized 
in  the  design  of  effective  education  policies  targeting  disadvantaged  social  groups.  These  will  address 
Roma‐specific issues to ensure improved learning outcomes and effective education. Other countries such 
as Australia face similar challenges and address these by putting a particular focus on marginalized groups 
(box 10). 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                             21 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

 
Box 10: Australia’s Commitment to Better Education Outcomes for Disadvantaged Groups 
    Because of various factors Australian indigenous groups face considerable education challenges compared to 
    other ethnic groups. This is why the Australian government has made education for indigenous Australians one 
    of its priorities. In the “Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians,” one of the key policy 
    documents  defining  the  legal  framework  for  Australian  education,  one  of  the  seven  commitments  targets 
    improving educational outcomes for indigenous youth and disadvantaged young Australians, especially those 
    from low socioeconomic backgrounds. The Australian government aims to narrow the gap for young indigenous 
    Australians  by  providing  targeted  support  and  focusing  on  school  improvements  in  low  socioeconomic 
    communities. In the process the Australian government aims to collect and utilize data to ensure the bettering 
    of education outcomes for disadvantaged social groups. 
     
    Source: MCEETYA 2008. 

 
The system would benefit from longitudinal tracking  Figure 8: Example of Longitudinal Tracking
of  students.  Longitudinal  tracking  of  students  allows 
for important policy conclusions, which can be utilized 
directly  to  improve  student  learning  outcomes. 
Longitudinal  tracking  in  combination  with  predictive 
analytical  tools  reaps  high  benefits  for  long‐term 
planning  and  education  policy  decisions.  The  tracking 
systems need to be directly incorporated into the EMIS 
structure  and  cover  students  throughout  their  entire 
academic  career.  The  system  is  already  linked  to  the 
tertiary education sector by sharing student data with 
universities. As SIIIR is already used as the main source 
of education data, it should be complemented with a 
longitudinal  student  tracking  system.  Florida,  U.S.A., 
has  implemented  a  successful  longitudinal  student  Source: Adapted from Florida Department of Education 2012. 
tracking  system  from  kindergarten  until  graduation  from  college,  which  may  serve  as  a  model  system 
(figure 8 and box 11). 
 
Box 11: Successful Longitudinal Tracking in Florida, U.S.A. 

    Florida, U.S.A., serves as an example on how to build a successful unique student ID (UID) system with a focus 
    on longitudinal student tracking. Every student is issued a unique tracking number, which is applied through 
    their  entire  academic  career,  including  tertiary  education,  within  the  state.  Florida  is  one  of  the  country’s 
    pioneers in collecting and tracking student‐level data with the oldest longitudinal data system in the country, 
    dating back to 1995. In 2014, the Florida Department of Education served nearly 2.7 million students, 4,200 
    public schools, 28 colleges, 192,000 teachers, 47,000 college professors and administrators, and 321,000 full‐
    time staff throughout the state. The UID system in Florida provides an example of a fully operational and utilized 
    longitudinal data system. In fact, Florida’s statewide longitudinal data system helped to institutionalize EMIS in 
    the education system, while cultivating a data‐driven culture. State educational accountability policies date back 
    nearly 50 years, positioning Florida at the forefront of efforts to track and learn from education data.   
     
    Source: McQuiggan and Sapp 2014. 
 
 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                  22 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Considerable potential exists to expand data utilization to the classroom with teacher training in data 
literacy. The Data Quality Campaign (DQC) in the United States has increasingly advocated including data 
literacy  in  teacher  training.  Teachers  not  only  provide  data,  which  enables  policy  makers  to  carry  out 
informed decisions, but they should also make use of data in the classrooms. The DQC views data literacy 
as an essential tool for teachers, who are entitled to data and should enjoy the needed infrastructure to 
use data on a daily basis in classroom instruction (DQC 2014). 
 
Following this logic, the Oregon DATA Project set out to train teachers on the value and use of data to 
enhance  classroom  practice  and  improve  student  learning,  by  giving  them  the  resources  to  collect, 
analyze, and use longitudinal data (DQC 2015). Data literacy training should be included in continuous 
training  and  professional  development  programs.  Teachers  are  often  seen  as  data  providers,  but  with 
appropriate  training  and  skills  they  can  also  become  data  users.  In  combination  with  early  warning 
systems and effective data access as well as utilization at the school level, excellent potential exists to 
improve learning outcomes. The Oregon, U.S.A., DATA Project has already demonstrated that data literacy 
training can change the way teachers value and use data. The Urban Teacher Residency United program 
has presented an example of how a teacher’s data literacy not only facilitates the teacher’s curriculum 
planning, but also directly benefits students (box 12).  
    Box 12: A Data‐Literate Teacher in Action 

     Urban  Teacher  Residency  United’s  video  A  Data  Literate  Teacher  profiles  Micah  O’Hare,  a  member  of  the 
     Memphis Teacher Residency program, as he uses data in the classroom. O’Hare explains that real‐time data at 
     the  daily  level,  weekly  level,  and  unit  level  are  all  critical  to  his  teaching  strategy.  With  this  insight  into  his 
     students’ progress he is able to customize his lessons. He explains that data allow him to be purposeful with his 
     time: “I know when I can release the majority of students to do something, and know that they can do it, and 
     during that time, who are the three students in the room that need me to stop by and give them a quick reminder 
     while I watch and make sure that they can do that skill.” O’Hare explains that he uses data through the lens of 
     growth toward something. In this way data are not a final compliance metric, but instead an active, real‐time 
     tool that puts information at his fingertips so he can more effectively meet the unique needs of each student. In 
     this way, he also uses data to empower individual students to take ownership of their progress: “I like to use the 
     data as a sales pitch. I use it to make success attainable for students.” Whether using data to track growth, top 
     scores, or personal best, data open up new access points to be successful and engage students on their learning 
     journey. 
      
     Source:  Urban Teacher Residency United 2014. 

 

Recommendation	2:	Building	Institutional	and	Staff	Capacity	
Institutional and staff capacity could be strengthened by (1) formalizing the regulatory structure of the 
SIIIR, (2) professional development and regularization of EMIS staff, and (3) adopting external quality 
assurance methods.  These three areas have emerged as important needs based on this review. 
 
Recently SIIIR has been institutionalized and has officially become the main education data system in 
Romania. A well‐defined EMIS policy should have clearly stated procedures and regulations for (a) central, 
local, and school reporting requirements, (b) defined responsibility and ownership of data, (c) allocation 
of  the  EMIS  budget,  (d)  data  collection  processes,  (e)  data  submission  requirements,  (f)  procurement 
guidelines if purchasing the software and hardware from external vendors, (g) technical specifications of 
the EMIS, (h) type of data collected, (i) data validation mechanisms (internal and external), (j) extent to 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                            23 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

which  data  should  be  utilized  by  stakeholders,  (m)  code  of  conduct  for  staff,  and  (n)  professional 
development activities. 
 
Updating the regulatory framework is needed to reflect the SIIIR as the replacement for the BDNE. The 
SIIIR has a clear workflow and architecture, covers a wide range of indicators, and provides public access 
to its data, but is not yet institutionalized through legal policies. Although SIIIR has effectively replaced 
the  BDNE,  which  was  the  official  education  database,  this  has  not  been  established  in  regulation.  The 
BDNE was legally established in 2006 by Ministerial Order 5760/2006, but although the SIIIR has replaced 
the BDNE in practice, it does not yet have a legal framework. 
 
Professional  development  plans  and  trainings  will  enable  EMIS  staff  and  education  stakeholders  to 
strengthen their analytical skills. No provision is made for EMIS staff professional development in the 
EMIS annual budget. Staff do not publish methodological papers or attend conferences, which limits their 
exposure to obtaining new analytical skills to keep the SIIIR up to date. Annual evaluations of EMIS staff 
as  stipulated  in  the  Labor  Code  are  important  and  should  be  continued.  Here  the  crucial  factor  is  the 
effective utilization of the evaluations to improve human resources within EMIS staff through targeted 
professional development plans. 
 
Strengthening data quality by instructing, training, and clearly defining indicators for data collectors is 
essential.  The  government  needs  to  clearly  define  each  indicator  in  accordance  with  international 
standards, so that staff can collect reliable and accurate data. If any indicators, such as dropout rates, are 
not  clearly defined,  this  dilutes  data  quality. Consequently, staff need  to be  made fully aware of each 
indicator and their definition. As the quality of source data builds the foundation for quality education 
statistics, training and instructing data collectors and data entry staff is essential. This is why instruction, 
training, and professional development mechanisms can be beneficial in improving data collection and, 
thus,  data  quality.  Training  should  aim  to  implement  international  best  practices  and  internalize 
standardized definitions of indicators. Special attention should be paid to rural areas, where data entry is 
often carried out by underqualified staff. 
 
Increasing  appeal  and  competitiveness  of  EMIS  positions  can  help  the  government  ensure  that 
specialized staff can be hired and retained. Qualified  human personnel are essential in any EMIS. On 
September 1,   2016, most EMIS staff left, which created a severe loss of human resources. In Romania, 
several  human  resource  issues  hinder  the  growth  and  effectiveness  of  the  system,  including  lack  of 
professional development of staff and certain specialized staff including statisticians, policy analysts, and 
communication experts. These positions are a crucial component in an advanced education data system. 
Currently regulation is needed to formally define these positions including their skill requirements and 
enable the MNESR to pay them competitively with the private sector. In general, the lack of appeal and 
(financial)  competitiveness  with  the  private  sector  is  a  factor  deterring  highly  qualified  staff  from 
accepting employment within the MNESR. 
 
Reliance  on  EU  project  funds  for  financing  specialized  staff  decreases  sustainability  of  the  EMIS. 
Currently, the EU funds specialized EMIS staff. However, overreliance on EU funding is not sustainable in 
the  long  term.  It  is  necessary  to  develop  stable  and  long‐term  positions  for  EMIS,  data  specialists, 
statisticians, and IT personnel within the Romanian MNESR to cement a well‐functioning EMIS.  
 
The  EMIS  should  include  clear  guidelines  of  ethical  standards  for  staff  to  ensure  data  integrity.  NIS 
adheres  to  the  principles  of  the  Code  of  Practice  of  European  Statistics,  adopted  by  the  European 
Statistical  System  Committee  (Eurostat  2017).  However,  ethical  standards  and  conflict‐of‐interest 



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                      24 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

guidelines  are  lacking,  which  may  limit  data  integrity,  as  well  as  a  lack  of  internal  or  external  quality 
reviews. Furthermore, the lack of publication of methodological papers hinders the integrity of the data. 
An established set of ethical guidelines is also lacking, which is needed for the professionalization of staff.  
 
The current EMIS may be expanded by providing deep‐reaching quality assurance measures. Quality 
assurance  could  be  strengthened  by  following  and  implementing  an  internationally  accepted  quality 
assurance management approach such as the International Organization for Standardization’s series ISO 
9000,  the  Education  Data  Quality  Assessment  Framework,  and  Utilization‐Focused  Evaluation.  To 
maintain quality, internal and external reviews are performed. Processes are in place that focus on data 
quality, collection monitoring, processing, and dissemination of education statistics as well as inclusion of 
data quality in statistical planning.  
                                    




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                          25 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Acknowledgments 
This report was prepared by SABER‐EMIS team members Husein Abdul‐Hamid (Task Team Leader) and 
Diana Mayrhofer in collaboration with the Country Project Team Leader, Mariana Doina Moarcas, and 
consultants Kevin Alan David Macdonald, Valentin Bucur, and Alina Sava. We also thank Dingyong Hou 
and Janssen Edelweiss Nunes Teixeira, both Senior Education Specialists, for their review and insights. The 
report benefited immensely from the guidance and support of the Ministry of National Education and 
Scientific Research and the School Inspectorates. Finally, the SABER‐EMIS team is especially grateful for 
the many parents, teachers, and principals who shared their time, feedback, and insights. Special thanks 
to colleagues providing support: Namrata Saraogi, Manar El‐Iriqsousi, and Cassia Miranda. 
 
 

Acronyms 
    BDNE         National Education Database 
    DQC          Data Quality Campaign 
    EMIS         Education Management Information Systems 
    ENGS         Electronic National Grade‐book System 
    EU           European Union 
    IT           Information Technology 
    MNESR        Ministry of National Education and Scientific Research 
    MoPF         Ministry of Public Finance 
    NIS          National Institute for Statistics 
    OECD         Organisation for Economic Co‐operation and Development 
    PISA         Programme for International Student Assessment 
    SABER        Systems Approach for Better Education Results 
    SIIIR        Integrated IT System of Romanian Education 
 
                                  




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                            26 
ROMANIA ǀ EMIS                                                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

References 
 
Abdul‐Hamid, Husein. 2014. “SABER EMIS Framework Paper.” World Bank, Washington, DC. 
Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority (ACARA). 2016. “MySchool.” ACARA, Sydney. 
    http://www.myschool.edu.au/.  
Bruns,  Barbara,  Deon  Filmer,  and  Harry  D.  Patrinos.  2011.  “Making  Schools  Work:  New  Evidence  on 
    Accountability Reforms.” World Bank Group, Washington, DC. 
Data Quality Campaign (DQC). 2014. “Teacher Data Literacy: It’s about Time.” DQC, Washington, DC. 
———. 2015. “EMIS in Different Country Contexts.” Paper presented by Paige Kowalski at the World Bank 
    Education Staff Development Program, February. Washington, DC. 
du Preez, Derek. 2012. “Department for Education Plans £31M Data Aggregation Project.” Computerworld 
    UK.  http://www.computerworlduk.com/news/public‐sector/3370673/department‐for‐education‐
    plans‐31m‐data‐aggregation‐project/. 
Education  Statistics  (EdStats).  2016.  “World  Bank  Education  Statistics—All  Indicators.”  World  Bank, 
    Washington                                                                                            DC. 
    http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=Education%20Statistics&preview=off.  
Eurostat.  “European  Statistics  Code  of  Practice.”  http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/quality/european‐
    statistics‐code‐of‐practice 
Howard  County.  2015.  “Integrated  Systems  for  HCPSS.”  Paper  presented  by  Grace  Chesney  and  Justin 
    Benedict to the World Bank, April. Washington, DC. 
International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  9000,  2016.  “ISO  9000  Quality  Management.” 
    http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards/management‐standards/iso_9000.htm. 
Maryland  State  Department  of  Education  (MSDE).  2012.  “School  Progress  Index.” 
    http://reportcard.msde.maryland.gov/Entity.aspx?WDATA=State. 
McQuiggan,  James  and  Armistead  Sapp.  2014.  Implement,  Improve  and  Expand  Your  Statewide 
    Longitudinal Data System: Creating a Culture of Data in Education. New York: Wiley.  
Ministerial Council on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs (MCEETYA). 2008. “Melbourne 
    Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians.” MCEETYA, Melbourne, Australia. 
United  Kingdom.  Department  for  Education.  2012.  “Department  for  Education  Departmental  Digital 
    Strategy.”          DFE‐30014‐2012.            Department           for       Education,         London. 
    https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/192204/dfe_depa
    rtmental_digital_strategy.pdf. 
Urban Teacher Residency United. 2014. “A Data Literate Teacher.” Video. https://vimeo.com/94399186.  
World  Bank.  2014.  “Project  Information  Document:  Concept  Stage”.  World  Bank,  Washington,  DC. 
    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/436801468092382153/pdf/PID‐Print‐P148585‐11‐18‐
    2014‐1416332567376.pdf 
___.  2015.  “Program  Appraisal  Document:  India—Enhancing  Teacher  Effectiveness  in  Bihar  Operation 
    Project.”                 World                     Bank,                Washington,                  DC. 
    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/184631468000251240/India‐Enhancing‐Teacher‐
    Effectiveness‐in‐Bihar‐Operation‐Project;jsessionid=cdCk62fl5npMvn7DapJx8N2a.  
———.  2016.  “World  Bank  Data  Romania.”  World  Bank,  Washington  DC. 
    http://data.worldbank.org/country/romania. 




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                              27 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 

Appendix A: Summary of Policy Lever Benchmarking  
              Policy goal                                 Policy lever                       Scorea                   Weight                  Benchmark 
                                          Legal framework                            2.81                  17%                        Established 
                                          Organizational structure and               2.67                  17%                        Established 
                                          institutionalized processes 
        Enabling environment              Human resources                            1.61                  17%                        Emerging 
                                          Infrastructural capacity                   2.81                  17%                        Established 
                                          Budget                                     2.00                  17%                        Emerging 
                                          Data‐driven culture                        2.29                  15%                        Established 
                                          Data architecture                          3.76                  20%                        Advanced 
                                          Data coverage                              1.74                  30%                        Emerging 
          System soundness                Data analytics                             1.00                  15%                        Emerging 
                                          Dynamic system                             2.67                  15%                        Established 
                                          Serviceability                             2.97                  20%                        Established 
                                          Methodological soundness                   2.75                  25%                        Established 
                                          Accuracy and reliability                   2.64                  25%                        Established 
             Quality data 
                                          Integrity                                  2.06                  25%                        Established 
                                          Periodicity and timeliness                 2.33                  25%                        Established 
                                          Openness                                   0.87                  15%                        Latent 
                                          Operational use                            1.48                  50%                        Emerging 
    Utilization in decision making 
                                          Accessibility                              2.93                  20%                        Established 
                                          Effectiveness in disseminating findings    0.80                  15%                        Latent 
a. 0–0.99 = Latent; 1–1.9 = Emerging; 2–2.9 = Established; 3–4 = Advanced. 
                                    




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                              28 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
Appendix B: Extended Rubric, Romania Scores Highlighted in Red 
                                                                                                                                               Scoring 
                                                                              Description of 
        Policy levers                        Indicators 
                                                                              best practices               Latent                 Emerging             Established             Advanced 

                                                                             The system contains 
                                                                             crucial components 
                                                                             of a comprehensive 
                                                                                                                            The system 
                                                                             enabling               The system lacks                               The system contains 
                                                                                                                            contains basic                                The system contains 
                                                                             environment, which     major components of                            most components of 
                                                                                                                            components of a                               crucial components of 
 POLICY AREA 1: ENABLING ENVIRONMENT                                         addresses related      a comprehensive                                a comprehensive 
                                                                                                                            comprehensive                                 a comprehensive 
                                                                             policy elements and    enabling                                       enabling 
                                                                                                                            enabling                                      enabling environment 
                                                                             enables the            environment                                    environment 
                                                                                                                            environment
                                                                             functioning of an 
                                                                             effective and 
                                                                             dynamic system
                              Institutionalization of system: the EMIS 
                              is institutionalized as an integral part of 
                              the education system and the 
                              government
                              Responsibility: responsibility for 
                              collecting, processing, and 
                              disseminating education statistics is 
                              given to a clearly designated institution                                                     Basic components 
                              or agency                                      An existing legal                              of a legal                                    There is an existing 
                                                                                                                                                   Most elements of a 
                              Dynamic framework: the legal                   framework supports     A legal framework is    framework or                                  legal framework to 
 1.1      Legal framework                                                                                                                          legal framework are 
                              framework is dynamic and elastic so            a fully functioning    not in place            informal                                      support a fully 
                                                                                                                                                   in place 
                              that it can adapt to advancements in           EMIS                                           mechanisms are in                             functioning EMIS
                              technology                                                                                    place 
                              Data supply: the legal framework 
                              mandates that schools participate in 
                              the EMIS by providing education data
                              Comprehensive, quality data: the 
                              requirement for comprehensive, 
                              quality data is clearly specified in the 
                              EMIS legal framework 




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                            29 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                               Scoring 
                                                                              Description of 
        Policy levers                        Indicators 
                                                                              best practices            Latent                     Emerging             Established                 Advanced 


                               Data sharing and coordination: the 
                               legal framework allows for adequate 
                               data sharing and coordination between 
                               the Ministry of Education and agencies 
                               and/or institutions that require 
                               education data
                               Utilization: the legal framework 
                               emphasizes data‐driven education 
                                                                                                                                                                                           
                               policy 

                               Budget: the education system budget 
                               includes a line item for the EMIS

                               Confidentiality: the legal framework 
                               guarantees that respondents’ data are 
                               confidential and used for the sole 
                               purpose of statistics
                                                                          The system is 
                                                                                                                                                    The institutional 
                                                                          institutionalized                                The institutional                                   The system is 
                                                                                                 The system is not                                  structure of the 
                                                                          within the                                       structure of the                                    institutionalized 
                                                                                                 specified in policies,                             system is defined 
                                                                          government, has                                  system is not                                       within the 
          Organizational                                                                         and what exists does                               within the 
                                                                          well‐defined                                     clearly specified in                                government, has well‐
          structure and        Organizational structure and                                      not have well‐defined                              government and it 
 1.2                                                                      organizational                                   policies, it has some                               defined organizational 
          institutionalized    institutionalized processes                                       organizational                                     has defined 
                                                                          processes, and has                               organizational                                      processes, and has 
          processes                                                                              processes; the EMIS                                organizational 
                                                                          several                                          processes, and its                                  several functionalities 
                                                                                                 has limited                                        processes, but its 
                                                                          functionalities                                  functionalities are                                 beyond statistical 
                                                                                                 functionalities                                    functionalities are 
                                                                          beyond statistical                               limited                                             reporting
                                                                                                                                                    limited
                                                                          reporting
                                                                          Qualified staff        Minimum standards         Some staff are 
                                                                                                                                                    The majority of staff      All staff are qualified 
                                                                          operate the system,    of qualification are      qualified to operate 
                                                                                                                                                    are qualified to           to operate the system, 
                               Personnel: the core tasks of the EMIS      and opportunities      not met for the           the system, and 
                                                                                                                                                    operate the system,        and well‐established 
 1.3      Human resources      are identified, and the EMIS is staffed    are available to       majority of staff that    limited 
                                                                                                                                                    and frequent               opportunities are 
                               with qualified people                      improve their          operate the system,       opportunities are 
                                                                                                                                                    opportunities are          constantly available to 
                                                                          performance and        and opportunities are     available to 
                                                                                                                                                    available to improve       improve staff 
                                                                          retention              not available to          improve staff 




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                 30 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                         Scoring 
                                                                        Description of 
        Policy levers                     Indicators 
                                                                        best practices                 Latent               Emerging             Established               Advanced 

                                                                                                improve their         performance and        staff performance        performance and 
                                                                                                performance and       retention              and retention            retention
                             Professional development: professional                             retention
                             training is available for EMIS staff 



                             Data collection: tools for data 
                             collection are available
                             Database(s): databases exist under the    The system has a 
                                                                                                                                                                      The system has a well‐
                             umbrella of the data warehouse and        well‐defined 
                                                                                                                                             The system has an        defined infrastructure 
                             have both hardware and software           infrastructure to 
                                                                                                                                             infrastructure that      to fully perform its 
                             means                                     perform data             The system lacks a    The system has a 
          Infrastructural                                                                                                                    allows it to perform     data collection and 
 1.4                         Data management system: a system is       collection and           well‐defined          basic or incomplete 
          capacity                                                                                                                           some of its functions    management, and 
                             in place that manages data collection,    management, and          infrastructure        infrastructure 
                                                                                                                                             in an integral           dissemination 
                             processing, and reporting                 dissemination 
                                                                                                                                             manner                   functions in an 
                                                                       functions in an 
                             Data dissemination: data dissemination                                                                                                   integral manner
                                                                       integral manner
                             tools are available and maintained by 
                             the agency producing education 
                             statistics
                             Personnel and professional 
                             development: the EMIS budget 
                             contains a specific budget for EMIS 
                             personnel and their professional 
                             development                                                                                                     The system budget 
                                                                                                                                             contains the majority 
                             Maintenance: the EMIS budget              The system budget is                                                                           The system budget is 
                                                                                                                                             of required 
                             contains a specific budget for system     comprehensive,           The system suffers    The system has a                                comprehensive, 
                                                                                                                                             categories to ensure 
 1.5      Budget             maintenance and recurrent costs           ensuring that the        from serious          basic or incomplete                             ensuring that the 
                                                                                                                                             that most parts of 
                                                                       system is sustainable    budgetary issues      budget                                          system is sustainable 
                                                                                                                                             the system are 
                             Reporting: the EMIS budget contains a     and efficient                                                                                  and efficient
                                                                                                                                             sustainable and 
                             specific budget for reporting costs                                                                             efficient

                             Physical infrastructure: the EMIS 
                             budget contains a specific budget for 
                             physical infrastructure costs



 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                       31 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                               Scoring 
                                                                         Description of 
        Policy levers                      Indicators 
                                                                         best practices                 Latent                    Emerging              Established                 Advanced 


                              Efficient use of resources: processes 
                              and procedures are in place to ensure 
                              that resources are used efficiently
                                                                                                                                                                               A data‐driven culture 
                                                                        A data‐driven culture                                                                                  exists that prioritizes 
                                                                                                                           The system has a 
                                                                        prioritizes data as a    The system suffers                                                            data management and 
                                                                                                                           data‐driven culture      A data‐driven culture 
                                                                        fundamental              because there is not a                                                        utilization within and 
                                                                                                                           that demonstrates        exists that prioritizes 
                                                                        element of               data‐driven culture                                                           beyond the education 
          Data‐driven                                                                                                      a basic appreciation     data management 
                              Data‐driven culture                       operations and           that prioritizes data                                                         system, and evidence 
          culture                                                                                                          of data and interest     and utilization within 
                                                                        decision making,         management and                                                                of that culture is 
                                                                                                                           in developing            and beyond the 
                                                                        both inside and          data utilization in                                                           present in daily 
                                                                                                                           better data              education system 
                                                                        outside of the           decision making                                                               interaction and 
                                                                                                                           utilization practices 
                                                                        education system                                                                                       decision making at all 
                                                                                                                                                                               levels 
                                                                                                                           The system has           The system has 
                                                                        The processes and                                                                                      The processes and 
                                                                                                                           basic processes          some processes and 
                                                                        structure of the                                                                                       structure of the 
                                                                                                 The system lacks          and a structure          a structure, but they 
                                                                        EMIS are sound and                                                                                     system are sound and 
 POLICY AREA 2: SYSTEM SOUNDNESS                                                                 processes and             that do not support      do not fully support 
                                                                        support the                                                                                            support the 
                                                                                                 structure                 the components of        the components of 
                                                                        components of an                                                                                       components of an 
                                                                                                                           an integrated            an integrated 
                                                                        integrated system                                                                                      integrated system 
                                                                                                                           system                   system
                                                                                                                                                    The system’s data 
                                                                                                                           The system’s data        structure has most 
                                                                        The data 
                                                                                                 The system’s data         architecture             elements of the data       The data architecture 
                                                                        architecture is well 
                                                                                                 structure does not        includes some            architecture;              is well defined to 
 2.1      Data architecture   Data architecture                         defined to ensure 
                                                                                                 have a well‐defined       components;              however, it has some       ensure full system 
                                                                        full system 
                                                                                                 data architecture         however, it is           deficiencies that          functionality 
                                                                        functionality 
                                                                                                                           incomplete               affect the system’s 
                                                                                                                                                    functionality
                                                                        The data in the 
                              Administrative data: the EMIS contains 
                                                                        system are 
                              administrative data                                                The data in the 
                                                                        comprehensive and                                  The data in the          The data in the            The data in the system 
                                                                                                 system are far from 
                              Financial data: the EMIS contains         cover administrative,                              system include           system include most        are comprehensive 
 2.2      Data coverage                                                                          being comprehensive, 
                              financial data                            financial, human                                   some of the data         but not all of the         and cover all data 
                                                                                                 and coverage is 
                                                                        resources, and                                     areas                    data areas                 areas
                              Human resources data: the EMIS                                     limited
                                                                        learning outcomes 
                              contains human resources data             data


 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                 32 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                                  Scoring 
                                                                           Description of 
        Policy levers                     Indicators 
                                                                           best practices                 Latent                    Emerging              Established               Advanced 


                            Learning outcomes data: the EMIS 
                            contains learning outcomes data
                                                                                                                             Basic tools and 
                                                                                                                             processes are 
                                                                         Tools and processes                                 available, but the 
                                                                                                                                                      Tools and processes      Tools and processes 
                                                                         are available to                                    system is not 
                                                                                                   Tools and processes                                are available;           are available to 
                                                                         perform data                                        capable of 
 2.3      Data analytics    Data analytics                                                         are used to perform                                however, data            perform data analytics 
                                                                         analytics at different                              conducting 
                                                                                                   limited tabulations                                analytics are not        at different levels on a 
                                                                         levels on a regular                                 advanced analytical 
                                                                                                                                                      performed regularly      regular basis
                                                                         basis                                               steps (e.g., 
                                                                                                                             predictive models, 
                                                                                                                             projections)
                            Quality assurance measures: the 
                            system is dynamic and maintains                                                                  The system in place 
                            quality assurance measures                                             The system in place is 
                                                                         The system in place                                 is not easily                                     The system in place is 
                                                                                                   not easily adaptable 
                            Data requirements and considerations:        is elastic and easily                               adaptable and            The system in place      elastic and easily 
                                                                                                   to changes 
                            mechanisms exist for addressing new          adaptable to allow                                  requires significant     is easily adaptable,     adaptable to allow for 
 2.4      Dynamic system                                                                           /advancements in 
                            and emerging data requirements               for changes                                         time and resources       but it remains           changes/ 
                                                                                                   data needs, as no 
                             System adaptability: the EMIS is elastic    /advancements in                                    to accommodate           reasonably complex       advancements in data 
                                                                                                   quality assurance 
                             and easily adaptable to allow for           data needs                                          changes and/or                                    needs
                                                                                                   standards are used
                             changes and/or advancements in data                                                             advancements
                             needs 
                            Validity across data sources:                Services provided by                                                                                  Services provided by 
                            information brought together from            the system are valid                                                                                  the system are valid 
                            different data and/or statistical            across data sources,                                                                                  across data sources, 
                            frameworks in the EMIS is placed             integrate non‐                                                                                        integrate non‐
                            within the data warehouse using              education databases                                                                                   education databases 
                            structural and consistency measures          into the EMIS, and        Serious issues exist      Inconsistencies          The data are             into the EMIS, and 
                            Integration of noneducation databases        archive data at the       related to data           exist related to         consistent and valid;    archive data at the 
 2.5      Serviceability 
                            into the EMIS: data from sources             service of EMIS           validity and              data validity and        however, some            service of EMIS clients 
                            collected by agencies outside the EMIS       clients by ensuring       consistency               consistency              concerns still exist     by ensuring the 
                            are integrated into the EMIS data            the relevance,                                                                                        relevance, 
                            warehouse                                    consistency,                                                                                          consistency, 
                            Archiving data: multiple years of data       usefulness, and                                                                                       usefulness, and 
                            are archived, including source data,         timeliness of its                                                                                     timeliness of its 
                            metadata, and statistical results            statistics                                                                                            statistics


 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                 33 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                              Scoring 
                                                                         Description of 
        Policy levers                     Indicators 
                                                                         best practices                  Latent                   Emerging             Established                Advanced 


                            Services to EMIS clients: services 
                            provided by the system to EMIS clients 
                            include ensuring the relevance, 
                            consistency, usefulness, and timeliness 
                            of its statistics
                                                                                                                                                   The system has most 
                                                                                                                                                   mechanisms in place 
                                                                        The system has the                                                         needed to collect,        The system has the 
                                                                        mechanisms                                          The system has         save, and produce         required mechanisms 
                                                                        required to collect,                                basic mechanisms       timely, high‐quality      in place to collect, 
                                                                                                  The system lacks 
                                                                        save, produce, and                                  to collect, save,      information for use       save, produce, and 
                                                                                                  mechanisms to 
                                                                        utilize information,                                and produce            in decision making;       utilize information, 
                                                                                                  collect, save, or 
 POLICY AREA 3: QUALITY DATA                                            which ensures                                       timely, quality        however, some             which ensures 
                                                                                                  produce timely, high‐
                                                                        accuracy, security,                                 information;           additional measures       accuracy, security, 
                                                                                                  quality information 
                                                                        and timely, high‐                                   however, its           are needed to             and timely, high‐
                                                                                                  for decision making 
                                                                        quality information                                 accuracy might be      ensure accuracy,          quality information 
                                                                        for use in decision                                 questionable           security, and/ or         for use in decision 
                                                                        making                                                                     timely information        making 
                                                                                                                                                   that can be used for 
                                                                                                                                                   decision making
                            Concepts and definitions: data fields, 
                            records, concepts, indicators, and 
                            metadata are defined and documented                                                             The methodological 
                            in official operations manuals along        The methodological                                                         The methodological 
                                                                                                  The methodological        basis for producing                              The methodological 
                            with other national datasets and            basis for producing                                                        basis for producing 
                                                                                                  basis for producing       educational                                      basis for producing 
                            endorsed by the government                  educational statistics                                                     educational statistics 
                                                                                                  educational statistics    statistics follows                               educational statistics 
                                                                        from raw data                                                              follows most 
          Methodological    Classification: defined education                                     does not follow           the basics of                                    from raw data follows 
 3.1                                                                    follows                                                                    required 
          soundness         system classifications are based on                                   internationally           internationally                                  internationally 
                                                                        internationally                                                            internationally 
                            technical guidelines and manuals                                      accepted standards,       accepted                                         accepted standards, 
                                                                        accepted standards,                                                        accepted standards, 
                            Scope: the scope of education statistics                              guidelines, or good       standards,                                       guidelines, and good 
                                                                        guidelines, and good                                                       guidelines, and good 
                            is broader than and not limited to a                                  practices                 guidelines, and                                  practices
                                                                        practices                                                                  practices
                            small number of indicators (e.g.,                                                               good practices
                            measurements of enrollment, class 
                            size, and completion)




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                              34 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                                   Scoring 
                                                                            Description of 
        Policy levers                      Indicators 
                                                                            best practices                  Latent                    Emerging                 Established                 Advanced 


                             Basis for recording: data‐recording 
                             systems follow internationally accepted 
                             standards, guidelines, and good 
                             practices
                             Source data: available source data 
                             provide an adequate basis for 
                             compiling statistics                                                                              Source data and             Source data and 
                                                                           Source data and 
                                                                                                                               statistical                 statistical techniques     Source data and 
                             Validation of source data: source data        statistical techniques 
                                                                                                     Source data and           techniques have             follow most required       statistical techniques 
                             are consistent with the definition,           are sound and 
          Accuracy and                                                                               statistical techniques    basic soundness             elements to be             are sound and 
 3.2                         scope, and classification as well as time     reliable, and 
          reliability                                                                                lack soundness and        and reliability, but        sound and reliable,        reliable, and statistical 
                             of recording, reference periods, and          statistical outputs 
                                                                                                     reliability               statistical outputs         but statistical            outputs sufficiently 
                             valuation of education statistics             sufficiently portray 
                                                                                                                               do not portray              outputs do not             portray reality
                             Statistical techniques: statistical           reality
                                                                                                                               reality                     portray reality
                             techniques are used to calculate 
                             accurate rates and derived indicators 
                             Professionalism: EMIS staff exercise 
                             their profession with technical                                                                   Education statistics 
                                                                                                                                                           Education statistics 
                             independence and without outside                                                                  contained within                                       Education statistics 
                                                                                                                                                           contained within the 
                             interference that could result in the                                                             the system are                                         contained within the 
                                                                                                   Education statistics                                    system are mostly 
                             violation of the public trust in EMIS         Education statistics                                guided by limited                                      system are guided by 
                                                                                                   contained within the                                    guided by principles 
                             statistics and the EMIS itself                contained within the                                principles of                                          all three principles of 
 3.3      Integrity                                                                                system are not                                          of integrity (two of 
                                                                           system are guided by                                integrity (one of the                                  integrity: 
                             Transparency: statistical policies and                                guided by principles                                    the three principles 
                                                                           principles of integrity                             three principles of                                    professionalism, 
                             practices are transparent                                             of integrity                                            of professionalism, 
                                                                                                                               professionalism,                                       transparency, and 
                             Ethical standards: policies and practices                                                                                     transparency, and 
                                                                                                                               transparency, and                                      ethical standards 
                             in education statistics are guided by                                                                                         ethical standards)
                                                                                                                               ethical standards) 
                             ethical standards
                             Periodicity: the production of reports 
                             and other outputs from the data                                         The system produces       The system                  The system produces 
                                                                           The system produces                                                                                        The system produces 
                             warehouse occur in accordance with                                      data and statistics       produces some               most data and 
          Periodicity and                                                  data and statistics                                                                                        all data and statistics 
 3.4                         cycles in the education system                                          neither periodically      data and statistics         statistics periodically 
          timeliness                                                       periodically in a                                                                                          periodically and in a 
                             Timeliness: final statistics and financial                              nor in a timely           periodically and in a       and in a timely 
                                                                           timely manner                                                                                              timely manner
                             statistics are both disseminated in a                                   manner                    timely manner               manner
                             timely manner




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                         35 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                                Scoring 
                                                                          Description of 
        Policy levers                      Indicators 
                                                                          best practices                 Latent                     Emerging                Established                 Advanced 

                                                                         The system is wholly     There are no signs         The system is used         The system is used         The system is wholly 
                                                                         utilized by different    that the EMIS is           by some education          by most education          utilized by different 
                                                                         users for decision       utilized in decision       stakeholders, but          stakeholders but is        users for decision 
 POLICY AREA 4: UTILIZATION FOR DECISION MAKING 
                                                                         making at different      making by the              not for major              not fully operational      making at different 
                                                                         levels of the            majority of education      policy decision            in governmental            levels of the 
                                                                         education system         stakeholders               making                     decision making            education system
                             EMIS stakeholders: EMIS primary 
                             stakeholders are identified and use the 
                             system in accordance with the legal                                                                                        The system is open 
                                                                         The system is open       The system lacks           The system is open 
                             framework                                                                                                                  to the majority of         The system is open to 
                                                                         to education             openness to                to some education 
                                                                                                                                                        education                  all education 
                             User awareness: current and potential       stakeholders in          education                  stakeholders in 
                                                                                                                                                        stakeholders in            stakeholders in terms 
 4.1      Openness           EMIS users are aware of the EMIS and        terms of their           stakeholders in terms      terms of their 
                                                                                                                                                        terms of their             of their awareness 
                             its outputs                                 awareness and            of their awareness         awareness and 
                                                                                                                                                        awareness and              and capacity to utilize 
                             User capacity: EMIS users have the          capacity to utilize      and capacity to utilize    capacity to utilize 
                                                                                                                                                        capacity to utilize the    the system
                             skills to interpret, manipulate, and        the system               the system                 the system
                                                                                                                                                        system
                             utilize the data produced by the system 
                             to ultimately disseminate findings
                             Utilization in evaluation: data produced 
                             by the EMIS are used to assess the 
                             education system
                             Utilization in governance: data 
                             produced by the EMIS are used for 
                             governance purposes                                                                                                        Data produced by 
                                                                         Data produced by         Data produced by the       Data produced by                                      Data produced by the 
                             Utilization by schools: data produced                                                                                      the system are used 
                                                                         the system are used      system are not used        the system are                                        system are used in 
                             by the EMIS are used by schools                                                                                            in practice by the 
 4.2      Operational use                                                in practice by the       in practice by             used in practice by                                   practice by the main 
                                                                                                                                                        majority of 
                             Utilization by clients: data produced by    main education           education                  some education                                        education 
                                                                                                                                                        education 
                             the EMIS are used by clients (including     stakeholders             stakeholders               stakeholders                                          stakeholders
                                                                                                                                                        stakeholders
                             parents, communities, and other 
                             actors) 
                             Utilization by government: the system 
                             is able to produce summative 
                             indicators (derived variables) to 
                             monitor education system 
                             Understandable data: data are               Education statistics     The system suffers         The system has             The system has             Education statistics 
 4.3      Accessibility      presented in an easily digestible           are presented in an      from serious               major accessibility        minor accessibility        are presented in an 
                             manner                                      understandable           accessibility issues       issues                     issues                     understandable 

 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                     36 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                                                                                   Scoring 
                                                                              Description of 
           Policy levers                       Indicators 
                                                                              best practices                 Latent                  Emerging              Established               Advanced 


                                 Widely disseminated data: education         manner and are                                                                                     manner and are 
                                 statistics are disseminated beyond the      widely disseminated                                                                                widely disseminated 
                                 Ministry of Education and/or the            using clear platforms                                                                              using a clear platform 
                                 education statistics–producing agency       for utilization,                                                                                   for utilization, 
                                 to other EMIS stakeholders                  complemented by                                                                                    complemented by 
                                 Platforms for utilization: platforms are    user support                                                                                       user support
                                 standardized across the EMIS and are 
                                 customizable to user needs
                                 User support: assistance is provided to 
                                 EMIS users upon request to help them 
                                 access the data
                                 Dissemination strategy: national                                                                                      A dissemination plan 
                                 governments have an information                                                                                       has been 
                                 dissemination strategy in place             Dissemination of                                                          implemented; 
                                                                                                                               Dissemination is                                 The dissemination of 
             Effectiveness in                                                education statistics     Dissemination is                                 however, room 
                                                                                                                               reasonably                                       education statistics via 
    4.4      disseminating                                                   via the EMIS is          neither strategic nor                            exists for 
                                 Dissemination effectiveness:                                                                  strategic, but                                   the EMIS is strategic 
             findings                                                        strategic and            effective                                        improvement (for 
                                 dissemination of EMIS statistics is                                                           ineffective                                      and effective
                                                                             effective                                                                 full effectiveness in 
                                 effective                                                                                                             relation to strategic 
                                                                                                                                                       engagement)
 
 
 




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                                  37 
SURINAME ǀ EMIS                                                                                                                                               SABER 
COUNTRY REPORT |2016 
 
                                                                                    www.worldbank.org/education/saber 
 




     The  Systems  Approach  for  Better  Education  Results  (SABER)  initiative 
     collects data on the policies and institutions of education systems around 
     the  world  and  benchmarks  them  against  practices  associated  with 
     student  learning.  SABER  aims  to  give  all  parties  with  a  stake  in 
     educational  results—from  students,  administrators,  teachers,  and 
     parents to policy makers and business people—an accessible, detailed, 
     objective snapshot of how well the policies of their country’s education 
     system are oriented toward ensuring that all children and youth learn.  
      
     This  report  focuses  specifically  on  policies  in  the  area  of  Education 
     Management Information Systems. 




       This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions 
       expressed  in  this  work  do  not  necessarily  reflect  the  views  of  The  World  Bank,  its  Board  of  Executive  Directors,  or  the 
       governments  they  represent.  The  World  Bank  does  not  guarantee  the  accuracy  of  the  data  included  in  this  work.  The 
       boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the 
       part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.  




 
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                              38 
