          JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


 Jordan
                                                                                                        SABER Country Report
 STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                    2014



           Key Policy Areas for Student Assessment                                                          Status
           1. Classroom Assessment
               Several system-level documents provide guidelines for carrying out classroom
               assessment activities. Additionally, there are system-wide resources and materials
               available to teachers to support them in conducting classroom assessment activities,
               including in-service training offered by supervisors in directorates of education.
               Nonetheless, classroom assessment practices by teachers continue to be weak, and
               there is a recognized need to implement more systematic mechanisms to monitor and
               ensure their quality.

           2. Examinations
               The General Secondary Examination (Tawjihi) has been administered to grade 12
               students since 1962. The main purposes of the examination are to certify student
               completion of secondary school and determine selection to higher-education
               institutions. Regular funding for the examination is provided by the government and
               through student fees, and covers all core activities. The Department of Examinations
               and Tests in the Ministry of Education is responsible for running the Tawjihi and has all
               of the required facilities to carry out the examination. An issue that needs to be
               addressed is increasing the number of options for students who do not perform well on
               the examination so that they can stay engaged in education or training and continue to
               develop their potential and ability to contribute to society.

           3. National Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA)
               There are two important NLSA programs in Jordan. The National Test for Quality
               Control of Education was administered for the first time in 2004. Since then, it has been
               administered every year in math, science, Arabic language, and English language to all
               students in (depending on the year) grade 4, 8, or 10. The National Assessment for the
               Knowledge Economy (NAfKE), has been administered three times since 2006 to
               students in grades 5, 9, and 11 in math, science, and literacy. Regular funding for
               NLSA activities is provided by the government (there is also some external funding for
               NAfKE) and covers all core activities. However, the funding does not cover long- or
               medium-term planning of program milestones, research and development activities, or
               staff training. With regard to the National Test in particular, more staff are needed to
               help carry out the assessment activities.

           4. International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA)
               In the last ten years, Jordan has participated in TIMSS (2003, 2007, 2011) and PISA
               (2006, 2009, 2012) and taken concrete steps to participate in TIMSS 2015 and PISA
               2015. The ILSA office is adequately staffed to carry out international assessments
               effectively, and opportunities to learn about ILSAs, such as workshops and online
               courses, are widely available. At the same time, funding for ILSA activity in Jordan
               needs to be stabilized and institutionalized, including moving away from a reliance on
               external funding and ensuring that funding is sufficient to cover all core activities.

Data collection on Jordan's assessment system was completed in 2014. Consequently, the findings in this report reflect the
status of the country’s assessment system at that time.




                                                                                                               THE WORLD BANK
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Introduction
Jordan has focused on increasing student learning outcomes by improving the quality of education in the country. An
effective student assessment system is an important component to improving education quality and learning outcomes
as it provides the necessary information to meet stakeholders’ decision-making needs. In order to gain a better
understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of its existing assessment system, Jordan decided to benchmark this
system using standardized tools developed under the World Bank’s Systems Approach for Better Education Results
(SABER) program. SABER is an evidence-based program to help countries systematically examine and strengthen the
performance of different aspects of their education systems.


What Is SABER-Student Assessment?

SABER-Student Assessment is a component of the SABER program that focuses specifically on benchmarking student
assessment policies and systems. The goal of SABER-Student Assessment is to promote stronger assessment systems that
contribute to improved education quality and learning for all.


National governments and international agencies are increasingly recognizing the key role that assessment of student
learning plays in an effective education system. The importance of assessment is linked to its role in:
(i)     providing information on levels of student learning and achievement in the system;
(ii)    monitoring trends in education quality over time;
(iii)   supporting educators and students with real-time information to improve teaching and learning; and
(iv)    holding stakeholders accountable for results.

SABER-Student Assessment methodology

The SABER-Student Assessment framework is built on the available evidence base for what an effective assessment system
looks like. The framework provides guidance on how countries can build more effective student assessment systems. The
framework is structured around two main dimensions of assessment systems: the types/purposes of assessment activities
and the quality of those activities.

Assessment Types and Purposes

Assessment systems tend to be comprised of three main types of assessment activities, each of which serves a different
purpose and addresses different information needs. These three main types are: classroom assessment, examinations,
and large-scale, system level assessments.

Classroom assessment provides real-time information to support ongoing teaching and learning in individual classrooms.
Classroom assessments use a variety of formats, including observation, questioning, and paper-and-pencil tests, to
evaluate student learning, generally on a daily basis.

Examinations provide a basis for selecting or certifying students as they move from one level of the education system to
the next (or into the workforce). All eligible students are tested on an annual basis (or more often if the system allows for
repeat testing). Examinations cover the main subject areas in the curriculum and usually involve essays and multiple-
choice questions.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                       59
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Large-scale, system-level assessments provide feedback on the overall performance of the education system at particular
grades or age levels. These assessments typically cover a few subjects on a regular basis (such as every 3 to 5 years), are
often sample based, and use multiple-choice and short-answer formats. They may be national or international in scope.


Appendix 1 summarizes the key features of these main types of assessment activities.


Quality Drivers of an Assessment System

The key considerations when evaluating a student assessment system are the individual and combined quality of
assessment activities in terms of the adequacy of the information generated to support decision making. There are three
main drivers of information quality in an assessment system: enabling context, system alignment, and assessment quality.


Enabling context refers to the broader context in which the assessment activity takes place and the extent to which that
context is conducive to, or supportive of, the assessment. It covers such issues as the legislative or policy framework for
assessment activities; institutional and organizational structures for designing, carrying out, or using results from the
assessment; the availability of sufficient and stable sources of funding; and the presence of trained assessment staff.


System alignment refers to the extent to which the assessment is aligned with the rest of the education system. This
includes the degree of congruence between assessment activities and system learning goals, standards, curriculum, and
pre- and in-service teacher training.


Assessment quality refers to the psychometric quality of the instruments, processes, and procedures for the assessment
activity. It covers such issues as design and implementation of assessment activities, analysis and interpretation of student
responses to those activities, and the appropriateness of how assessment results are reported and used.


Crossing the quality drivers with the different assessment types/purposes provides the framework and broad indicator
areas shown in Table 1. This framework is a starting point for identifying indicators that can be used to review assessment
systems and plan for their improvement.


Table 1: Framework for Building an Effective Assessment System, with Indicator Areas




                                                                                                                           3
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


The indicators are identified based on a combination of criteria, including:

x   professional standards for assessment;
x   empirical research on the characteristics of effective assessment systems, including analysis of the characteristics that
    differentiate between the assessment systems of low- and high-performing nations; and
x   theory — that is, general consensus among experts that it contributes to effective assessment.


Levels of Development


The World Bank has developed a set of standardized questionnaires and rubrics for collecting and evaluating data on the
three assessment types and related quality drivers.


The questionnaires are used to collect data on the characteristics of the assessment system in a particular country. The
information from the questionnaires is then applied to the rubrics in order to judge the development level of the country’s
assessment system in different areas.


The basic structure of the rubrics for evaluating data collected using the standardized questionnaires is summarized in
Appendix 2. The goal of the rubrics is to provide a country with some sense of the development level of its assessment
activities compared to best or recommended practice in each area. For each indicator, the rubric displays four
development levels—Latent, Emerging, Established, and Advanced. These levels are artificially constructed categories
chosen to represent key stages on the underlying continuum for each indicator. Each level is accompanied by a description
of what performance on the indicator looks like at that level.

x   Latent is the lowest level of performance; it represents absence of the desired attribute.
x   Emerging is the next level; it represents partial presence of the attribute.
x   Established represents the acceptable minimum standard.
x   Advanced represents the ideal or current best practice.

A summary of the development levels for each assessment type is presented in Appendix 3.


In reality, assessment systems are likely to be at different levels of development in different areas. For example, a system
may be Established in the area of examinations, but Emerging in the area of large-scale, system-level assessment, and vice
versa. While intuition suggests that it is probably better to be further along in as many areas as possible, the evidence is
unclear as to whether it is necessary to be functioning at Advanced levels in all areas. Therefore, one might view the
Established level as a desirable minimum outcome to achieve in all areas, but only aspire beyond that in those areas that
most contribute to the national vision or priorities for education. In line with these considerations, the ratings generated
by the rubrics are not meant to be additive across assessment types (that is, they are not meant to be added to create an
overall rating for an assessment system; they are only meant to produce an overall rating for each assessment type). The
methodology for assigning development levels is summarized in Appendix 4.




                                                                                                                           4
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Education in Jordan
Jordan is an upper-middle-income country in the Middle East & North Africa region. Gross domestic product per capita
was $4,945 in 2012, and growth was 2.8 percent.

Jordan has made significant progress in increasing school enrollments and education quality. The vast majority of children
go to primary school, with a net enrollment rate of 91 percent in 2010. There was impressive growth in the transition rate
to secondary school, with an increase from 63 percent in 1994 to 97 percent in 2006. Jordan also ensures a high level of
gender parity in access to basic services. The country reached gender parity at the primary level in 1999 (earlier than most
other countries in the region) and has now achieved full parity in secondary and tertiary enrollment and 90 percent parity
in adult literacy. In the period between 1999 and 2007, Jordan also made significant gains on international surveys of
student achievement, with a particularly impressive gain of almost 30 points on the science portion of the Trends in
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS).

In 2003 Jordan implemented the first phase of the Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy Program (ERfKE I) and
is now implementing the second phase of this program (ERfKE II 2009–2015), which aims to provide students enrolled in
pretertiary education institutions in Jordan with increased levels of skills to participate in the knowledge economy. In
particular, the program focuses on school-level implementation and teacher quality. It aims to strengthen the institutional
capacity of the Ministry of Education in policy, strategic planning, monitoring, and evaluation and to improve teacher
employment, utilization, and professional development policies and implementation. The program also seeks to fine-tune
the curriculum and student assessment to ensure alignment with the knowledge-based economy.

Detailed information was collected on Jordan’s student assessment system using the SABER–Student Assessment
questionnaires and rubrics. It is important to remember that these tools primarily focus on benchmarking a country’s
policies and arrangements for assessment activities at the system or macrolevel. Additional data would need to be
collected to determine actual, on-the-ground practices in Jordan, particularly by teachers and students in schools. The
following sections discuss the findings by each assessment type, accompanied by suggested policy options. The suggested
policy options were determined in collaboration with key local stakeholders based on Jordan’s immediate interests and
needs. Detailed, completed rubrics for each assessment type in Jordan are provided in Appendix 5.




                                                                                                                          5
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Classroom Assessment

Level of Development: EMERGING

In Jordan, several documents provide guidance on classroom assessment. The Directorate of Tests in the Department of
Examinations and Tests authorized the Guidance Brochures on Classroom Assessment and Student Assessment Reports in
2011 to provide guidelines for classroom assessment in grades 1 through 12. In addition, the Achievement Tests Guide,
which applies to grades 1 through 12, and the Classroom Assessment Strategy document, which applies generally to all
grade levels, provide guidelines for classroom assessment.

Some system-wide resources are available to teachers for engaging in classroom assessment activities. For example, a
document that outlines what students are expected to learn in all subject areas at each grade level between 1 and 12 and
a document that outlines the levels of performance students are expected to reach in math, science, Arabic language, and
English language at each grade level between 1–10 and grade 12 are available through the Ministry of Education. In
addition, textbooks and workbooks that provide support for classroom assessment and Performance Standards and
Indicator Guides are available.

System-level mechanisms are in place to ensure that teachers develop skills and expertise in classroom assessment. For
example, teachers have opportunities to participate in conferences and workshops, and in-service teacher training
includes a focus on classroom assessment. The in-service training is offered by supervisors in directorates of education
who have been trained by experts at the Ministry of Education. The supervisors train teachers to use the Performance
Standards and Indicator Guides.

Classroom assessment is also a required component of teacher supervision. Teacher supervision, which is conducted by
the Department of Examinations and Tests, includes field visits to evaluate the implementation of classroom assessment
standards. At the end of each term, the Department of Examinations and Tests prepares a report based on a sample of
schools visited, detailing issues identified, along with recommendations for improvement.

Despite these resources and supports, classroom assessment practices are considered to be weak, overly relying on
multiple-choice, selection-type questions and overemphasizing the recall of information. The uneven application of
standards for grading students’ work and grade inflation also have been identified as problems.

Classroom assessment information is required to be disseminated to all key stakeholders. For example, teachers distribute
performance reports to students, who are required to share these with their parents. In addition, dissemination of
classroom assessment information to school district or Ministry of Education officials is required.


Suggested policy options:

1. Review existing pre- and in-service training opportunities and improve their quality, breadth, and duration so that
   teachers become more fluent and confident in using a variety of classroom assessment activities in their practice.

2. Ensure the system-wide availability of a variety of high-quality resources to help teachers engage in classroom
   assessment. For example, develop and make available scoring criteria and rubrics for grading students’ work and
   encourage school principals to promote their use.




                                                                                                                       6
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Examinations

Level of Development: ESTABLISHED

The General Secondary Examination (Tawjihi) is administered to students in grade 12 in core and elective subjects. The
examination was first administered in 1962. Its main purposes are certification of secondary school completion and
student selection to higher education. The Ministry of Education most recently authorized the use of the Tawjihi for these
purposes in its 2011 General Secondary Certificate Instructions document.

Regular funding for the Tawjihi is provided by the government and through student fees. Funding covers all core
examination activities, including examination design and administration, data analysis and reporting, and medium- to
long-term planning of program milestones. However, funding does not cover staff training or research and development
activities.

The Department of Examinations and Tests, which is responsible for the Tawjihi, is an office within the Ministry of
Education that has been running the examination since it was first administered in the 1960s.

The Department of Examinations and Tests has the required facilities to carry out the examination. The permanent staff
in the Department of Examinations and Tests is supported by staff from the Ministry as needed, including for supervision
or correction activities. Occasionally the Ministry seeks external temporary support to assist with the design of questions.
For all other functions, the Ministry has sufficient staff to run the examination.

Up-to-date compulsory workshops on the Tawjihi are available for teachers. These workshops are organized by supervisors
in the directorates of education in the governorates. The workshops address what grade 12 teachers are expected to cover
and include information on any updates to the examination. Teachers are involved in some examination-related tasks,
including administering and scoring the examination, acting as a judge, and supervising examination procedures.

Only one systematic mechanism, internal review or observers, is in place to ensure the quality of the examination. External
review or observers, external certification or audits, and pilot or field testing are not in place.

Inappropriate behavior surrounding the examination process is not widespread but does occur. Policies are in place to
address breaches of examination-taking rules. For example, impersonation (when an individual other than the registered
candidate takes the examination), copying from other candidates, the use of unauthorized materials such as prepared
answers and notes, and collusion among candidates via mobile phones sometimes occur during the examination process.
To address these forms of inappropriate behavior, strict identification policies are put in place, observers monitor test
takers from both the front and back of examination rooms, and students are prohibited from bringing mobile phones or
any paper into the examination room. If students are suspected of bringing paper or phones into the examination room,
they are thoroughly searched and may be prohibited from taking the exam.

An important issue to be addressed is increasing the number of options for students who do not perform well on the
examination. Currently the options are very limited. Although students may retake the examination, or parts of it, up to
four times in three years, they cannot continue their formal education or training at the next level of the system, nor can
they repeat grade 12.

Suggested policy options:

1. Continue the ongoing work to integrate new knowledge economy skills into the Tawjihi.

                                                                                                                          7
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


2. Ensure the availability of a greater variety of options for students who do not pass the Tawjihi. For example, encourage
   dialogue around devising alternative “avenues of success” for students and make this a priority in the examination
   reform.

3. Ensure the fairness of the Tawjihi by implementing additional preventive and reactive measures to reduce
   inappropriate behaviors during the examination process. For example, train monitors to effectively react to
   inappropriate behaviors exhibited by test takers.




                                                                                                                         8
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


National Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA) — National Test for Quality Control of Education
Level of Development: EMERGING

The National Test for Quality Control of Education (National Test) is administered every year, alternating between grades
4, 8, and 10 (each of the three grades is assessed once in a three-year span). The assessment was first administered in
2004. Students are assessed in Arabic language, mathematics, science, and English language. All students at the tested
grade level are assessed. The main purposes are to monitor education quality at the system level; support schools and
teachers; and inform policy design, evaluation, and decision making.

A formal document, the Ministry of Education’s Statistical Report, authorizes the National Test and is available to the
public. In addition, a written plan is publicly available that specifies who will be tested and in which subject areas.

Regular funding is allocated by the government and covers all core NLSA activities, including assessment design and
administration as well as data analysis and reporting. However, funding does not cover long- or medium-term planning of
program milestones, research and development activities, or staff training.

The Directorate of Examinations and Tests, which is responsible for carrying out the National Test, is a permanent unit in
the Ministry of Education. Although there is a permanent and full-time staff, it is insufficient in terms of quality and
quantity.

Regular reviews are conducted, both internal and by qualified external experts, of the alignment between the assessment
instrument and what it is supposed to measure.

Mechanisms are in place to ensure the quality of the NLSA. For example, a pilot is conducted before the main data
collection to ensure the quality of the NLSA, all proctors and administrators are trained according to a protocol, there are
internal reviewers, a standardized manual is available for assessment administrators, and discrepancies are required to
be reported on a standard sheet. However, scorers are not trained to ensure high interrater reliability, and no
requirements are in place for double scoring or processing of data, for booklets to be numbered, or for external reviewers
or audits.

NLSA results are disseminated in an effective way. For example, reports are disseminated within 12 months after the
assessment is administered, reports with results are made available to all stakeholder groups, and a media briefing is held
to discuss the results. In addition, the main reports on the results contain information on overall achievement levels and
subgroups, trends over time, and standard errors. However, no workshops or presentations are given for key stakeholders
on the results, and results are not featured in newspapers and magazines or on radio and television.

Very limited mechanisms are in place to monitor the consequences of the NLSA. Remedial plans are developed to address
students’ weaknesses in basic learning skills, with follow-up on implementation of these plans conducted by field
supervisors. However, there are no expert review groups, regular focus groups of key stakeholders, themed conferences
that provide a forum to discuss research and other data on the assessment, or funding for independent research.

Suggested policy options:

1. Strengthen quality assurance mechanisms for the National Test by implementing key procedures such as training for
   scorers to ensure high interrater reliability.



                                                                                                                          9
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


2. Increase the number of staff in the Directorate of Examinations and Tests working on the National Test in order to
   address issues of insufficient human resources. In addition, provide additional opportunities for staff working on the
   National Test to improve their skills related to carrying out assessment activities.




                                                                                                                      10
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


National Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA) – National Assessment for the Knowledge Economy
(NAfKE)
Level of Development: EMERGING

The National Assessment for the Knowledge Economy (NAfKE) has been administered three times, in 2006, 2008, and
2011, to a representative random sample of students in grades 5, 9, and 11 in the subjects of math, science, and literacy.
NAfKE is conducted alongside the Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy (ERfKE I and II) projects. ERfKE is a sector-
level intervention supported by the World Bank and other donors, which aims to transform the education system at the
early childhood, basic, and secondary levels to produce graduates with the necessary skills for the knowledge economy.
NAfKE serves to provide the Ministry of Education in Jordan with data on strengths and weaknesses in students’ skills with
respect to the knowledge economy to inform decision making. In addition, the assessment serves to measure changes in
student performance related to the implementation of ERfKE.

According to the appraisal document for ERfKE, the National Center for Human Resources Development (NCHRD) is
authorized to carry out external monitoring and evaluation for the project, including the implementation of NAfKE. The
NCHRD is a permanent research center created to carry out studies and assessments across sectors. In addition, the
Monitoring & Evaluation Framework document for ERfKE includes NAfKE as a major input to assess progress and
outcomes. This document also serves as a written plan for NAfKE, specifying who will be assessed and in which subject
areas.

A combination of funding from nongovernment sources and NCHRD’s internal budget are used to cover core NAfKE
activities, including assessment design and administration as well as data analysis and reporting. The NCHRD is adequately
staffed to effectively carry out the assessment. However, funding does not cover long- or medium-term planning of
program milestones, staff training, or research and development activities.

A variety of mechanisms are in place to ensure the quality of NAfKE. For example, a standardized manual is available for
assessment administrators, double scoring and processing of data are done, and a pilot is conducted before the main data
collection takes place. In addition, all proctors or administrators are trained according to a protocol, discrepancies must
be recorded on a standard sheet, and all booklets are numbered. Scorers are trained to ensure high interrater reliability,
and internal reviewers or observers are in place.

NAfKE results are disseminated within 12 months after the assessment is administered through national reports,
workshops, and presentations to key stakeholders. Reports containing average and disaggregated results are made
available to all stakeholder groups. The main reports also present trends over time, overall and for subgroups, and
standard errors for reported statistics. Workshops or presentations are also given for key stakeholders on the results.

Suggested policy options:

1. Redouble efforts within the Ministry of Education and NCHRD to ensure better alignment and consistency of the NAfKE
   with the ongoing curriculum reform, the introduction of innovative classroom-based student assessment practices,
   and the integration of information and communication technology in the curriculum.

2. Establish and make widely available opportunities to learn about NAfKE in teacher training courses, workshops, or
   presentations so that teachers are knowledgeable about the assessment and so that NAfKE is aligned with the overall
   education system. For example, offer workshops to teachers on the domains measured in the assessment and how to
   read and use results.


                                                                                                                        11
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


3. Consider institutionalizing NAfKE as a measure of education system quality post-ERfKE by introducing formal policy
   documents authorizing the assessment and by allocating regular government funding for NAfKE activities.




                                                                                                                  12
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA)

Level of Development: EMERGING

Jordan has participated in multiple ILSAs in the last 10 years, including TIMSS at the grade 8 level (2003, 2007, and 2011)
and PISA (2006, 2009, and 2012). Jordan has also taken concrete steps to participate in PISA 2015 and TIMSS 2015.


The available funding for ILSA participation covers some of the core activities, including international participation fees,
implementation of the assessment exercise in Jordan, and attendance at international expert meetings. To date, Jordan
has covered participation fees for the international studies through a World Bank loan, and costs related to meetings and
implementation of the study are covered by a grant from USAID. Data analysis and research are usually carried out by the
NCHRD from its own budget and through a USAID-funded capacity building project supporting NCHRD researchers. The
available funding for ILSAs covers research and development when there is a specific need for such activities.


The ILSA office is adequately staffed and trained to carry out ILSA activities effectively, with minimal issues. The number
of staff members is sufficient, including four permanent staff and some temporary staff. Permanent staff members work
on data analysis and data management, and temporary staff are hired for data collection and data entry. Some members
of the team have previous experience working on ILSAs and have attended some of the international meetings related to
these assessments.


Country-specific ILSA results and information are regularly disseminated. A national report is made available online, and
copies are distributed to key stakeholders. Copies of the international report are also distributed. In addition to these
reports, a policy brief is produced that targets policy makers and other key stakeholders. Recently, because of an apparent
decline in TIMSS scores, another report was produced to analyze the results and possible factors contributing to this
decline.


Results from ILSAs are used in a variety of ways to inform decision making in Jordan. For example, results are used to track
the impact of reforms on student achievement levels and to inform interventions such as ERfKE. In addition, results are
used to inform curriculum improvement, teacher training programs, and other assessment activities in the system. ILSA
results are not used to inform resource allocation.


Decisions based on ILSA results have had a positive impact on students’ achievement levels. A study published in 2011 by
H. Abdul-Hamid and colleagues found that ILSA results contributed to feedback between researchers and policy makers,
improving student achievement levels in Jordan.


Suggested policy options:


1. Identify ways to further engage the Department of Examinations and Tests in the analysis and utilization of TIMSS and
   PISA data, in collaboration with the NCHRD, to raise awareness among supervisors and teachers of the objective of
   those assessments and their potential value-added in the improvement of school and classroom practice.

2. Continue to build the capacity of NCHRD so that National Reports for TIMSS and PISA are issued in a timely manner
   and with sufficient analytical quality. In addition, collaborate with the national media to better disseminate
   information and results from Jordan’s participation in ILSAs.

                                                                                                                         13
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014



3. Introduce government funding for ILSA activities, including research and development activities, to ensure the stability
   and continuity of the country’s ILSA engagement moving forward.




                                                                                                                        14
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Appendix 1: Assessment Types and Their Key Differences


                     Classroom             Large-scale assessment                                 Examinations
                                                      surveys
                                          National            International               Exit                Entrance


    Purpose          To provide      To provide              To provide            To certify             To select students
                     immediate       feedback on overall     feedback on the       students as they       for further
                     feedback to     health of the system    comparative           move from one          educational
                     inform          at particular           performance of        level of the           opportunities
                     classroom       grade/age level(s),     the education         education system
                     instruction     and to monitor          system at             to the next (or into
                                     trends in learning      particular            the workforce)
                                                             grade/age level(s)

    Frequency        Daily           For individual          For individual        Annually and           Annually and more
                                     subjects offered on     subjects offered      more often where       often where the
                                     a regular basis         on a regular basis    the system allows      system allows for
                                     (such as every 3-5      (such as every 3-5    for repeats            repeats
                                     years)                  years)


    Who is           All students    Sample or census of     A sample of           All eligible           All eligible
    tested?                          students at a           students at a         students               students
                                     particular grade or     particular grade or
                                     age level(s)            age level(s)



    Format           Varies from     Usually multiple        Usually multiple      Usually essay and      Usually essay and
                     observation     choice and short        choice and short      multiple choice        multiple choice
                     to              answer                  answer
                     questioning
                     to paper-and-
                     pencil tests
                     to student
                     performances
    Coverage of      All subject     Generally confined      Generally             Covers main            Covers main
    curriculum       areas           to a few subjects       confined to one or    subject areas          subject areas
                                                             two subjects

    Additional       Yes, as part    Frequently              Yes                   Seldom                 Seldom
    information      of the
    collected from   teaching
    students?        process

    Scoring          Usually         Varies from simple      Usually involves      Varies from            Varies from simple
                     informal and    to more statistically   statistically         simple to more         to more statistically
                     simple          sophisticated           sophisticated         statistically          sophisticated
                                     techniques              techniques            sophisticated          techniques
                                                                                   techniques




                                                                                                                                  15
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Appendix 2: Basic Structure of Rubrics for Evaluating Data Collected on a Student Assessment System

                                                                      Development level



                                     LATENT                                 ESTABLISHED
                                  (Absence of, or        EMERGING            (Acceptable
                                  deviation from,    (On way to meeting       minimum          ADVANCED
           Dimension                 attribute)      minimum standard)        standard)       (Best practice)   Justification
                                                     EC—Enabling Context
 EC1—Policies
 EC2—Leadership, public
 engagement
 EC3—Funding
 EC4—Institutional arrangements
 EC5—Human resources
                                                    SA—System Alignment
 SA1—Learning/quality goals
 SA2—Curriculum
 SA3—Pre-, in-service teacher
 training
                                                    AQ—Assessment Quality
 AQ1—Ensuring quality (design,
 administration, analysis)
 AQ2—Ensuring effective uses




                                                                                                                                16
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Appendix 3: Summary of the Development Levels for Each Assessment Type

    Assessment type                   LATENT                    EMERGING                   ESTABLISHED                        ADVANCED


                              Absence of, or deviation    On way to meeting           Acceptable minimum           Best practice
                              from, the attribute         minimum standard            standard


                              There is no system-wide     There is weak system-       There is sufficient          There is strong system-wide
                              institutional capacity to   wide institutional          system-wide institutional    institutional capacity to support
                              support and ensure the      capacity to support and     capacity to support and      and ensure the quality of
 Classroom Assessment         quality of classroom        ensure the quality of       ensure the quality of        classroom assessment practices.
                              assessment practices.       classroom assessment        classroom assessment
                                                          practices.                  practices.


                              There is no standardized    There is a partially        There is a stable            There is a stable standardized
                              examination in place for    stable standardized         standardized                 examination in place and
                              key decisions.              examination in place,       examination in place.        institutional capacity and strong
                                                          and a need to develop       There is institutional       mechanisms to monitor it. The
                                                          institutional capacity to   capacity and some            examination is of high quality and
                                                          run the examination. The    limited mechanisms to        is perceived as fair and free from
 Examinations
                                                          examination typically is    monitor it. The              corruption.
                                                          of poor quality and is      examination is of
                                                          perceived as unfair or      acceptable quality and is
                                                          corrupt.                    perceived as fair for
                                                                                      most students and free
                                                                                      from corruption.

                              There is no NLSA in         There is an unstable        There is a stable NLSA       There is a stable NLSA in place
                              place.                      NLSA in place and a         in place. There is           and institutional capacity and
                                                          need to develop             institutional capacity and   strong mechanisms to monitor it.
                                                          institutional capacity to   some limited                 The NLSA is of high quality and
                                                          run the NLSA.               mechanisms to monitor        its information is effectively used
 National (or System-Level)
                                                          Assessment quality and      it. The NLSA is of           to improve education.
 Large-Scale Assessment
                                                          impact are weak.            moderate quality and its
                                                                                      information is
                                                                                      disseminated, but not
                                                                                      always used in effective
                                                                                      ways.

                              There is no history of      Participation in an ILSA    There is more or less        There is stable participation in an
                              participation in an ILSA    has been initiated, but     stable participation in an   ILSA and institutional capacity to
                              nor plans to participate    there still is need to      ILSA. There is               run the ILSA. The information
                              in one.                     develop institutional       institutional capacity to    from the ILSA is effectively used
                                                          capacity to carry out the   carry out the ILSA. The      to improve education.
 International Large-Scale                                ILSA.                       information from the
 Assessment                                                                           ILSA is disseminated,
                                                                                      but not always used in
                                                                                      effective ways.




                                                                                                                                                       17
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Appendix 4: Methodology for Assigning Development Levels


1. The country team or consultant collects information about the assessment system in the country.


2. Based on the collected information, a level of development and score is assigned to each dimension in the rubrics:


    x   Latent = 1 score point
    x   Emerging = 2 score points
    x   Established = 3 score points
    x   Advanced = 4 score points

3. The score for each quality driver is computed by aggregating the scores for each of its constituent dimensions. For
example:


The quality driver, ‘Enabling Context,’ in the case of ILSA, has 3 dimensions on which a hypothetical country receives the
following scores: Dimension A = 2 points; Dimension B = 2 points; Dimension C = 3 points. The hypothetical country’s
overall score for this quality driver would be: (2+2+3)/3 = 2.33


4. A preliminary level of development is assigned to each quality driver.


5. The preliminary development level is validated using expert judgment in cooperation with the country team and the
World Bank Task Team Leader.


For scores that allow a margin of discretion (i.e., to choose between two levels of development), a final decision has to be
made based on expert judgment. For example, the aforementioned hypothetical country has an ‘Enabling Context’ score
of 2.33, corresponding to a preliminary level of development of ‘Emerging or Established.’ Based on qualitative
information not captured in the rubric, along with expert judgment, the country team chooses ‘Emerging’ as the most
appropriate level.


6. Scores for certain key dimensions under ‘Enabling Context’ (in the case of EXAM, NLSA, and ILSA) and under ‘System
Alignment’ (in the case of CLASS) were set as ceiling scores, i.e., the overall mean score for the particular assessment type
cannot be greater than the score for these key dimensions. These key variables include formal policy, regular funding,
having a permanent assessment unit, and the quality of assessment practices.




                                                                                                                          18
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Appendix 5: SABER-Student Assessment Rubrics for Jordan




                                                       JORDAN
                                                Classroom Assessment




                                                                                                    19
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                           ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
   Overall policy and resource framework within which classroom assessment activity takes place in a country or system, and the degree to which classroom
                                      assessment activity is coherent with other components of the education system.
                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                         Setting clear guidelines for classroom assessment
 There is no system-level document that    There is an informal system-level           There is a formal system-level document       This option does not apply to this
 provides guidelines for classroom         document that provides guidelines for       that provides guidelines for classroom        dimension.
 assessment.                               classroom assessment.                       assessment.1

 This option does not apply to this        This option does not apply to this          The availability of the document is           The document is widely available.2
 dimension.                                dimension.                                  restricted.


                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                     Aligning classroom assessment with system learning goals
 There are no system-wide resources for    There are scarce system-wide resources      There are some system-wide resources          There are a variety of system-wide
 teachers for classroom assessment.        for teachers for classroom assessment.      for teachers for classroom assessment.3       resources available for teachers for
                                                                                                                                     classroom assessment.

 There is no official curriculum or        There is an official curriculum or          There is an official curriculum or            There is an official curriculum or
 standards document.                       standards document, but it is not clear     standards document that specifies what        standards document that specifies what
                                           what students are expected to learn or to   students are expected to learn, but the       students are expected to learn and to
                                           what level of performance.                  level of performance required is not clear.   what level of performance.4
                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 3:
                                           Having effective human resources to carry out classroom assessment activities
 There are no system-level mechanisms to   This option does not apply to this          There are some system-level mechanisms        There are a variety of system-level
 ensure that teachers develop skills and   dimension.                                  to ensure that teachers develop skills and    mechanisms to ensure that teachers
 expertise in classroom assessment.                                                    expertise in classroom assessment.5           develop skills and expertise in classroom
                                                                                                                                     assessment.




                                                                                                                                                                            20
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014



                                                                       ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                            Quality of classroom assessment design, administration, analysis, and use.
                LATENT                                  EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                    ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                           Ensuring the quality of classroom assessment
 Classroom assessment practices suffer     Classroom assessment practices are        Classroom assessment practices are            Classroom assessment practices are
 from widespread weaknesses or there is    known to be weak.6                        known to be of moderate quality.              known to be generally of high quality.
 no information available on classroom
 assessment practices.
 There are no mechanisms to monitor the    There are ad hoc mechanisms to monitor    There are limited systematic mechanisms       There are varied and systematic
 quality of classroom assessment           the quality of classroom assessment       to monitor the quality of classroom           mechanisms in place to monitor the
 practices.                                practices.                                assessment practices.7                        quality of classroom    assessment
                                                                                                                                   practices.
                                                                     ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                          Ensuring effective uses of classroom assessment
 Classroom assessment information is not   This option does not apply to this        Classroom assessment information is           Classroom assessment information is
 required to be disseminated to key        dimension.                                required to be disseminated to some key       required to be disseminated to all key
 stakeholders.                                                                       stakeholders.                                 stakeholders.8

 There are no required uses of classroom   There are limited required uses of        There are adequate required uses of           There are adequate required uses of
 assessment to support student learning.   classroom assessment to support student   classroom assessment to support student       classroom assessment to support student
                                           learning.                                 learning, excluding its use as an input for   learning, including its use as an input for
                                                                                     external examination results.9                external examination results.




                                                                                                                                                                            21
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Classroom Assessment: Development-Level Rating Justifications

1. The Department of Examinations and Tests–Directorate of Tests authorized the Guidance Brochures on Classroom Assessment and Student Assessment Report
in 2011 to provide guidelines for classroom assessment for grades 1 through 12. In addition, the Achievement Tests Guide, which applies to grades 1 through 12,
and the Classroom Assessment Strategy document, which applies generally to all grade levels, provide guidelines for classroom assessment.

2. The Guidance Brochures on Classroom Assessment and Student Assessment Report, the Achievement Tests Guide, and the Classroom Assessment Strategy
documents are available to the public through school libraries. These documents are also disseminated to directorates of education, as well as public, military,
UNRWA, and private schools. The Achievement Tests Guide and the Classroom Assessment Strategy documents are also available online.

3. Some system-wide resources are available to teachers for engaging in classroom assessment activities. For example, a document that outlines what students
are expected to learn in all subject areas at each grade between 1 and 12 and a document which outlines the levels of performance students are expected to reach
in mathematics, science, Arabic language, and English language at each grade between levels 1–10 and grade 12 are available through the Ministry of Education.
In addition, textbooks or workbooks that provide support for classroom assessment and Performance Standards and Indicator Guides are available. However,
scoring criteria or rubrics for students’ work, item banks or pools with examples of selection/multiple-choice questions or supply/open-ended questions, online
assessment resources, or computer based testing with instant reports on students’ performance are not available to teachers.

4. Performance Standards and Indicator Guides specify what students from grades 1 through 12 are expected to learn and to what level of performance across all
subject areas.

5. Some system-level mechanisms are in place to ensure that teachers develop skills and expertise in classroom assessment. For example, teachers have
opportunities to participate in conferences and workshops, and in-service teacher training focused on classroom assessment. In addition, school inspection or
teacher supervision includes a component focused on classroom assessment. In-service teacher training is offered to teachers by supervisors in directorates of
education who have been trained by experts at the Ministry of Education. Teachers are trained to use the Performance Standards and Indicator Guides during
these in-service training opportunities. However, no preservice teacher training opportunities or online resources are available on classroom assessment.
Additionally, not all teacher training programs include a required course on classroom assessment, and teachers do not have the opportunity to participate in item
development for, or scoring of, large-scale assessments or exams.

6. Classroom assessment practices are considered to be weak. Classroom assessment activities commonly rely on multiple-choice, selection-type questions and
are mainly about recalling information. Although it is not common to observe errors in the scoring or grading of students’ work, it is common for teachers to not
use explicit or a priori criteria for scoring or grading students’ work. The uneven application of standards for grading students’ work and grade inflation have also
been identified as problems. However, it is rare for parents to be poorly informed about students’ grades, for classroom assessment activities to provide little
useful feedback to students, and for classroom assessment activities not to be aligned with a pedagogical or curricular framework. At the same time, it is not
common for classroom assessment activities to be mainly used as administrative or control tools rather than as pedagogical resources.


                                                                                                                                                                  22
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


7. Classroom assessment is a required component of a teacher’s performance evaluation and school inspection or teacher supervision. Teacher supervision is
conducted by the Department of Examination and Tests, which include field visits to follow up on implementation of standards and criteria. At the end of each
term, the department prepares a report based on a sample of schools visited detailing issues identified, along with recommendations for improvement. No external
moderation system is in place to review the difficulty of classroom assessment activities, and national reviews of the quality of education do not include a focus
on classroom assessment. In addition, no government funding is available for research on the quality of classroom assessment activities.

8. Classroom assessment information is required to be disseminated to all key stakeholders. For example, teachers distribute performance reports to students,
who are required to share these with their parents. In addition, classroom assessment information is required to be disseminated to school district or Ministry of
Education officials.

9. Classroom assessment activities are used for diagnosing student learning issues, providing feedback to students on their learning, informing parents about their
child’s learning, and planning next steps in instruction. For example, classroom assessment activities are used to determine whether a student has passed or failed
and whether they should repeat a grade. In addition, it also determines a student’s stream (Scientific, Literary, Information Technology, etc.) in secondary
education, because a minimum grade must be achieved for each stream. However, classroom assessment activities are not used for grading students for internal
classroom uses or for providing input to an external examination program.




                                                                                                                                                                23
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014




                                                  JORDAN
                                                Examinations




                                                                                            24
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT
 Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which assessment activity takes place in a country or system
                                and the extent to which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, the assessment activity.
                LATENT                                    EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                 ADVANCED



                                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                          Setting clear policies
 No standardized examination has taken       The standardized examination has been     The examination is a stable program that   This option does not apply to this
 place.                                      operating on an irregular basis.          has been operating regularly.1             dimension


 There is no policy document that            There is an informal or draft policy      There is a formal policy document that     This option does not apply to this
 authorizes the examination.                 document     that   authorizes  the       authorizes the examination.2               dimension.
                                             examination.

 This option does not apply to this          The policy document is not available to   The policy document is available to the    This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                  the public.                               public.3                                   dimension.


 This option does not apply to this          This option does not apply to this        The policy document addresses some key     The policy document addresses all key
 dimension.                                  dimension.                                aspects of the examination.4               aspects of the examination.


                                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                                        Having strong leadership
 All stakeholder groups strongly oppose      Most stakeholder groups oppose the        Most stakeholder groups support the        All stakeholder groups support the
 the examination or are indifferent to it.   examination.                              examination.5                              examination.


 There are no attempts to improve the        This option does not apply to this        There are independent attempts to          There are coordinated attempts to
 examination by stakeholder groups.          dimension.                                improve the examination by stakeholder     improve the examination by stakeholder
                                                                                       groups.                                    groups.6

 Efforts to improve the examination are      This option does not apply to this        Efforts to improve the examination are     This option does not apply to this
 not welcomed by the leadership in charge    dimension.                                generally welcomed by the leadership in    dimension.
 of the examination                                                                    charge of the examination.7

                                                                                                                                                                       25
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                                                                                                                 (CONTINUED)
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                             ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                                             Having regular funding
 There is no funding allocated for the         There is irregular funding allocated for   There is regular funding allocated for the   This option does not apply to this
 examination.                                  the examination.                           examination.8                                dimension.


 This option does not apply to this            Funding covers some core examination       Funding covers all core examination          This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                    activities: design, administration, data   activities: design, administration, data     dimension.
                                               processing or reporting.                   processing and reporting.9

 This option does not apply to this            Funding does not cover research and        This option does not apply to this           Funding    covers        research      and
 dimension.                                    development.10                             dimension.                                   development.


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 4:
                                                                  Having strong organizational structures
 The examination office does not exist or is   The examination      office   is   newly   The examination office is a stable           This option does not apply to this
 newly established.                            established.                               organization.11                              dimension.


 The examination office is not accountable     This option does not apply to this         The examination office is accountable to     This option does not apply to this
 to an external board or agency.12             dimension.                                 an external board or agency.                 dimension.


 Examination results are not recognized by     Examination results are recognized by a    Examination results are recognized by        Examination results are recognized by
 any certification or selection system.        certification or selection system in the   one certification or selection system in     two or more certification or selection
                                               country.13                                 another country.                             systems in another country.13

 The examination office does not have the      The examination office has some of the     The examination office has all of the        The examination office has state of the art
 required facilities to carry out the          required facilities to carry out the       required facilities to carry out the         facilities to carry out the examination.
 examination.                                  examination.                               examination.14

                                                                                                                                                                 (CONTINUED)


                                                                                                                                                                                26
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                LATENT                                   EMERGING                               ESTABLISHED                               ADVANCED



                                                                      ENABLING CONTEXT 5:
                                                                  Having effective human resources
 There is no staff to carry out the         The examination office is inadequately   The examination office is adequately    The examination office is adequately
 examination.                               staffed to effectively carry out the     staffed to carry out the examination    staffed to carry out the assessment
                                            examination; issues are pervasive.       effectively, with minimal issues.       effectively, with no issues.15

 The country does not offer opportunities   This option does not apply to this       The country offers some opportunities   The country offers a wide range of
 that prepare for work on the               dimension.                               that prepare for work on the            opportunities that prepare for work on
 examination.                                                                        examination. 16                         the examination.




                                                                                                                                                                  27
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                             SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                       Degree to which the assessment is coherent with other components of the education system.
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED




                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                   Aligning examinations with learning goals and opportunities to learn
 It is not clear what the examination          This option does not apply to this          There is a clear understanding of what the   This option does not apply to this
 measures.                                     dimension.                                  examination measures.17                      dimension.


 What the examination measures is              This option does not apply to this          What is measured by the examination is       This option does not apply to this
 questioned by some stakeholder groups.        dimension.                                  largely accepted by stakeholder groups.18    dimension.


 Material to prepare for the examination is    There is some material to prepare for the   There is comprehensive material to           There is comprehensive material to
 minimal, and it is only accessible to very    examination that is accessible to some      prepare for the examination that is          prepare for the examination that is
 few students.                                 students.                                   accessible to most students.19               accessible to all students.

                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                   Providing teachers with opportunities to learn about the examination
 There are no courses or workshops on          There are no up-to-date courses or          There are up-to-date voluntary courses or    There are up-to-date compulsory courses
 examinations available to teachers.           workshops on examinations available to      workshops on examinations available to       or workshops on examinations for
                                               teachers.                                   teachers.                                    teachers.20

 Teachers are excluded          from     all   Teachers are involved in very few           Teachers are involved          in   some     Teachers are involved        in   most
 examination-related tasks.                    examination-related tasks.                  examination-related tasks.21                 examination-related tasks.




                                                                                                                                                                             28
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                         ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                  Degree to which the assessment meets quality standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way.
                LATENT                                    EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                        ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                            Ensuring quality
 There is no technical report or other      There is some documentation on the          There is a comprehensive technical report   There is a comprehensive, high-quality
 documentation.                             examination, but it is not in a formal      but with restricted circulation.22          technical report available to the general
                                            report format.                                                                          public.

 There are no mechanisms in place to        This option does not apply to this          There are limited systematic mechanisms     There are varied and systematic
 ensure the quality of the examination.     dimension.                                  in place to ensure the quality of the       mechanisms in place to ensure the quality
                                                                                        examination.23                              of the examination.

                                                                        ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                           Ensuring fairness
 Inappropriate behavior surrounding the     Inappropriate behavior surrounding the      Inappropriate behavior surrounding the      Inappropriate behavior surrounding the
 examination process is high.               examination process is moderate.24          examination process is low.                 examination process is marginal.


 The examination results lack credibility   The examination results are credible for    The examination results are credible for    This option does not apply to this
 for all stakeholder groups.                some stakeholder groups.                    all stakeholder groups.25                   dimension.


 The majority of the students (over 50%)    A significant proportion of students (10–   A small proportion of students (less than   All students can take the examination;
 may not take the examination because of    50%) may not take the examination           10%) may not take the examination           there are no language, gender, or other
 language, gender, or other equivalent      because of language, gender, or other       because of language, gender, or other       equivalent barriers.26
 barriers.                                  equivalent barriers.                        equivalent barriers.
                                                                                                                                                             (CONTINUED)




                                                                                                                                                                           29
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014




                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                ADVANCED



                                                                      ASSESSMENT QUALITY 3:
                                                             Using examination information in a fair way
 Examination results are not used in a      Examination results are used by some      Examination results are used by most      Examination results are used by all
 proper way by all stakeholder groups.      stakeholder groups in a proper way.       stakeholder groups in a proper way.       stakeholder groups in a proper way.27


 Student names and results are public.      This option does not apply to this        Students’ results are confidential.28     This option does not apply to this
                                            dimension.                                                                          dimension.


                                                                     ASSESSMENT QUALITY 4:
                                                         Ensuring positive consequences of the examination
 There are no options for students who do   There are very limited options for        There are some options for students who   There is a variety of options for students
 not perform well on the examination, or    students who do not perform well on the   do not perform well on the examination.   who do not perform well on the
 students must leave the education          examination.29                                                                      examination.
 system.
 There are no mechanisms in place to        This option does not apply to this        There are some mechanisms in place to     There is a variety of mechanisms in place
 monitor the consequences of the            dimension.                                monitor the consequences of the           to monitor the consequences of the
 examination.                                                                         examination.30                            examination.




                                                                                                                                                                        30
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


Examinations: Development-Level Rating Justifications

1. The General Secondary Examination (Tawjihi) is administered to students in grade 12 in core and elective subjects. Core subjects include Arabic language, Islamic
culture, English language, general culture, and computers. Elective subjects depend on a student’s stream, which are chosen from the following specializations:
science, literature, Islamic studies, information technology, health, and vocational. The examination was first administered in 1962, and its main purposes are for
student certification for school cycle completion and student selection to higher education.

2. The Ministry of Education authorized the Tawjihi with the General Secondary Certificate Instructions document in 2011.

3. The General Secondary Certificate Instructions document is available to the public through the Ministry of Education’s website. In addition, it is available at
directorates of education and at schools.

4. The General Secondary Certificate Instructions document addresses some key aspects of the examination. It outlines governance, distribution of power,
responsibilities among key entities, procedures to investigate and address security breaches, cheating, and other forms of inappropriate behavior, and procedures
for special or disadvantaged students. In addition, the policy document describes the purpose of the examination, specifies who can sit for the examination,
identifies rules about preparation for the examination, and explains alignment of the examination with curricula and standards. However, the policy document
does not describe authorized uses of results and the funding sources or explain the format of the examination questions.

5. Universities strongly support the Tawjihi, and policy makers, teacher unions, and educators support it as well. Because of the high-stakes nature of the exam,
students, parents, think tanks, and NGOs oppose it. It is unclear whether media and employers support the examination.

6. Coordinated efforts are made to improve the examination by stakeholder groups. Ongoing efforts are being made to reform the Tawjihi, with particular attention
to minimizing pressure faced by students for their performance.

7. Leadership in charge of the examination generally welcomes efforts to improve the examination.

8. Regular funding is provided by the government and by student fees.

9. Funding covers all core examination activities, including examination design and administration, data analysis and reporting, and long- or medium-term planning
of program milestones. However, funding does not cover staff training.

10. Funding for the Tawjihi does not cover research and development activities.

11. The Department of Examinations and Tests, which is responsible for the Tawjihi, is an office within the Ministry of Education that has been running the
examination since it was first administered in the 1960s.

                                                                                                                                                                 31
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


12. The Department of Examinations and Tests is not accountable to an external board or agency.

13. The examination results are officially recognized by certification and selection systems in Jordan.

14. The Department of Examinations and Tests has all of the required facilities to carry out the examination, including computers for all technical staff, a secure
building, secure storage facilities, access to adequate computer servers, an ability to backup data, and adequate communication tools.

15. The permanent staff in the department is supported by staff from the ministry as needed, including teachers for supervision, or for correction. Occasionally,
the ministry seeks external support (temporary) to help in the design of questions. Otherwise, for all other functions the ministry has sufficient staff to run the
examination.

16. Jordan offers some opportunities that prepare for work on the examination. For example, some graduate programs are specifically focused on educational
measurement and evaluation at the University of Jordan, Amman Arab University, and Yarmouk University. In addition, non-university courses on educational
measurement and evaluation are offered. However, there are no university courses on educational measurement and evaluation, internships in the examination
office, or funding available for attending international programs, courses, or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation.

17. There is a clear understanding that the examination measures the national school curriculum guidelines and standards.

18. What is measured by the examination is largely accepted by stakeholder groups.

19. Comprehensive material is accessible to most students online and through schools and teachers. Available material includes examples of the types of questions
that are on the examination as well as information on how to prepare for the examination. In addition, the general outcomes framework is available, which explains
what is measured by the examination. However, a report on the strengths and weaknesses in student performance are not available.

20. Up-to-date compulsory courses or workshops on the Tawjihi are available for teachers. These workshops are organized by supervisors in directorates of
education in governorates and address what grade 12 teachers are expected to deliver and updates to the examination.

21. Teachers are involved in some examination-related tasks. Teachers are involved in administering and scoring the examination, acting as a judge, and supervising
examination procedures; however, they are not involved in selecting or creating examination questions and scoring guides, or resolving inconsistencies between
examination scores and school grades.

22. A comprehensive technical report on the Tawjihi is available but with restricted circulation.

23. Only one systematic mechanism, internal review or observers, is in place to ensure the quality of the examination. External review or observers, external
certification or audits, pilot or field testing, and translation verification are not in place.

                                                                                                                                                                32
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


24. Inappropriate behavior surrounding the examination process is moderate. For example, impersonation when an individual other than the registered candidate
takes the examination, copying from other candidates, the use of unauthorized materials such as prepared answers and notes, and collusion among candidates
via mobile phones and passing of paper do occur during the examination process. To address these forms of inappropriate behavior, strict identification policies
are put in place, observers monitor test takers from both the front and back of exam rooms, and students are prohibited from bringing mobile phones or any
paper into the exam room. If students are suspected of bringing phones or paper into the exam room, they are thoroughly searched and may be prohibited from
taking the exam. Other inappropriate behaviors, such as leakage of the content of an examination paper and intimidation of examination supervisors, do not occur
during the examination process.

25. All stakeholder groups perceive the examination results as credible.

26. All students can take the Tawjihi; there are no language, gender, or other equivalent barriers.

27. All stakeholder groups use examination results in a proper way.

28. Student results are confidential. Although results are not publicly available, they can be accessed online by entering a student’s unique seat number or through
the school.

29. There are very limited options for students who do not perform well on the examination. Although students may retake the examination (or parts of it) up to
four times in three years, they cannot opt for less selective schools, universities, or tracks or repeat the grade. Students also do not have the option to attend
remedial courses to prepare to retake the examination.

30. Only one mechanism is in place to monitor the consequences of the examination: regular focus groups or surveys of key stakeholders. Other mechanisms, such
as a permanent oversight committee, studies that are updated regularly, and expert review groups, are not in place.




                                                                                                                                                                 33
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014




                                    JORDAN
  National (or System-Level) Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA)—National Test for
                          Quality Control of Education




                                                                                       34
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT
Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which NLSA activity takes place in a country or system, and the
                                       extent to which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, the NLSA activity.
                 LATENT                                   EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                     Setting clear policies for NLSA
 No NLSA exercise has taken place.           The NLSA has been operating on an         The NLSA is a stable program that has       This option does not apply to this
                                             irregular basis.                          been operating regularly.1                  dimension.


 There is no policy document pertaining to   There is an informal or draft policy      There is a formal policy document that      This option does not apply to this
 NLSA.                                       document that authorizes the NLSA.        authorizes the NLSA.2                       dimension.


 This option does not apply to this          The policy document is not available to   The policy document is available to the     This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                  the public.                               public.3                                    dimension.


 There is no plan for NLSA activity.         This option does not apply to this        There is a general understanding that the   There is a written NLSA plan for the
                                             dimension.                                NLSA will take place.                       coming years.4


                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                               Having strong public engagement for NLSA
 All stakeholder groups strongly oppose      Some stakeholder groups oppose the        Most stakeholder groups support the         All stakeholder groups support the NLSA.
 the NLSA or are indifferent to it. 5        NLSA.                                     NLSA.


                                                                                                                                                           (CONTINUED)




                                                                                                                                                                          35
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                    ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                           ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                                       Having regular funding for NLSA
 There is no funding allocated to the NLSA.   There is irregular funding allocated to the   There is regular funding allocated to the     This option does not apply to this
                                              NLSA.                                         NLSA.6                                        dimension.


 This option does not apply to this           Funding covers some core NLSA activities:     Funding covers all core NLSA activities:      This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                   design, administration, analysis, and         design, administration, analysis, and         dimension.
                                              reporting.                                    reporting.7

 This option does not apply to this           Funding does not cover research and           This option does not apply to this            Funding    covers       research   and
 dimension.                                   development activities.8                      dimension.                                    development activities.


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 4:
                                                              Having strong organizational structures for NLSA
 There is no NLSA office, ad hoc unit or      The NLSA office is a temporary agency or      The NLSA office is a permanent agency,        This option does not apply to this
 team.                                        group of people.                              institution or unit.9                         dimension.


 This option does not apply to this           Political considerations regularly hamper     Political considerations     sometimes        Political considerations never hamper
 dimension.                                   technical considerations.                     hamper technical considerations.10            technical considerations.


 This option does not apply to this           The NLSA office is not accountable to a       The NLSA office is accountable to a clearly   This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                   clearly recognized body.11                    recognized body.                              dimension.


                                                                                                                                                                  (CONTINUED)




                                                                                                                                                                                36
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                 LATENT                                     EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                 ADVANCED



                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 5:
                                                                 Having effective human resources for NLSA
 There is no staff allocated for running an   The NLSA office is inadequately staffed to   The NLSA office is adequately staffed to   The NLSA office is adequately staffed to
 NLSA.                                        effectively carry out the assessment.12      carry out the NLSA effectively, with       carry out the NLSA effectively, with no
                                                                                           minimal issues.                            issues.

 The country does not offer opportunities     This option does not apply to this           The country offers some opportunities to   The country offers a wide range of
 that prepare individuals for work on         dimension.                                   prepare individuals for work on the        opportunities to prepare individuals for
 NLSA.                                                                                     NLSA.13                                    work on the NLSA.




                                                                                                                                                                            37
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                       Degree to which the NLSA is coherent with other components of the education system.
                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                       SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                                Aligning the NLSA with learning goals
 It is not clear if the NLSA is based on    This option does not apply to this        The NLSA measures performance against        This option does not apply to this
 curriculum or learning standards.          dimension.                                curriculum or learning standards.14          dimension.


 What the NLSA measures is generally        This option does not apply to this        What the NLSA measures is questioned by      What the NLSA measures is largely
 questioned by stakeholder groups.          dimension.                                some stakeholder groups.15                   accepted by stakeholder groups.


 There are no mechanisms in place to        There are ad hoc reviews of the NLSA to   There are regular internal reviews of the    This option does not apply to this
 ensure that the NLSA accurately            ensure that it measures what it is        NLSA to ensure that it measures what it is   dimension.
 measures what it is supposed to measure.   intended to measure.                      intended to measure.16

                                                                       SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                    Providing teachers with opportunities to learn about the NLSA
 There are no courses or workshops on the   There are occasional      courses   or    There are some courses or workshops on       There are widely available high quality
 NLSA.17                                    workshops on the NLSA.                    the NLSA offered on a regular basis.         courses or workshops on the NLSA
                                                                                                                                   offered on a regular basis.




                                                                                                                                                                        38
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                             ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                      Degree to which the NLSA meets technical standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way.
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                     ESTABLISHED                                       ADVANCED



                                                                           ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                        Ensuring the quality of the NLSA
 No options are offered to include all        This option does not apply to this             At least one option is offered to include all   Different options are offered to include all
 groups of students in the NLSA.              dimension.                                     groups of students in the NLSA.18               groups of students in the NLSA.


 There are no mechanisms in place to          This option does not apply to this             There are some mechanisms in place to           There are a variety of mechanisms in
 ensure the quality of the NLSA.              dimension.                                     ensure the quality of the NLSA.19               place to ensure the quality of the NLSA.


 There is no technical report or other        There is some documentation about the          There is a comprehensive technical report       There is a comprehensive, high-quality
 documentation about the NLSA.                technical aspects of the NLSA, but it is not   but with restricted circulation.                technical report available to the general
                                              in a formal report format.                                                                     public.20

                                                                           ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                       Ensuring effective uses of the NLSA
 NLSA results are not disseminated.           NLSA results are poorly disseminated.          NLSA results are disseminated in an             This option does not apply to this
                                                                                             effective way.21                                dimension.


 NLSA information is not used or is used in   This option does not apply to this             NLSA results are used by some                   NLSA information is used by all
 ways inconsistent with the purposes or       dimension.                                     stakeholder groups in a way that is             stakeholder groups in a way that is
 the technical characteristics of the                                                        consistent with the purposes and                consistent with the purposes and
 assessment.                                                                                 technical   characteristics of  the             technical   characteristics of  the
                                                                                             assessment.                                     assessment.22
 There are no mechanisms in place to          This option does not apply to this             There are some mechanisms in place to           There are a variety of mechanisms in
 monitor the consequences of the NLSA.        dimension.                                     monitor the consequences of the NLSA.23         place to monitor the consequences of the
                                                                                                                                             NLSA.




                                                                                                                                                                                       39
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


National (of System-Level) Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA): Development-Level Rating Justifications

   1. The National Test for Quality Control of Education is administered every year, alternating between Grades 4, 8, and 10 (each of the three grades is assessed
      once in three years). The National Test for Quality Control of Education was first administered in 2004, and students are assessed in the following subjects:
      Arabic language, mathematics, science, and English language. All students at the given grade levels are assessed, and the main purposes are to monitor
      education quality at the system level, support schools and teachers, and inform policy design, evaluation, and decision making.

   2. The Ministry of Education’s Statistical Report authorizes the National Test for Quality Control of Education annually.

   3. The Statistical Report is available to the public.

   4. There is a publicly available written plan specifying who will be tested and in which subject areas.

   5. It is not possible to tell the stakeholder engagement for the National Test for Quality Control of Education.

   6. Regular funding is allocated by the government to the National Examination.

   7. Funding covers all core NLSA activities, including assessment design and administration, and data analysis and reporting. However, funding does not cover
      long- or medium-term planning of program milestones or staff training.

   8. Funding for the NLSA program does not cover research and development activities.

   9. The Directorate of Examination and Testing, which is responsible for carrying out the National Examination, is a permanent unit in the Ministry of
      Education.

   10. Although political considerations sometimes hamper technical considerations, assessment results have never been withheld from publication because of
       political reasons.

   11. The Directorate of Examination and Testing is not accountable to a clearly recognized body.

   12. The Directorate of Examination and Testing is inadequately staffed to effectively carry out the assessment. Although there is permanent and full-time staff,
       it is insufficient in terms of quality and quantity. Although staffing is insufficient, no issues have been identified related to the performance of the human
       resources responsible for the National Examination.



                                                                                                                                                                  40
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


   13. Jordan offers some opportunities to prepare individuals for work on the National Examination. There are graduate programs and courses on educational
       measurement and evaluation at the University of Jordan, Amman Arab University, and Yarmouk University. In addition, non-university courses or
       workshops on educational measurement and evaluation are available. However, there are no internships or short-term employment opportunities in the
       large-scale assessment office or funding for attending international programs, courses, or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation.

   14. The National Examination measures performance against internationally recognized and national curriculum guidelines or standards.

   15. What the National Examination measures is questioned by some stakeholder groups.

   16. Regular independent reviews are conducted by qualified experts as well as regular internal reviews and ad hoc reviews of the alignment between the
       assessment instrument and what it is supposed to measure.

   17. Jordan offers no courses or workshops on the NLSA.

   18. At least one option is offered to include all groups of students in the NLSA. For example, the large-scale assessment is offered in the language of instruction
       for almost all student groups. However, accommodations are not provided for students with disabilities, and no special plans are made to ensure that the
       large-scale assessment is administered to students in hard-to-reach areas.

   19. Some mechanisms are in place to ensure the quality of the NLSA. For example, a pilot is conducted before the main data collection occurs to ensure the
       quality of the NLSA, all proctors and administrators are trained according to a protocol, there are internal reviewers, there is a standardized manual for
       large-scale assessment administrators, and discrepancies are required to be reported on a standard sheet. However, scorers are not trained to ensure high
       interrater reliability, and no requirements are set for double scoring or processing of data, booklets to be numbered, external reviewers, or external
       certification or audits.

   20. A comprehensive, high-quality technical report on the National Examination is available to the general public.

   21. NLSA results are disseminated in an effective way. For example, reports are disseminated within 12 months after the large-scale assessment is
       administered, reports with results are made available for all stakeholder groups, and a media briefing is organized to discuss results. In addition, the main
       reports on the results contain information on overall achievement levels and subgroups, trends over time overall and for subgroups, and standard errors.
       However, no workshops or presentations are held for key stakeholders on the results, and results are not featured in newspapers and magazines or on
       radio and television.

   22. Information on the National Examination is used by all stakeholder groups in a way that is consistent with the purposes and technical characteristics of
       the assessment.


                                                                                                                                                                   41
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


   23. Very limited mechanisms are in place to monitor the consequences of the NLSA. Remedial plans are developed to address students’ weaknesses in basic
       learning skills, with follow-up on implementation of plans conducted by field supervisors. However, there are no expert review groups, regular focus groups
       of key stakeholders, themed conferences that provide a forum to discuss research and other data on the consequences of the large-scale assessment,
       funding for independent research on the impact of the large-scale assessment, or a permanent oversight committee in place.




                                                                                                                                                               42
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014




                                       JORDAN
         National (or System-Level) Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA)—National
                   Assessment for the Knowledge Economy (NAfKE)




                                                                                         43
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT
Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which NLSA activity takes place in a country or system, and the
                                       extent to which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, the NLSA activity.
                 LATENT                                   EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                     Setting clear policies for NLSA
 No NLSA exercise has taken place.           The NLSA has been operating on an         The NLSA is a stable program that has       This option does not apply to this
                                             irregular basis.1                         been operating regularly.                   dimension.


 There is no policy document pertaining to   There is an informal or draft policy      There is a formal policy document that      This option does not apply to this
 NLSA.                                       document that authorizes the NLSA.2       authorizes the NLSA.                        dimension.


 This option does not apply to this          The policy document is not available to   The policy document is available to the     This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                  the public.                               public. 3                                   dimension.


 There is no plan for NLSA activity.         This option does not apply to this        There is a general understanding that the   There is a written NLSA plan for the
                                             dimension.                                NLSA will take place.                       coming years.4


                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                               Having strong public engagement for NLSA
 All stakeholder groups strongly oppose      Some stakeholder groups oppose the        Most stakeholder groups support the         All stakeholder groups support the NLSA.5
 the NLSA or are indifferent to it.          NLSA.                                     NLSA.


                                                                                                                                                            (CONTINUED)




                                                                                                                                                                          44
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014



                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                    ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                           ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                                       Having regular funding for NLSA
 There is no funding allocated to the NLSA.   There is irregular funding allocated to the   There is regular funding allocated to the     This option does not apply to this
                                              NLSA.6                                        NLSA.                                         dimension.


 This option does not apply to this           Funding covers some core NLSA activities:     Funding covers all core NLSA activities:      This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                   design, administration, analysis, and         design, administration, analysis, and         dimension.
                                              reporting.                                    reporting.7

 This option does not apply to this           Funding does not cover research and           This option does not apply to this            Funding    covers       research   and
 dimension.                                   development activities.8                      dimension.                                    development activities.


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 4:
                                                              Having strong organizational structures for NLSA
 There is no NLSA office, ad hoc unit or      The NLSA office is a temporary agency or      The NLSA office is a permanent agency,        This option does not apply to this
 team.                                        group of people.                              institution or unit.9                         dimension.


 This option does not apply to this           Political considerations regularly hamper     Political considerations     sometimes        Political considerations never hamper
 dimension.                                   technical considerations.                     hamper technical considerations.10            technical considerations.


 This option does not apply to this           The NLSA office is not accountable to a       The NLSA office is accountable to a clearly   This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                   clearly recognized body.11                    recognized body.                              dimension.


                                                                                                                                                                  (CONTINUED)




                                                                                                                                                                                45
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                 LATENT                                     EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                  ADVANCED



                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 5:
                                                                 Having effective human resources for NLSA
 There is no staff allocated for running an   The NLSA office is inadequately staffed to   The NLSA office is adequately staffed to    The NLSA office is adequately staffed to
 NLSA.                                        effectively carry out the assessment.        carry out the NLSA effectively, with        carry out the NLSA effectively, with no
                                                                                           minimal issues.                             issues.12

 The country does not offer opportunities     This option does not apply to this           The country offers some opportunities to    The country offers a wide range of
 that prepare individuals for work on         dimension.                                   prepare individuals for work on the NLSA.   opportunities to prepare individuals for
 NLSA.                                                                                                                                 work on the NLSA.13




                                                                                                                                                                             46
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                  SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                       Degree to which the NLSA is coherent with other components of the education system.
                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                       SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                                Aligning the NLSA with learning goals
 It is not clear if the NLSA is based on    This option does not apply to this        The NLSA measures performance against        This option does not apply to this
 curriculum or learning standards.          dimension.                                curriculum or learning standards.14          dimension.


 What the NLSA measures is generally        This option does not apply to this        What the NLSA measures is questioned by      What the NLSA measures is largely
 questioned by stakeholder groups.          dimension.                                some stakeholder groups.                     accepted by stakeholder groups.15


 There are no mechanisms in place to        There are ad hoc reviews of the NLSA to   There are regular internal reviews of the    This option does not apply to this
 ensure that the NLSA accurately            ensure that it measures what it is        NLSA to ensure that it measures what it is   dimension.
 measures what it is supposed to measure.   intended to measure.                      intended to measure.16

                                                                       SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                    Providing teachers with opportunities to learn about the NLSA
 There are no courses or workshops on the   There are occasional      courses   or    There are some courses or workshops on       There are widely available high-quality
 NLSA.17                                    workshops on the NLSA.                    the NLSA offered on a regular basis.         courses or workshops on the NLSA
                                                                                                                                   offered on a regular basis.




                                                                                                                                                                        47
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                             ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                      Degree to which the NLSA meets technical standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way.
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                     ESTABLISHED                                       ADVANCED



                                                                           ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                        Ensuring the quality of the NLSA
 No options are offered to include all        This option does not apply to this             At least one option is offered to include all   Different options are offered to include all
 groups of students in the NLSA.18            dimension.                                     groups of students in the NLSA.                 groups of students in the NLSA.


 There are no mechanisms in place to          This option does not apply to this             There are some mechanisms in place to           There are a variety of mechanisms in
 ensure the quality of the NLSA.              dimension.                                     ensure the quality of the NLSA.                 place to ensure the quality of the NLSA.19


 There is no technical report or other        There is some documentation about the          There is a comprehensive technical report       There is a comprehensive, high-quality
 documentation about the NLSA.                technical aspects of the NLSA, but it is not   but with restricted circulation.20              technical report available to the general
                                              in a formal report format.                                                                     public.

                                                                           ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                       Ensuring effective uses of the NLSA
 NLSA results are not disseminated.           NLSA results are poorly disseminated.          NLSA results are disseminated in an             This option does not apply to this
                                                                                             effective way.21                                dimension.


 NLSA information is not used or is used in   This option does not apply to this             NLSA results are used by some                   NLSA information is used by all
 ways inconsistent with the purposes or       dimension.                                     stakeholder groups in a way that is             stakeholder groups in a way that is
 the technical characteristics of the                                                        consistent with the purposes and                consistent with the purposes and
 assessment.                                                                                 technical   characteristics of  the             technical   characteristics of  the
                                                                                             assessment.22                                   assessment.
 There are no mechanisms in place to          This option does not apply to this             There are some mechanisms in place to           There are a variety of mechanisms in
 monitor the consequences of the NLSA.23      dimension.                                     monitor the consequences of the NLSA.           place to monitor the consequences of the
                                                                                                                                             NLSA.




                                                                                                                                                                                       48
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


National (of System-Level) Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA): Development-Level Rating Justifications

1. The National Assessment for the Knowledge Economy (NAfKE) has been administered three times, in 2006, 2008, and 2011. It was introduced to monitor
education quality at the system level and inform policy design, evaluation, and decision making and is administered to a representative random sample of
students. The NAfKE is conducted alongside the Education Reform for Knowledge Economy (ERfKE I and II) projects. ERfKE is a sector-level intervention
supported by the World Bank and other donors that aims to transform the education system at the early childhood, basic, and secondary levels to produce
graduates with the skills needed for the knowledge economy. The NAfKE serves to provide the Ministry of Education in Jordan with data on strengths and
weaknesses in students’ skills with respect to the knowledge economy to inform decision making. In addition, the assessment serves to measure changes in
student performance related to implementation of the ERfKE.

2. Policy documents are available pertaining to NAfKE in Jordan. The appraisal document for the ERfKE states that the NCHRD is authorized to carry out external
monitoring and evaluation for the project. In addition, the Monitoring and Evaluation Framework document for ERfKE includes NAfKE as a major input to assess
progress and outcomes. In addition, terms of reference are available regarding the NAfKE.

3. The policy documents are available at the Ministry of Education, the National Library, and the Library of the National Center for the Development of Human
Resources.

4. A publicly available written plan, the Monitoring & Evaluation Framework document for the ERfKE, specifies who will be tested and in which subject areas. The
plan is available to, and accessible by, only certain selected groups.

5. Based on the information provided, a rating cannot be established for this category.

6. In addition to funding from nongovernment sources, NCHRD’s internal budget covers some assessment-related activities.

7. Funding covers all core NLSA activities, including assessment design and administration as well as data analysis and reporting. However, funding does not
cover long- or medium-term planning of program milestones or staff training.

8. Funding for the NLSA program does not cover research and development activities.

9. The NCHRD is a permanent research center created to carry out studies and assessments across sectors and runs the NAfKE.

10. Political considerations sometimes hamper technical considerations. For example, debate surrounded which year’s assessment results would be considered
the baseline. Since performance declined in 2011 compared to 2006 and 2008, discussion was held about using the 2011 results as the baseline so as not to
highlight a decline in performance over time.


                                                                                                                                                                49
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


11. The NCHRD is not accountable to a clearly recognized body.

12. The NCHRD is adequately staffed with permanent or full-time staff to effectively carry out the assessment.

13. Jordan offers some opportunities to prepare individuals for work on the NAfKE such as university graduate programs on educational measurement and
evaluation. In addition, there are nonuniversity courses or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation, internships or short-term employment
opportunities in the large-scale assessment office for students and researchers, and funding for attending international programs, courses, or workshops on
educational measurement and evaluation.

14. The NAfKE measures performance against internationally recognized and national curriculum guidelines or standards.

15. What the NAfKE measures is largely accepted by stakeholder groups.

16. Regular internal reviews are conducted of the alignment between the NAfKE and what it is supposed to measure.

17. Jordan offers no courses or workshops on the NLSA.

18. No options are offered to include all groups of students in the NLSA.

19. A variety of mechanisms are in place to ensure the quality of the NAfKE. For example, there is a standardized manual for large-scale assessment
administrators, double scoring and processing of data, and a pilot conducted before the main data collection takes place. In addition, all proctors or
administrators are trained according to a protocol, discrepancies must be recorded on a standard sheet, and all booklets are numbered. At the same time,
scorers are trained to ensure high interrater reliability, and internal reviewers or observers are in place. However, no external reviewers or observers or external
certifications or audits are in place.

20. A comprehensive technical report on the NAfKE is available, but with restricted circulation.

21. NLSA results are disseminated in an effective way. For example, reports are disseminated within 12 months after the large-scale assessment is administered,
and reports with results are made available for all stakeholder groups. In addition, the main reports on the results contain information on overall achievement
levels and subgroups, trends over time overall and for subgroups, and standard errors. Although workshops or presentations are given for key stakeholders on
the results, results are not featured in newspapers and magazines or on radio and television. At the same time, no media briefing is organized to discuss results.

22. Information on the NAfKE is used by some stakeholder groups in a way that is consistent with the purposes and technical characteristics of the assessment.



                                                                                                                                                                  50
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


23. No mechanisms are in place to monitor the consequences of the NLSA. There are no expert review groups, regular focus groups of key stakeholders, themed
conferences that provide a forum to discuss research and other data on the consequences of the large-scale assessment, funding for independent research on
the impact of the large-scale assessment, or a permanent oversight committee in place.




                                                                                                                                                         51
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014




                                              JORDAN
                             International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA)




                                                                                                  52
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                              ENABLING CONTEXT
Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which ILSA takes place in a country or system and the extent to
                                               which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, ILSA activity.
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                    ESTABLISHED                                     ADVANCED



                                                                             ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                          Setting clear policies for ILSA
 The country/system has not participated       This option does not apply to this           The country/system has participated in at      The country/system has participated in
 in an ILSA in the last 10 years.              dimension.                                   least one ILSA in the last 10 years.           two or more ILSA in the last 10 years.1


 The country/system has not taken              This option does not apply to this           The country/system has taken concrete          This option does not apply to this
 concrete steps to participate in an ILSA in   dimension.                                   steps to participate in at least one ILSA in   dimension.
 the next five years.                                                                       the next five years.2

 There is no policy document that              There is an informal or draft policy         There is a formal policy document that         This option does not apply to this
 addresses participation in ILSA.              document that addresses participation in     addresses participation in ILSA.               dimension.
                                               ILSA.3

 This option does not apply to this            The policy document is not available to      The policy document is available to the        This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                    the public.                                  public.4                                       dimension.


                                                                            ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                                        Having regular funding for ILSA
 There is no funding for participation in      There is funding from loans or external      There is regular funding allocated at          There is regular funding approved by law,
 ILSA.                                         donors.5                                     discretion.                                    decree or norm.


 This option does not apply to this            Funding covers some core activities of the   Funding covers all core activities of the      This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                    ILSA.6                                       ILSA.                                          dimension.


 Funding does not cover research and           This option does not apply to this           This option does not apply to this             Funding    covers        research    and
 development activities.                       dimension.                                   dimension.                                     development activities.7



                                                                                                                                                                                   53
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                                                                                                          (CONTINUED)
              LATENT                                 EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                   ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                          Having effective human resources for ILSA
 There is no team or national/system   There is a team or national/system           There is a team and national/system          This option does not apply to this
 coordinator to carry out the ILSA     coordinator to carry out the ILSA            coordinator to carry out the ILSA            dimension.
 activities.                           activities.                                  activities.8

 This option does not apply to this    The national/system coordinator or other     The national/system coordinator is fluent    This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                            designated team member may not be            in the language of the assessment.9          dimension.
                                       fluent in the language of the assessment.

 This option does not apply to this    The ILSA office is inadequately staffed or   The ILSA office is adequately staffed or     The ILSA office is adequately staffed and
 dimension.                            trained to carry out the assessment          trained to carry out the ILSA effectively,   trained to carry out the ILSA effectively,
                                       effectively.                                 with minimal issues.10                       with no issues.




                                                                                                                                                                         54
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                        SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                 Degree to which the ILSA meets technical quality standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way.
                LATENT                                  EMERGING                                ESTABLISHED                                  ADVANCED



                                                                     SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                            Providing opportunities to learn about ILSA
 The ILSA team has not attended            The ILSA team attended some              The ILSA team attended all international   This option does not apply to this
 international workshops or meetings.      international workshops or meetings.11   workshops or meetings.                     dimension.


 The    country/system       offers   no   This option does not apply to this       The country/system offers some             The country/system offers a wide range
 opportunities to learn about ILSA.        dimension.                               opportunities to learn about ILSA.12       of opportunities to learn about ILSA.


 This option does not apply to this        This option does not apply to this       Opportunities to learn about ILSA are      Opportunities to learn about ILSA are
 dimension.                                dimension.                               available to the country’s/system’s ILSA   available to a wide audience, in addition
                                                                                    team members only.                         to the country’s/system’s ILSA team
                                                                                                                               members.13




                                                                                                                                                                      55
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                               ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                    Degree to which the ILSA meets technical quality standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way.
                  LATENT                                       EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                             ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                            Ensuring the quality of ILSA
 Data from the ILSA has not been                The country/system met sufficient             The country/system met all technical        This option does not apply to this
 published.                                     standards to have its data presented          standards required to have its data         dimension.
                                                beneath the main display of the               presented in the main displays of the
                                                international report or in an annex.          international report.14
 The country/system has not contributed         This option does not apply to this            This option does not apply to this          The country/system has contributed new
 new knowledge on ILSA.15                       dimension.                                    dimension.                                  knowledge on ILSA.


                                                                             ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                           Ensuring effective uses of ILSA
 If any, country/system-specific results        Country/system-specific results and           Country/system-specific results and         Country/system-specific results and
 and information are not disseminated in        information are disseminated irregularly      information are regularly disseminated in   information are regularly and widely
 the country/system.                            in the country/system.                        the country/system.16                       disseminated in the country/system.

 Products to provide feedback to schools        This option does not apply to this            Products to provide feedback to schools     Products to provide feedback to schools
 and educators about the ILSA results are       dimension.                                    and educators about the ILSA results are    and educators about ILSA results are
 not made available.                                                                          sometimes made available.17                 systematically made available.

 There is no media coverage of the ILSA         There is limited media coverage of the        There is some media coverage of the ILSA    There is wide media coverage of the ILSA
 results.                                       ILSA results.18                               results.                                    results.


 If any, country/system-specific results        Results from the ILSA are used in a limited   Results from the ILSA are used in some      Results from the ILSA are used in a variety
 and information from the ILSA are not          way to inform decision making in the          ways to inform decision making in the       of ways to inform decision making in the
 used to inform decision making in the          country/system.                               country/system.                             country/system.19
 country/system.
 It is not clear that decisions based on ILSA   This option does not apply to this            This option does not apply to this          Decisions based on the ILSA results have
 results have had a positive impact on          dimension.                                    dimension.                                  had a positive impact on students’
 students’ achievement levels.                                                                                                            achievement levels.20


                                                                                                                                                                                   56
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


International Large Scale Assessment (ILSA): Development-Level Rating Justifications

1. Jordan has participated in multiple ILSAs in the last 10 years, including in TIMSS (2003, 2007, and 2011) and PISA (2006, 2009, and 2012). However, Jordan has
participated in TIMSS only at the grade 8 level.

2. Jordan has taken concrete steps to participate in PISA 2015 and TIMSS 2015.

3. The Monitoring and Evaluation Framework document for the ERfKE Program, agreed upon by the government and all the donors, addresses Jordan’s
participation in ILSAs.

4. The Monitoring and Evaluation Framework document is publicly available.

5. A regular funding program is available for international assessment participation allocated at discretion as well as funding provided by loans or external
donors. For example, Jordan covers participation fees for the international studies through a World Bank loan, while costs related to meetings and the
international study are covered by a grant from USAID.

6. Funding covers some core activities of the ILSAs, including international participation fees, implementation of the assessment exercise in Jordan, and
attendance at international expert meetings for the assessment exercise. Data analysis and research is usually carried out by the NCHRD from their own budget
and through a USAID-funded capacity-building project supporting NCHRD researchers.

7. Funding for ILSAs covers research and development when there is a need for such activities.

8. There are two national coordinators (one for TIMSS and one for PISA) and a team to carry out the ILSA activities.

9. The national ILSA coordinators are fluent in the language of the assessment.

10. The ILSA office is adequately staffed and trained to carry out ILSAs effectively, with minimal issues. There are sufficient staff members, who include four
permanent staff and temporary staff; permanent staff members work on data analysis and data management, and temporary staff are hired for data collection
and data entry. In addition, some members of the team have previous experience working on international assessments and have attended some international
meetings related to the assessment.

11. Jordan’s ILSA team attended some international workshops or meetings.

12. Jordan offers some opportunities to learn about ILSAs, such as workshops or meetings on using international assessment databases and funding for
attending international workshops or training on international assessments.

                                                                                                                                                                57
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014


13. Opportunities to learn about ILSAs are available to Jordan’s ILSA team members, Ministry of Education employees working in the Departments of
Examinations, Curricula, and Supervision and Training, and professionals or university staff interested in assessment.

14. Jordan met all technical standards required to have its data presented in the main displays of the international report.

15. Jordan has not contributed new knowledge on ILSAs.

16. Country-specific results and information are regularly disseminated in Jordan. A national report was made available online, and copies were distributed to
key stakeholders. In addition, copies of the international report were distributed to key stakeholders. In addition to these reports, a policy brief was developed
targeting policy makers and other key stakeholders. Recently, because of an apparent decline in TIMSS scores relative to previous years, another report was
produced to analyze results and possible factors contributing to decline.

Jordan’s results were communicated through a press release, and brochures and PowerPoint presentations with the country’s results were made available
online and distributed to key stakeholders. Results have regularly received coverage on television and radio and in newspapers. All information related to the
international study, its reports, and its results are usually copied to CDs and disseminated to universities and other interested stakeholders. However, products
providing feedback to the schools and educators about the results have not regularly been made available.

17. Products providing feedback to schools and educators about the ILSA results are sometimes made available.

18. Media coverage of the ILSA results is limited. Although media coverage has been limited to a few small articles for most cycles of the assessment exercises,
for TIMSS 2003 wider media coverage was organized, which included a large press conference.

19. Results from ILSAs are used in a variety of ways to inform decision making in Jordan. For example, results are used to track the impact of reforms on student
achievement levels, informing interventions such as ERfKE. In addition, results are used to inform curriculum improvement, teacher training programs, and other
assessment activities in the system. However, results from the ILSA are not used to inform resource allocation.

20. Decisions based on ILSA results have had a positive impact on students’ achievement levels. A study published in 2011 by H. Abdul-Hamid et al. found that
assessment results contributed to feedback between researchers and policy makers, improving student achievement levels in Jordan.




                                                                                                                                                                   58
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2014



Acknowledgments
This report, part of a 16-country benchmarking exercise in the Middle East & North Africa and Africa regions, was prepared
by the World Bank SABER–Student Assessment team, in partnership with the Arab League Educational, Cultural, and
Scientific Organization (ALECSO) and the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO),
which led data collection efforts. This effort is part of the Arab Regional Agenda for Improving Education Quality (ARAIEQ)
led by ALECSO in partnership with the World Bank. It benefited from feedback and review from Juan Manuel Moreno,
World Bank Lead Education Specialist and Task Team Leader for education projects in Jordan, as well as comments
received during a national validation workshop held in Jordan.


References
Abdul-Hamid, H., K. Abu-Lebdeh, and H. Patrinos. 2011. “Assessment Testing Can Be Used to Inform Policy Decisions: The
Case of Jordan.” Policy Research Working Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Clarke, M. 2012. “What Matters Most for Student Assessment Systems: A Framework Paper.” READ/SABER Working Paper
Series. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ministry of Education. 2012. “Education Reform for knowledge Economy- Second Phase (ERfKE II).” The Hashemite
Kingdom of Jordan, Amman. Data retrieved from http://www.moe.gov.jo/Files/ (23-7-2012) (12-30-05%20PM).pdf on
November 19, 2013.

UNESCO. 2012. “Fact Sheet: Education in Jordan.” EFA Global Monitoring Report 2012. UNESCO, Paris.

World Bank. 2009. “Project Appraisal Document for a Second Education Reform for the Knowledge Economy Project.”
Report No. 46824-JO. World Bank, Washington, DC.

———. “Jordan Country Indicator Data.” World                      Bank,    Washington,     DC.    Data    retrieved        from
http://databank.worldbank.org/data on November 19, 2013.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                        59
JORDAN ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                                SABER
COUNTRY REPORT |2014


                                                                               www.worldbank.org/education/saber




       The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER)
       initiative produces comparative data and knowledge on education
       policies and institutions, with the aim of helping countries
       systematically strengthen their education systems.          SABER
       evaluates the quality of education policies against evidence-based
       global standards, using new diagnostic tools and detailed policy
       data. The SABER country reports give all parties with a stake in
       educational results—from administrators, teachers, and parents to
       policy makers and business people—an accessible, objective
       snapshot showing how well the policies of their country’s education
       system are oriented toward ensuring that all children and youth
       learn.

       This report focuses specifically on policies in the area of student
       assessment.



This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The
World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.




                                                                                                                                                         2
SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS
