MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Morocco
                                                                                                         SABER Country Report
STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                      2015




        Key Policy Areas for Student Assessment                                                             Status
        1. Classroom Assessment
           A formal, publicly available document provides guidelines for classroom assessment
           activities in Morocco. Resources and materials are available to teachers to support them
           in carrying out their assessment activities. Nonetheless, classroom assessment
           information tends to be used more as an administrative tool than as a pedagogical
           resource, and teachers’ assessment practices are generally weak. Mechanisms to
           monitor the quality of classroom assessment practices are very limited.


        2. Examinations
            The Baccalaureate Examination has been administered in its current form since 2003.
            The results are used to certify student completion of secondary education and to make
            decisions about student admission to higher education. The government provides regular
            funding for the examination. Funding covers all core assessment activities, as well as
            research and development. The examination office is stable and adequately staffed.
            However, formal mechanisms to ensure the quality of the examination process are
            limited, and some inappropriate behavior surrounding the examination has been
            reported.

        3. National Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA)
            Le Programme National de l’Evaluation des Apprentissages ( National Program for
            Assessment of Learning) was administered for the first time in 2008 to a representative
            random sample of students in primary (grades 4 and 6) and secondary (grades 8 and 9)
            schools. The assessment covered Arabic, French, mathematics, and science. The
            government allocates regular funding for the assessment, covering all core activities, but
            not research and development. Limited opportunities are available to learn about the
            assessment, particularly for teachers.

        4. International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA)
           In the last 10 years, Morocco has participated in the Progress in International Reading
           Literary Study (PIRLS) 2006 and 2011, and Trends in International Mathematics and
           Science Study (TIMSS) 2007, 2011, and 2015. The country has taken concrete steps to
           participate in PIRLS 2016. The Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training
           provides regular funding for ILSA activities. Morocco has effective human resources for
           ILSA and meets technical quality standards. It is not clear, however, that decisions based
           on ILSA data have had a positive impact on students’ achievement levels, and media
           coverage of ILSA results is limited.




                                                                                                                THE WORLD BANK
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                Table of Contents


           Introduction ................................................................................................................................................3
           What is SABER--Student Assessment? ........................................................................................................3
           Education in Morocco .................................................................................................................................7
           Classroom Assessment in Morocco ............................................................................................................8
           Examinations in Morocco ............................................................................................................................9
           National Large-Scale Assessment in Morocco .......................................................................................... 11
           International Large-Scale Assessment in Morocco ................................................................................... 13
           Appendix 1: Assessment Types and Their Key Differences ....................................................................... 15
           Appendix 2: Basic Structure of Rubrics
                              for Evaluating Data Collected on a Student Assessment System .........................................16
           Appendix 3: Summary of the Development Levels for Each Assessment Type .......................................17
           Appendix 4: Methodology for Assigning Development Levels ................................................................. 18
           Appendix 5: SABER--Student Assessment Rubrics for Morocco ............................................................... 19
           Acknowledgments .....................................................................................................................................53
           References.................................................................................................................................................53




                                                                                                                                                       THE WORLD BANK
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Introduction

Morocco has focused on increasing student learning outcomes by improving the quality of education in the country. An
effective student assessment system is an important component of efforts to improve education quality and learning
outcomes because it provides the necessary information to meet stakeholders’ decision-making needs. In order to gain a
better understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of its existing assessment system, Morocco decided to benchmark
this system using standardized tools developed under The World Bank’s Systems Approach for Better Education Results
(SABER) program. SABER is an evidence-based program to help countries systematically examine and strengthen the
performance of different aspects of their education systems.


What is SABER-Student Assessment?

SABER-Student Assessment is a component of the SABER program that focuses specifically on benchmarking student
assessment policies and systems. The goal of SABER-Student Assessment is to promote stronger assessment systems that
contribute to improved education quality and learning for all.


National governments and international agencies are increasingly recognizing the key role that assessment of student
learning plays in an effective education system. The importance of assessment is linked to its role in:
(i)     providing information on levels of student learning and achievement in the system;
(ii)    monitoring trends in education quality over time;
(iii)   supporting educators and students with real-time information to improve teaching and learning; and
(iv)    holding stakeholders accountable for results.



SABER-Student Assessment methodology

The SABER-Student Assessment framework is built on the available evidence base for what an effective assessment system
looks like. The framework provides guidance on how countries can build more effective student assessment systems. The
framework is structured around two main dimensions of assessment systems: the types/purposes of assessment activities
and the quality of those activities.

Assessment types and purposes

Assessment systems tend to be comprised of three main types of assessment activities, each of which serves a different
purpose and addresses different information needs. These three main types are: classroom assessment; examinations;
and large-scale, system level assessments.

Classroom assessment provides real-time information to support ongoing teaching and learning in individual classrooms.
Classroom assessments use a variety of formats, including observation, questioning, and paper-and-pencil tests, to
evaluate student learning, generally on a daily basis.

Examinations provide a basis for selecting or certifying students as they move from one level of the education system to
the next (or into the workforce). All eligible students are tested on an annual basis, or more often if the system allows for



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                       3
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


repeat testing. Examinations cover the main subject areas in the curriculum and usually involve essays and multiple-choice
questions.


Large-scale, system-level assessments provide feedback on the overall performance of the education system at particular
grades or age levels. These assessments typically cover a few subjects on a regular basis (such as every 3 to 5 years), are
often sample-based, and use multiple-choice and short-answer formats. They may be national or international in scope.


Appendix 1 summarizes the key features of these main types of assessment activities.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                     4
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Quality drivers of an assessment system

The key considerations when evaluating a student
assessment system are the individual and combined quality
of the assessment activities in terms of the adequacy of the
information they generate to support decision making. There
are three main drivers of information quality in an
assessment system: the enabling context, system alignment,
and assessment quality.


Enabling context refers to the broader context in which the
assessment activity takes place and the extent to which that context is conducive to, or supportive of, the assessment. It
covers such issues as the legislative or policy framework for assessment activities; institutional and organizational
structures for designing, carrying out, or using results from the assessment; the availability of sufficient and stable sources
of funding; and the presence of trained assessment staff.


System alignment refers to the extent to which the assessment is aligned with the rest of the education system. This
includes the degree of congruence between assessment activities and system learning goals, standards, curriculum, and
pre- and in-service teacher training.


Assessment quality refers to the psychometric quality of the instruments, processes, and procedures for the assessment
activity. It covers such issues as design and implementation of assessment activities, analysis and interpretation of student
responses to those activities, and the appropriateness of how assessment results are reported and used.


Crossing the quality drivers with the different assessment types/purposes provides the framework and broad indicator
areas shown in Table 1. This framework is a starting point for identifying indicators that can be used to review assessment
systems and plan for their improvement.


Table 1: Framework for building an effective assessment system, with indicator areas
The indicators are identified based on a combination of criteria, including:

x   professional standards for assessment;
x   empirical research on the characteristics of effective assessment systems, including analysis of the characteristics
    that differentiate between the assessment systems of low- versus high-performing nations; and
x   theory — that is, general consensus among experts that it contributes to effective assessment.


Levels of development

The World Bank has developed a set of standardized questionnaires and rubrics for collecting and evaluating data on the
three assessment types and related quality drivers.


The questionnaires are used to collect data on the characteristics of the assessment system in a particular country. The
information from the questionnaires is then applied to the rubrics in order to judge the development level of the country’s
assessment system in different areas.

SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                         5
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015



The basic structure of the rubrics for evaluating data collected using the standardized questionnaires is summarized in
Appendix 2. The goal of the rubrics is to provide a country with some sense of the development level of its assessment
activities compared to best or recommended practice in each area. For each indicator, the rubric displays four
development levels—Latent, Emerging, Established, and Advanced. These levels are artificially-constructed categories
chosen to represent key stages on the underlying continuum for each indicator. Each level is accompanied by a description
of what performance on the indicator looks like at that level.

x   Latent is the lowest level of performance; it represents absence of the desired attribute.
x   Emerging is the next level; it represents partial presence of the attribute.
x   Established represents the acceptable minimum standard.
x   Advanced represents the ideal or current best practice.

A summary of the development levels for each assessment type is presented in Appendix 3.


In reality, assessment systems are likely to be at different levels of development in different areas. For example, a system
may be Established in the area of examinations, but Emerging in the area of large-scale, system-level assessment, and vice
versa. While intuition suggests that it is probably better to be further along in as many areas as possible, the evidence is
unclear as to whether it is necessary to be functioning at Advanced levels in all areas. Therefore, one might view the
Established level as a desirable minimum outcome to achieve in all areas, but only aspire beyond that in those areas that
most contribute to the national vision or priorities for education. In line with these considerations, the ratings generated
by the rubrics are not meant to be additive across assessment types (that is, they are not meant to be added to create an
overall rating for an assessment system; they are only meant to produce an overall rating for each assessment type). The
methodology for assigning development levels is summarized in Appendix 4.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                      6
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Education in Morocco

Morocco is a lower-middle-income country in the Middle East and North Africa region. In 2014, GDP per capita was
US$3,103 (current US$) and annual GDP growth was 2.6 percent. Unemployment has remained high, particularly among
youth. Morocco’s political context evolved smoothly through the Arab Spring, from the adoption of a new Constitution in
2011 which set the stage for a more open and democratic society, increased decentralization, and support for modern
institutions to the current coalition government which continues to make constitutional reforms and take steps to reduce
the fiscal deficit.

In 1999, the Government of Morocco adopted the National Education and Training Charter, and declared the decade from
2000 to 2009 as the “decade for education.” In 2009, an Education Emergency Plan (EEP) for 2009-2012 was prepared to
accelerate the reform process and draw on lessons learned from programs implemented in the previous decade. Net
enrollment rates have increased at both the primary and secondary levels, with the net primary school enrollment rate
rising from 79 percent in 2001 to 98 percent in 2014, and that for secondary levels growing from 40 percent in 2005 to 56
percent in 2012. Still, significant disparities in access and quality remain, particularly at the secondary level. For example,
close to 46 percent of female youth of secondary school age are out of school, compared to 36 percent of male youth of
the same age. Quality of education also remains low. According to results from the 2011 Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), 74 percent of Moroccan students did not reach even the lowest of four
benchmark levels in Grade 4 mathematics.

To address the issues of access and quality, Morocco has committed to reforming its education system. Specifically, the
EEP enumerated three key policy areas, with the goal of improving education and training for all students. These areas
are: (i) achieving universal basic education; (ii) strengthening system performance (teaching, management, and
stewardship); and (iii) improving mobilization and utilization of resources.

Detailed information was collected on Morocco’s student assessment system using the SABER-Student Assessment
questionnaires and rubrics in order to benchmark it against best practices. Specifically, a local consultant with in-depth
knowledge of, and experience with, the Moroccan education system oversaw the completion of the four SABER-Student
Assessment questionnaires – one questionnaire each for Classroom Assessment, Examinations, National Large-Scale
Assessment, and International Large-Scale Assessment. The data to complete these questionnaires was obtained through
interviews and focus groups with key stakeholders and a review of existing official and technical documents. The
information in the completed questionnaires was then applied to the SABER--Student Assessment rubrics (one rubric for
each assessment type), and the conclusions of this report were determined on the basis of this analysis. It is important to
remember that these tools primarily focus on benchmarking a country’s policies and arrangements for assessment
activities at the system or macro level. Additional data would need to be collected to determine actual, on-the-ground
practices in Morocco, particularly by teachers and students in schools.


The following sections discuss the findings by each assessment type, accompanied by suggested policy options. The
suggested policy options were determined in collaboration with key local stakeholders based on Morocco’s immediate
interests and needs. Appendix 5 provides detailed, completed rubrics for each assessment type.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                         7
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Classroom Assessment in Morocco

Level of development: EMERGING

There is a formal, system-level document, called “Supervising and Monitoring Continuous Assessment in the School
Department,” which provides guidelines for classroom assessment activities in Morocco. This document is publicly
available online, as well as at teacher training colleges.

Teachers benefit from a variety of system-level mechanisms for ensuring that they develop skills and expertise in
classroom assessment. These mechanisms include pre- and in-service teacher training programs; opportunities to
participate in conferences and workshops; and opportunities to participate in the development or scoring of large-scale
assessments and examinations.

Teachers also have access to a number of resources to support their classroom assessment activities, including documents
that outline what their students are expected to learn and what levels of performance they are expected to reach at
different grade levels. Other resources include textbooks and workbooks that provide support for classroom assessment;
and item banks with examples of questions. However, teachers are not provided with explicit criteria or rubrics for
evaluating students’ work. Such criteria or rubrics would make it easier for teachers to systematically evaluate students’
work against expected standards for the grade level.

According to key documents, classroom assessment is meant to be used for diagnosing student learning issues; providing
feedback to students on their learning (including in the form of grades); informing parents about their child's learning; and
planning next steps in instruction. Teachers typically carry out classroom assessment activities to meet external (system-
level) requirements or information needs, and to inform their own teaching and their students’ learning.

It is rare to observe errors in the scoring of students' work, and grade inflation is not a serious problem. Nonetheless, in
practice, classroom assessment activities are considered to be weak. This is because classroom assessment information is
used more as an administrative tool than as a pedagogical resource, and provides little useful feedback to students. This
is compounded by the fact that the assessments frequently focus on student recall of information.

Only one mechanism–school inspection and teacher supervision–is used to monitor the quality of classroom assessment
practices throughout the system. Classroom assessment is not a required component of a teacher’s performance
evaluation. In addition, government funding is not available for research on the quality of classroom assessment activities
or on ways to improve them.

Classroom assessment information is required to be disseminated to all key stakeholders, including students, parents, and
education officials. However, it is not used as an input for external examination results.

Suggested policy options:

1. Improve the quality of classroom assessment practices by providing more focused training on this topic to teachers.
For example, introduce a required course on classroom assessment to all teacher training programs. As part of this course,
reinforce the core pedagogical purposes of classroom assessment activities and the uses of classroom assessment
information to support student learning. Also as part of this course, instruct teachers in how to use explicit criteria and
rubrics for evaluating students' work.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                       8
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


The Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training might also consider preparing a short guidebook for teachers
on assessment techniques. For example, in Uganda, a 50-page guidebook on the topic of test construction was developed
and disseminated to teachers. The guidebook included easy-to-understand, non-technical information on the purposes of
assessment, assessment design, and uses of assessment results.


2. Further strengthen monitoring of classroom assessment practices by instituting additional systematic mechanisms.
Such mechanisms might include incorporating classroom assessment into teachers’ performance evaluations; putting in
place an external moderation system to help review and standardize the difficulty of classroom assessments and scoring
criteria; and providing funding for research on the quality of classroom assessment activities and ways to improve them.


Examinations in Morocco

Level of development: ESTABLISHED

The Baccalaureate Examination is authorized by the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training and has been
regularly administered in its current form since 2003. The results are used to certify student completion of upper-
secondary education and to make decisions about student admission to higher education. “The Ministerial Decision for
Organizing the Examinations for Obtaining the Baccalaureate Certificate” is a publicly available document that authorizes
the examination. This document specifies the examination’s purpose, its alignment with the official national curriculum,
governance arrangements, and eligibility for sitting for the examination. Most stakeholder groups strongly support the
examination program.

The government provides regular funding for the examination. Funding covers all core examination activities, as well as
research and development.

The National Center for Evaluation, Examinations, and Orientation (NCEEO has had primary responsibility for running the
Baccalaureate Examination since 2003. The center has all of the necessary facilities and technology to carry out the
examination program.

In terms of human resources, the examination office is adequately staffed at the national level, utilizing additional support
from inspectors and trainers as necessary. Several opportunities are available to interested stakeholders to prepare for
work on the examination program, including funding for attending international programs, courses, or workshops on
educational measurement and evaluation; and internships in the examination office. However, there are no relevant
university graduate programs or courses at local universities. While, in general, there are no issues with the performance
of permanent staff at the NCEEO, test administrators, who are mainly teachers, tend not to receive sufficient training to
be able to successfully carry out their responsibilities, especially when they are new in the role.

Teachers are involved in most examination-related tasks, including selecting or creating examination questions and
scoring guides, administering the examination, and scoring student responses. A mixture of compulsory and voluntary
workshops on these topics is organized by academies, inspectors, and the National Director of Training to help prepare
teachers for these roles.

Materials to prepare for the Baccalaureate Examination are available free of charge to all students. These materials include
sample questions, general information on how to prepare, and a framework document explaining what is measured by
the examination. All students can take the examination; there are no language, gender, or other barriers. Some
inappropriate behavior has been reported during past examination administrations, including students copying from other

SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                       9
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


candidates, using unauthorized materials such as prepared answers and notes, and intimidating examination supervisors
and other officials. At the same time, the examination results are generally perceived as credible, although the media have
at times been critical of them. Examination results are recognized abroad and accepted for entrance to various European
higher learning institutions, as well as to institutions in some Arab and Asian countries.

Examination results are not confidential. Student names and results are public, available not only to schools and parents,
but also to ministries, nongovernmental organizations, academies, and provinces via various electronic sites.

Students who do not perform well on the examination do not have to leave the education system, but can instead retake
the examination, apply to less-selective schools, or repeat the grade.

Limited mechanisms are in place to ensure the technical quality of the Baccalaureate Examination. For example, there is
some documentation on the technical aspects of the examination, albeit not in formal report format. In addition, teachers
are used as internal verifiers in the final stages of question design to determine time requirements and suggest revisions.
Other quality assurance mechanisms, such as using external reviewers or field testing, do not take place.

The only mechanism in place to monitor the consequences of the examination are regular focus groups or surveys of key
stakeholders. The NCEEO also analyzes student response data after the examination to provide feedback to national
commissions and supervisors in support of general quality-improvement efforts.

Suggested policy options:


1. Introduce additional systematic mechanisms to ensure the quality of the examination. For example, pilot the
examination questions or carry out an external review of the quality of the examination. Additionally, prepare a
comprehensive, high-quality technical report on the examination and make it publicly available. Finally, ensure that test
administrators are adequately prepared to carry out their duties by instituting mandatory upfront training. Short quizzes
could be administered at the beginning and end of these trainings to measure participants’ knowledge of proper
administration procedures and to identify and address any knowledge gaps in advance of the examination administration.


2. Enhance the fairness of the examination by putting in place mechanisms to prevent and address inappropriate
behaviors. In addition to the draft policy and book of procedures to combat fraud that are currently under review, consider
introducing clear guidelines for all key stakeholders (including students, parents, teachers, administrators, and
examination developers) on what constitutes appropriate and inappropriate behaviors during the examination process,
and specify the consequences for engaging in an inappropriate behavior. Ensure that the guidelines are easily accessible
to all, including the general public.


3. Ensure confidentiality of students’ examination results. For example, instead of reporting results by name, a unique
identification number could be assigned to each student taking the examination, with examination results reported
according to these numbers.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                     10
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


National Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA) in Morocco

Level of development: EMERGING

Morocco’s Le Programme National de l’Evaluation des Apprentissages (National Program for Assessment of Learning) was
first administered in 2008 to a representative random sample of students in primary (grades 4 and 6) and secondary
(grades 8 and 9) schools. Students were assessed in the areas of Arabic, French, mathematics, and science. Special plans
were made to ensure that the assessment was administered to students in hard-to-reach parts of the country. While the
assessment was offered in the language of instruction for almost all student groups, there were no accommodations or
alternative assessments for students with disabilities.

The main purposes of this NLSA include monitoring education quality at the system level; supporting schools and teachers;
and informing policy design, evaluation, and decision-making. The formal policy document (Le Programme National de
l’Evaluation des Apprentissages, issued by the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training authorizing the NLSA
is publically available. Although there is no written plan, there is a common understanding that the next NLSA will take
place in 2016.


The NLSA is well aligned with the rest of the education system. It measures performance against the official curriculum.
Internal reviews took place following the 2008 administration to ensure that the assessment was measuring what it was
intended to measure.


In general, there is support for the NLSA from stakeholder groups and no noted opposition, although teacher unions
question the importance of the assessment.


Regular funding is allocated to the NLSA and covers all core NLSA activities. Funding does not cover research and
development activities.

The NLSA office is a permanent unit, with permanent full-time staff, in the National Center for Evaluation, Examinations,
and Orientation (NCEEO). NCEEO is part of the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training, and is responsible
for NLSA instrument development, while Regional Academies for Education and Training (AREFs) finance the
administration, in-service teacher training, and use of the results. The NCEEO is accountable to the Minister, who is
accountable to the government and the parliament.

Issues that have been identified with the performance of those responsible for running the NLSA include poor training of
test administrators, unclear instructions and guidelines for administering the assessment, and a deficiency in teachers’
abilities to use the results. More training of core NLSA staff is needed, particularly in the areas of data analysis and use
(for example, producing action plans or writing policy briefs).


There are some limited opportunities to prepare individuals for work on the NLSA program. These include short-term
employment with NCEEO, funding for attending international workshops, and occasional workshops organized by the
ministry or NCEEO. Such opportunities are available to a limited number of staff. University courses or graduate programs
focused on educational measurement and evaluation are not available.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                      11
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


A variety of mechanisms are in place to ensure the quality of the NLSA, including a standardized manual for assessment
administrators, pilots of instruments before the main data collection, and the numbering of booklets. A comprehensive,
high-quality technical report was prepared for the 2008 assessment and is available to the general public. Key stakeholders
and the public learned about the results of the 2008 NLSA through targeted communications, including via workshops and
various media outlets.


Mechanisms have been put in place to monitor the consequences of the NLSA, including a permanent oversight committee
and themed conferences that provide a forum to discuss research and other data on the NLSA. However, funding for
independent research is not available.


Suggested policy options:

1. Ensure sustainability, successful planning, and implementation of the National Program for Assessment of Learning
by developing a formal, written plan for the next two to three assessment rounds. The plan should specify who will be
tested and in what subject areas; the levels of the system at which data should be analyzed and reported; and key
stakeholder groups to be targeted for communication and use of the results.

2. Increase the capacity of those currently responsible for NLSA activities and ensure the quality of future assessment
specialists by providing regular, formal opportunities to learn about educational measurement and evaluation. For
example, develop regular, comprehensive training courses or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation,
and make them available to NCEEO staff and others carrying out key NLSA activities. Additionally, offer required courses
or workshops for teachers responsible for key NLSA activities, such as test administration, and provide a certificate of
completion to those teachers.

To build a pipeline of suitably qualified assessment specialists, develop and introduce graduate and undergraduate
university courses that specifically focus on educational measurement and evaluation.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                     12
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA) in Morocco

Level of development: ESTABLISHED

In the past 10 years, Morocco has participated in several ILSAs, including the 2006 and 2011 Progress in International
Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) and the 2007, 2011, and 2015 Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study
(TIMSS). It has also taken concrete steps to participate in PIRLS 2016. PIRLS and TIMSS are overseen by the International
Association for the Evaluation of Educational Achievement (IEA). There is no formal policy document addressing Morocco’s
participation in ILSAs. However, the government signs individual agreements with the IEA for each PIRLS or TIMSS exercise
in which it participates.


Funding for ILSA activities is allocated at the discretion of the Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training.
Funding covers all core ILSA activities, but does not cover research and development.


The National Research Coordinator, appointed by the Minister of National Education and Vocational Training, is
responsible for each ILSA exercise. A sufficiently staffed team is also in place. The team has previous experience working
on ILSAs, and comprises individuals with the necessary training to carry out the required activities effectively, with no
errors, delays, or other issues. At the same time, there is a need for further team capacity-building in the areas of ILSA
data analysis and effective uses of ILSA results.


Opportunities to learn about ILSAs are limited, and include workshops and meetings on using ILSA databases, and funding
for attending international training. These opportunities are offered to individuals working directly on a specific ILSA
exercise, and to inspectors and teachers. University or online courses on the topic of ILSAs are not available.

Morocco met all technical standards required to have its data presented in the main displays of each PIRLS and TIMSS
international report. The country has also contributed to the global knowledge base on ILSAs through the publication of a
comparative report on the results for Morocco of PIRLS, TIMSS, and PNEA, Morocco’s national large-scale assessment
program.

ILSA results have been disseminated to stakeholders throughout the country, including schools and educators, through
targeted reports, brochures, and presentations. However, the results have received limited coverage by the media, and
do not appear on the front page of newspapers or as the main story on the TV news.

ILSA results have been used in a variety of ways to inform decision-making in Morocco, including to track the impact of
reforms on student achievement levels and to inform curriculum improvement, teacher training programs, resource
allocation, and other assessment activities. In addition, the Ministry’s national education strategy is partially based on the
results of TIMSS, PIRLS, PNEA, and other assessments. However, it is not clear that decisions based on ILSA results have
had a positive impact on overall student achievement levels in the country.


Suggested policy options:


1. Increase the availability of informed and technically competent individuals who could work on ILSAs by expanding
in-country opportunities to learn about these assessment activities. For example, begin to develop a cadre of informed


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                        13
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


individuals and potential future ILSA staff by offering university students opportunities to learn about ILSAs, including by
taking university courses or shadowing ILSA practitioners.


2. Enhance the effectiveness of the communication of ILSA results to key stakeholders. For example, develop a highly
tailored communications and dissemination strategy that includes the media.


In 2013, key education stakeholders in Zambia came together to devise a broad-reaching communications plan that would
raise awareness about learning outcomes across the country and motivate citizens to take action. Each activity in the
communications plan was designed to reach specific audiences. An easy-to-read brochure featuring a summary of national
assessment findings and recommendations for action was created for teachers, school administrators, and policymakers;
a 10-minute film entitled, “Are Zambia’s Children Learning?”, was created for parents and other concerned citizens and
aired on broadcast television; and a DVD, including a teacher discussion guide and case studies on effective teaching
strategies, was developed for use in in-service teacher trainings.


In Ireland, following the release of the 2003 Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) results, a teacher’s guide
to the mathematics achievements of Irish 15-year-olds on the test was published. The guide included examples of PISA
test items, along with information on student performance and the extent to which Irish teachers teach PISA-type
mathematics.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                      14
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Appendix 1: Assessment Types and Their Key Differences

                       Classroom                Large-scale assessment                            Examinations
                                                          Surveys
                                               National          International           Exit              Entrance


      Purpose           To provide          To provide          To provide         To certify           To select
                        immediate           feedback on         feedback on the    students as they     students for
                        feedback to         overall health of   comparative        move from one        further
                        inform              the system at       performance of     level of the         educational
                        classroom           particular          the education      education system     opportunities
                        instruction         grade/age           system at          to the next (or
                                            level(s), and to    particular         into the
                                            monitor trends in   grade/age          workforce)
                                            learning            level(s)


      Frequency         Daily               For individual      For individual     Annually and         Annually and
                                            subjects offered    subjects offered   more often           more often
                                            on a regular        on a regular       where the system     where the system
                                            basis (such as      basis (such as     allows for           allows for
                                            every 3-5 years)    every 3-5 years)   repeats              repeats


      Who is            All students        Sample or           A sample of        All eligible         All eligible
      tested?                               census of           students at a      students             students
                                            students at a       particular grade
                                            particular grade    or age level(s)
                                            or age level(s)


      Format            Varies from         Usually multiple    Usually multiple   Usually essay        Usually essay
                        observation to      choice and short    choice and short   and multiple         and multiple
                        questioning to      answer              answer             choice               choice
                        paper-and-pencil
                        tests to student
                        performances


      Coverage of       All subject areas   Generally           Generally          Covers main          Covers main
      curriculum                            confined to a few   confined to one    subject areas        subject areas
                                            subjects            or two subjects

      Additional        Yes, as part of     Frequently          Yes                Seldom               Seldom
      information       the teaching
      collected from    process
      students?

      Scoring           Usually informal    Varies from         Usually involves   Varies from          Varies from
                        and simple          simple to more      statistically      simple to more       simple to more
                                            statistically       sophisticated      statistically        statistically
                                            sophisticated       techniques         sophisticated        sophisticated
                                            techniques                             techniques           techniques



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                            15
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Appendix 2: Basic Structure of Rubrics for Evaluating Data Collected on a Student Assessment System

                                                                       Development Level



                                     LATENT                                 ESTABLISHED
                                  (Absence of, or         EMERGING           (Acceptable
                                  deviation from,     (On way to meeting      minimum          ADVANCED
           Dimension                 attribute)       minimum standard)       standard)       (Best practice)   Justification
                                                     EC—ENABLING CONTEXT
 EC1—Policies
 EC2—Leadership, public
 engagement
 EC3—Funding
 EC4—Institutional arrangements
 EC5—Human resources
                                                     SA—SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
 SA1—Learning/quality goals
 SA2—Curriculum
 SA3—Pre-, in-service teacher
 training
                                                    AQ—ASSESSMENT QUALITY
 AQ1—Ensuring quality (design,
 administration, analysis)
 AQ2—Ensuring effective uses




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                         16
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Appendix 3: Summary of the Development Levels for Each Assessment Type


   Assessment Type              LATENT                    EMERGING                   ESTABLISHED                   ADVANCED


                        Absence of the attribute    On way to meeting           Acceptable minimum           Best practice
                                                    minimum standard            standard


                        There is no system-wide     There is weak system-       There is sufficient          There is strong system-
                        institutional capacity to   wide institutional          system-wide institutional    wide institutional
                        support and ensure the      capacity to support and     capacity to support and      capacity to support and
                        quality of classroom        ensure the quality of       ensure the quality of        ensure the quality of
                        assessment practices.       classroom assessment        classroom assessment         classroom assessment
                                                    practices.                  practices.                   practices.
 CLASSROOM ASSESSMENT




                        There is no standardized    There is a partially        There is a stable            There is a stable
                        examination in place for    stable standardized         standardized                 standardized
                        key decisions.              examination in place,       examination in place.        examination in place and
                                                    and a need to develop       There is institutional       institutional capacity and
                                                    institutional capacity to   capacity and some            strong mechanisms to
                                                    run the examination. The    limited mechanisms to        monitor it. The
 EXAMINATIONS
                                                    examination typically is    monitor it. The              examination is of high
                                                    of poor quality and is      examination is of            quality and is perceived
                                                    perceived as unfair or      acceptable quality and is    as fair and free from
                                                    corrupt.                    perceived as fair for        corruption.
                                                                                most students and free
                                                                                from corruption.
                        There is no NLSA in         There is an unstable        There is a stable NLSA       There is a stable NLSA
                        place.                      NLSA in place and a         in place. There is           in place and institutional
                                                    need to develop             institutional capacity and   capacity and strong
                                                    institutional capacity to   some limited                 mechanisms to monitor
                                                    run the NLSA.               mechanisms to monitor        it. The NLSA is of high
 NATIONAL (OR SYSTEM-
                                                    Assessment quality and      it. The NLSA is of           quality and its
 LEVEL) LARGE-SCALE
                                                    impact are weak.            moderate quality and its     information is
 ASSESSMENT
                                                                                information is               effectively used to
                                                                                disseminated, but not        improve education.
                                                                                always used in effective
                                                                                ways.


                        There is no history of      Participation in an ILSA    There is more or less        There is stable
                        participation in an ILSA    has been initiated, but     stable participation in an   participation in an ILSA
                        nor plans to participate    there still is need to      ILSA. There is               and institutional capacity
                        in one.                     develop institutional       institutional capacity to    to run the ILSA. The
                                                    capacity to carry out the   carry out the ILSA. The      information from the
 INTERNATIONAL LARGE-                               ILSA.                       information from the         ILSA is effectively used
 SCALE ASSESSMENT                                                               ILSA is disseminated,        to improve education.
                                                                                but not always used in
                                                                                effective ways.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                             17
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Appendix 4: Methodology for Assigning Development Levels

1. The country team or consultant collects information about the assessment system in the country.


2. Based on the collected information, a level of development and score is assigned to each dimension in the rubrics:


    x   Latent = 1 score point
    x   Emerging = 2 score points
    x   Established = 3 score points
    x   Advanced = 4 score points

3. The score for each quality driver is computed by aggregating the scores for each of its constituent dimensions. For
example:


The quality driver, ‘Enabling Context,’ in the case of ILSA, has 3 dimensions on which a hypothetical country receives the
following scores: Dimension A = 2 points; Dimension B = 2 points; Dimension C = 3 points. The hypothetical country’s
overall score for this quality driver would be: (2+2+3)/3 = 2.33.


4. A preliminary level of development is assigned to each quality driver.


5. The preliminary development level is validated using expert judgment in cooperation with the country team and the
World Bank Task Team Leader.


For scores that allow a margin of discretion (i.e., to choose between two levels of development), a final decision has to be
made based on expert judgment. For example, the aforementioned hypothetical country has an ‘Enabling Context’ score
of 2.33, corresponding to a preliminary level of development of ‘Emerging or Established.’ Based on qualitative
information not captured in the rubric, along with expert judgment, the country team chooses ‘Emerging’ as the most
appropriate level.


6. Scores for certain key dimensions under ‘Enabling Context’ (in the case of EXAM, NLSA, and ILSA) and under ‘System
Alignment’ (in the case of CLASS) were set as ceiling scores, i.e., the overall mean score for the particular assessment type
cannot be greater than the score for these key dimensions. These key variables include formal policy, regular funding,
having a permanent assessment unit, and the quality of assessment practices.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                       18
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015



Appendix 5: SABER-Student Assessment Rubrics for Morocco
This appendix provides the completed SABER--Student Assessment rubrics for each type of assessment activity in Morocco. In each row of the rubric, the relevant
selection is indicated by a shaded cell. The selection may include a superscript number that refers to the justification for the selection. The justification text can
be found in the “Development-level rating justifications” section at the end of the rubric. If a row includes a superscript number, but not a shaded cell, this means
that insufficient information was available to determine the relevant selection in the row.




                                                                  Morocco
                                                           Classroom Assessment




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                   19
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                           ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
   Overall policy and resource framework within which classroom assessment activity takes place in a country or system, and the degree to which classroom
                                      assessment activity is coherent with other components of the education system
                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                         Setting clear guidelines for classroom assessment
 There is no system-level document that    There is an informal system-level           There is a formal system-level document       This option does not apply to this
 provides guidelines for classroom         document that provides guidelines for       that provides guidelines for classroom        dimension.
 assessment.                               classroom assessment.                       assessment.1

 This option does not apply to this        This option does not apply to this          The availability of the document is           The document is widely available.2
 dimension.                                dimension.                                  restricted.


                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                     Aligning classroom assessment with system learning goals
 There are no system-wide resources for    There are scarce system-wide resources      There are some system-wide resources          There are a variety of system-wide
 teachers for classroom assessment.        for teachers for classroom assessment.      for teachers for classroom assessment.3       resources available for teachers for
                                                                                                                                     classroom assessment.

 There is no official curriculum or        There is an official curriculum or          There is an official curriculum or            There is an official curriculum or
 standards document.                       standards document, but it is not clear     standards document that specifies what        standards document that specifies what
                                           what students are expected to learn or to   students are expected to learn, but the       students are expected to learn and to
                                           what level of performance.                  level of performance required is not clear.   what level of performance. 4
                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT AND SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 3:
                                           Having effective human resources to carry out classroom assessment activities
 There are no system-level mechanisms to   This option does not apply to this          There are some system-level mechanisms        There are a variety of system-level
 ensure that teachers develop skills and   dimension.                                  to ensure that teachers develop skills and    mechanisms to ensure that teachers
 expertise in classroom assessment.                                                    expertise in classroom assessment.            develop skills and expertise in classroom
                                                                                                                                     assessment. 5




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                             20
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


                                                                       ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                             Quality of classroom assessment design, administration, analysis, and use
                LATENT                                  EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                    ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                           Ensuring the quality of classroom assessment
 Classroom assessment practices suffer     Classroom assessment practices are        Classroom assessment practices are            Classroom assessment practices are
 from widespread weaknesses, or there is   known to be weak.6                        known to be of moderate quality.              known to be generally of high quality.
 no information available on classroom
 assessment practices.
 There are no mechanisms to monitor the    There are ad hoc mechanisms to monitor    There are limited systematic mechanisms       There are varied and systematic
 quality of classroom assessment           the quality of classroom assessment       to monitor the quality of classroom           mechanisms in place to monitor the
 practices.                                practices.7                               assessment practices.                         quality of classroom    assessment
                                                                                                                                   practices.
                                                                     ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                          Ensuring effective uses of classroom assessment
 Classroom assessment information is not   This option does not apply to this        Classroom assessment information is           Classroom assessment information is
 required to be disseminated to key        dimension.                                required to be disseminated to some key       required to be disseminated to all key
 stakeholders.                                                                       stakeholders.                                 stakeholders.8

 There are no required uses of classroom   There are limited required uses of        There are adequate required uses of           There are adequate required uses of
 assessment to support student learning.   classroom assessment to support student   classroom assessment to support student       classroom assessment to support student
                                           learning.                                 learning, excluding its use as an input for   learning, including its use as an input for
                                                                                     external examination results.9                external examination results.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                            21
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

Classroom Assessment: Development-level rating justifications

1. There is a formal, system-level document titled, "Supervising and Monitoring Continuous Assessment in the School Department," which provides guidelines
for classroom assessment.

2. The "Supervising and Monitoring Continuous Assessment in the School Department" document is available to the public online and at teacher training
colleges.

3. The following resources are typically available to teachers for their classroom assessment activities:
    - A document that outlines what students are expected to learn in different subject areas at different grade or age levels
    - A document that outlines the level(s) of performance that students are expected to reach in different subject areas at different grade or age levels
    - Textbooks or workbooks that provide support for classroom assessment
    - Item banks or pools with examples of selection/multiple-choice or supply/open-ended questions
    - Online assessment resources

The following resources are not typically available:
    - Scoring criteria or rubrics for students’ work
    - Computer-based testing with instant reports on students’ performance

4. There is an official curriculum or standards document that outlines what students at different grade or age levels are expected to learn and to what
performance level.

5. The following mechanisms exist to ensure that teachers develop skills and expertise in classroom assessment:
    - Pre-service teacher training
    - In-service teacher training
    - Online resources on classroom assessment
    - Opportunities to participate in conferences and workshops
    - Opportunities to participate in item development for, or scoring of, large-scale assessments or exams
    - School inspection or teacher supervision includes component focused on classroom assessment

6. The following characteristics are very common of student assessment activities:
    - Provide little useful feedback to students
    - Mainly used as administrative or control tool rather than as pedagogical resource

The following characteristics are common of student assessment activities:
    - Are mainly about recalling information


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                22
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

    -   Teachers do not use explicit or a priori criteria for scoring or grading students' work

The following characteristic is not common of student assessment activities:
    - Rely mainly on multiple-choice, selection-type questions

The following characteristics are rarely present for student assessment activities:
    - It is common to observe errors in the scoring or grading of students' work
    - Uneven application of standards for grading students' work is a serious problem
    - Grade inflation is a serious problem
    - Not aligned with pedagogical or curricular framework

7. There is one mechanism in place to monitor the quality of classroom assessment activities:
    - Classroom assessment is a required component of school inspection or teacher supervision

The following system-level mechanisms are not in place:
    - Classroom assessment is a required component of a teacher’s performance evaluation
    - There is an external moderation system that reviews the difficulty of classroom assessment activities, appropriateness of scoring criteria, etc.
    - National or other system-wide reviews of the quality of education include a focus on classroom assessment
    - Government funding is available for research on the quality of classroom assessment activities and how to improve classroom assessment

8. Schools or teachers are required to report to the following on individual student performance:
     - School district/education ministry officials
     - Parents
     - Students

9. The following are the required uses of classroom assessment activities to promote and inform student learning:
    - Diagnosing student learning issues
    - Providing feedback to students on their learning
    - Informing parents about their child's learning
    - Planning next steps in instruction
    - Grading students for internal classroom uses

Classroom assessment is not used as an input for external examination results.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                            23
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                             SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015




                                                 MOROCCO
                                                Examinations




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                               24
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT
Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which assessment activity takes place in a country or system,
                                and the extent to which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, the assessment activity
                LATENT                                    EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                 ADVANCED



                                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                          Setting clear policies
 No standardized examination has taken       The standardized examination has been     The examination is a stable program that   This option does not apply to this
 place.                                      operating on an irregular basis.          has been operating regularly.1             dimension


 There is no policy document that            There is an informal or draft policy      There is a formal policy document that     This option does not apply to this
 authorizes the examination.                 document     that   authorizes  the       authorizes the examination.2               dimension.
                                             examination.

 This option does not apply to this          The policy document is not available to   The policy document is available to the    This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                  the public.                               public.3                                   dimension.


 This option does not apply to this          This option does not apply to this        The policy document addresses some key     The policy document addresses all key
 dimension.                                  dimension.                                aspects of the examination.4               aspects of the examination.


                                                                         ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                                        Having strong leadership
 All stakeholder groups strongly oppose      Most stakeholder groups oppose the        Most stakeholders groups support the       All stakeholder groups support the
 the examination or are indifferent to it.   examination.                              examination.5                              examination.


 There are no attempts to improve the        This option does not apply to this        There are independent attempts to          There are coordinated attempts to
 examination by stakeholder groups.          dimension.                                improve the examination by stakeholder     improve the examination by stakeholder
                                                                                       groups.                                    groups.6

 Efforts to improve the examination are      This option does not apply to this        Efforts to improve the examination are     This option does not apply to this
 not welcomed by the leadership in charge    dimension.                                generally welcomed by the leadership in    dimension.
 of the examination.                                                                   charge of the examination.7

                                                                                                                                                         (CONTINUED)


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                       25
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                             ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                                             Having regular funding
 There is no funding allocated for the         There is irregular funding allocated for   There is regular funding allocated for the   This option does not apply to this
 examination.                                  the examination.                           examination.8                                dimension.


 This option does not apply to this            Funding covers some core examination       Funding covers all core examination          This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                    activities: design, administration, data   activities: design, administration, data     dimension.
                                               processing or reporting.                   processing and reporting.9

 This option does not apply to this            Funding does not cover research and        This option does not apply to this           Funding    covers      research     and
 dimension.                                    development.                               dimension.                                   development.10


                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 4:
                                                                  Having strong organizational structures
 The examination office does not exist or is   The examination      office   is   newly   The examination office is a stable           This option does not apply to this
 newly established.                            established.                               organization.11                              dimension.


 The examination office is not accountable     This option does not apply to this         The examination office is accountable to     This option does not apply to this
 to an external board or agency.12             dimension.                                 an external board or agency.                 dimension.


 Examination results are not recognized by     Examination results are recognized by a    Examination results are recognized by        Examination results are recognized by
 any certification or selection system.        certification or selection system in the   one certification or selection system in     two or more certification or selection
                                               country.                                   another country.                             systems in another country.13

 The examination office does not have the      The examination office has some of the     The examination office has all of the        The examination office has state-of-the-
 required facilities to carry out the          required facilities to carry out the       required facilities to carry out the         art facilities to carry out the
 examination.                                  examination.                               examination.                                 examination.14

                                                                                                                                                               (CONTINUED)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                             26
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                LATENT                                   EMERGING                               ESTABLISHED                               ADVANCED



                                                                      ENABLING CONTEXT 5:
                                                                  Having effective human resources
 There is no staff to carry out the         The examination office is inadequately   The examination office is adequately    The examination office is adequately
 examination.                               staffed to carry out the examination     staffed to carry out the examination    staffed to carry out the assessment
                                            effectively; issues are pervasive.       effectively, with minimal issues.15     effectively, with no issues.

 The country does not offer opportunities   This option does not apply to this       The country offers some opportunities   The country offers a wide range of
 that prepare for work on the               dimension.                               that prepare for work on the            opportunities that prepare for work on
 examination.                                                                        examination.16                          the examination.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                  27
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                             SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                       Degree to which the assessment is coherent with other components of the education system
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                   Aligning examinations with learning goals and opportunities to learn
 It is not clear what the examination          This option does not apply to this          There is a clear understanding of what the   This option does not apply to this
 measures.                                     dimension.                                  examination measures.17                      dimension.


 What the examination measures is              This option does not apply to this          What is measured by the examination is       This option does not apply to this
 questioned by some stakeholder groups.        dimension.                                  largely accepted by stakeholder groups.18    dimension.


 Material to prepare for the examination is    There is some material to prepare for the   There is comprehensive material to           There is comprehensive material to
 minimal and is accessible to very few         examination that is accessible to some      prepare for the examination that is          prepare for the examination that is
 students.                                     students.                                   accessible to most students.                 accessible to all students.19

                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                   Providing teachers with opportunities to learn about the examination
 There are no courses or workshops on          There are no up-to-date courses or          There are up-to-date voluntary courses or    There are up-to-date compulsory courses
 examinations available to teachers.           workshops on examinations available to      workshops on examinations available to       or workshops on examinations for
                                               teachers.                                   teachers.                                    teachers.20

 Teachers are excluded          from     all   Teachers are involved in very few           Teachers are involved          in   some     Teachers are involved          in   most
 examination-related tasks.                    examination-related tasks.                  examination-related tasks.                   examination-related tasks.21




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                               28
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                          ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                  Degree to which the assessment meets quality standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way
                LATENT                                    EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                         ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                             Ensuring quality
 There is no technical report or other      There is some documentation on the           There is a comprehensive technical report   There is a comprehensive, high-quality
 documentation.                             examination, but it is not in a formal       but with restricted circulation.            technical report available to the general
                                            report format.22                                                                         public.

 There are no mechanisms in place to        This option does not apply to this           There are limited systematic mechanisms     There are varied and systematic
 ensure the quality of the examination.     dimension.                                   in place to ensure the quality of the       mechanisms in place to ensure the quality
                                                                                         examination.23                              of the examination.

                                                                         ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                            Ensuring fairness
 Inappropriate behavior surrounding the     Inappropriate behavior surrounding the       Inappropriate behavior surrounding the      Inappropriate behavior surrounding the
 examination process is high.               examination process is moderate.24           examination process is low.                 examination process is marginal.


 The examination results lack credibility   The examination results are credible for     The examination results are credible for    This option does not apply to this
 for all stakeholder groups.                some stakeholder groups.25                   all stakeholder groups.                     dimension.


 The majority of the students (more than    A significant proportion of students (10%-   A small proportion of students (less than   All students can take the examination;
 50%) may not take the examination          50%) may not take the examination            10%) may not take the examination           there are no language, gender or other
 because of language, gender, or other      because of language, gender, or other        because of language, gender, or other       equivalent barriers.26
 equivalent barriers.                       equivalent barriers.                         equivalent barriers.
                                                                                                                                                              (CONTINUED)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                            29
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                  ESTABLISHED                                ADVANCED



                                                                      ASSESSMENT QUALITY 3:
                                                             Using examination information in a fair way
 Examination results are not used in a      Examination results are used by some      Examination results are used by most      Examination results are used by all
 proper way by all stakeholder groups.      stakeholder groups in a proper way.       stakeholder groups in a proper way.27     stakeholder groups in a proper way.


 Student names and results are public.28    This option does not apply to this        Students’ results are confidential.       This option does not apply to this
                                            dimension.                                                                          dimension.


                                                                     ASSESSMENT QUALITY 4:
                                                         Ensuring positive consequences of the examination
 There are no options for students who do   There are very limited options for        There are some options for students who   There is a variety of options for students
 not perform well on the examination, or    students who do not perform well on the   do not perform well on the                who do not perform well on the
 students must leave the education          examination.                              examination.29                            examination.
 system.
 There are no mechanisms in place to        This option does not apply to this        There are some mechanisms in place to     There is a variety of mechanisms in place
 monitor the consequences of the            dimension.                                monitor the consequences of the           to monitor the consequences of the
 examination.                                                                         examination.30                            examination.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                        30
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

Examinations: Development-level rating justifications

1. The Baccalaureate Exam, as the exit examination for upper-secondary school, has been applied since the protectorate, and reforms have improved it through
the years. The current format has been administered since 2003.

2. The Baccalaureate Exam is authorized by "The Ministerial Decision for Organizing the Examinations for Obtaining the Baccalaureate Certificate" document,
signed by the Minister of National Education and Vocational Training.

3. The ministerial decision is available and to, and easily accessed by, the public.

4. The policy document includes the following:
    - It outlines governance, distribution of power, and responsibilities among key entities.
    - It describes the purpose of the examination.
    - It specifies who can sit for the examination.
    - It explains alignment with curricula and standards.

The policy document does not include the following:
    - It does not describe the authorized uses of results.
    - It does not state the funding sources.
    - It does not outline procedures to investigate and address security breaches, cheating, or other forms of inappropriate behavior.
    - It does not outline procedures for special/disadvantaged students

5. The following stakeholder groups strongly support the examination program:
    - Policymakers
    - Teacher unions
    - Educators
    - Students
    - Media
    - Universities

The following support the examination program:
    - Parents

The following are neutral regarding the examination program:
    - Think tanks, nongovernmental organizations or equivalent
    - Employers


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                            31
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

    -
6. Coordinated efforts have been made by stakeholder groups to improve the examination.

7. Efforts to improve the examination are generally welcomed by the leadership in charge of the examination.

8. There is regular funding allocated for the examination by the government.

9. The following activities are covered by funding allocated for the examination:
    - Examination design
    - Examination administration
    - Data analysis
    - Data reporting
    - Long- or medium-term planning of program milestones
    - Research and development
    - Staff training, activities not related to examination

10. Research and development activities are covered by funding for the examination.

11. The examination office has had primary responsibility for running the examination since 2003.

12. The office responsible for running the examination is accountable to the academy to which it belongs and is not accountable to an external body.

13. Baccalaureate holders easily secure admission to many European universities and other institutions of higher education, including in France, Spain, Germany,
and Finland, in addition to Arab and Asian schools.

14. The examination office has the following:
    - Computers for all technical staff
    - Secure building
    - Secure storage facilities
    - Access to adequate computer servers
    - Ability to backup data
    - Adequate communication tools (phone, email, Internet)

15. Nationally, there are human resources available at the National Center for Evaluation, Examinations, and Orientation (NCEEO). The center also employs
inspectors and trainers as needed.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                               32
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

One issue that has been identified with the performance of those responsible for the examination is poor training of test administrators who are mainly
teachers, especially when they are new in the role.

16. The following opportunities are available in Morocco on an annual basis:
    - Funding for attending international programs, courses, or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation
    - Internships in the examination office


University graduate programs, courses, or non-university training courses or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation are not available.


17. The examination measures the national school curriculum guidelines or standards.

18. Stakeholder groups largely accept what is measured by the examination.

19. All students definitely have access to the materials needed to prepare for the examination. Materials are widely accessible by virtually all students (more
than 90%) in a variety of learning contexts.

Publicly available materials include:
   - Examples of the types of questions that are on the examination
   - Information on how to prepare for the examination
   - The framework document explaining what is measured on the examination

20. There are regularly updated, compulsory courses or workshops as well as regularly updated voluntary courses or workshops. Workshops are organized by
academies, inspectors, or by the National Director of Training.

Such courses are usually available to all teachers.

Topics covered by the courses include: analyzing curricula, developing frameworks, designing items and correction codebooks, and creating checklists for
correction and results presentation.

21. The following examination-related tasks are performed mainly by teachers:
    - Selecting or creating examination questions
    - Selecting or creating examination scoring guides
    - Administering the examination
    - Scoring the examination


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                 33
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

The following examination-related tasks are not mainly performed by teachers:
    - Acting as a judge (i.e. in orals)
    - Supervising examination procedures
    - Resolving inconsistencies between examination scores and school grades (i.e. moderation)

22. There is some documentation on the examination, but it is not in a formal report format.

23. The only mechanism in place to ensure the quality of the examination is internal review or observers. The National Examination Commission resorts to
verifiers (typically teachers, but sometimes supervisors of certain subjects) at the end of the process of designing the questions. Verifiers take the examination,
gauge the time to be spent on it by students, revise the language, and write a report suggesting improvements, if any.

The following mechanisms are not in place to ensure the quality of the examination:
    - External review or observers
    - External certification or audit
    - Pilot or field testing
    - Translation verification

24. The following inappropriate behaviors typically occur during the examination process:
    - Copying from other candidates
    - Use of unauthorized materials such as prepared answers and notes
    - Collusion among candidates via mobile phone, passing of paper, or equivalent
    - Intimidation of examination supervisors, markers or officials

The following inappropriate behaviors do not typically occur during the examination process:
    - Leakage of the content of an examination paper or part of a paper prior to the examination
    - Impersonation when an individual other than the registered candidate takes the examination
    - Issuance of forged certificates or alteration of results information
    - Provision of external assistance via the supervisor, mobile phone or other means

25. Examination results are perceived as credible by education specialists, but sometimes attract criticism from the media.

26. All students can take the examination regardless of background, location, the ability to pay, or the like.

27. Some political parties use results for critical purposes, for example, voicing complaints about the low performance level of students or the administration

The following stakeholder groups do not use the examination results improperly:


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                  34
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

   -   Teacher unions
   -   Educators
   -   Students
   -   Parents
   -   Media
   -   Think tanks, nongovernmental organizations, or equivalent
   -   Universities
   -   Employers

28. Students' results are made public as soon as the procedures are over. Their scores are posted in schools and communicated via MASSAR (a grading system)
to parents, and put on various electronic sites accessible by ministries, nongovernmental organizations, academies, and provinces.

29. Students who don't perform well on the examination do not have to leave the education system and may retake the examination. They may also opt for less
selective schools, universities, or tracks, or repeat the grade. However, students may not attend remedial or preparatory courses to prepare to retake the
examination.
30. The only mechanism in place to monitor the consequences of the examination is regular focus groups or surveys of key stakeholders. The NCEEO analyzes
the questions after the Baccalaureate Exam, using item response theory (IRT) to provide feedback to national commissions and supervisors (inspectors who
train, monitor, and coach teachers and ensure the curriculum is implemented and continuous assessment is properly administered) for regular improvement.

The following mechanisms are not in place to monitor the consequences of the examination:
    - Funding for independent research on the impact of the examination
    - A permanent oversight committee
    - Studies (e.g. predictive validity) that are updated regularly
    - Expert review groups




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                           35
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                              SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015




                                        MOROCCO
                 National (or System-Level) Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                36
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT
    Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which NLSA activity takes place in a country or system,
                                    and the extent to which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, the NLSA activity
                 LATENT                                   EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                     Setting clear policies for NLSA
 No NLSA exercise has taken place.           The NLSA has been operating on an         The NLSA is a stable program that has       This option does not apply to this
                                             irregular basis.1                         been operating regularly.                   dimension.


 There is no policy document pertaining to   There is an informal or draft policy      There is a formal policy document that      This option does not apply to this
 NLSA.                                       document that authorizes the NLSA.        authorizes the NLSA.2                       dimension.


 This option does not apply to this          The policy document is not available to   The policy document is available to the     This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                  the public.                               public.3                                    dimension.


 There is no plan for NLSA activity.         This option does not apply to this        There is a general understanding that the   There is a written NLSA plan for the
                                             dimension.                                NLSA will take place.4                      coming years.


                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                               Having strong public engagement for NLSA
 All stakeholder groups strongly oppose      Some stakeholder groups oppose the        Most stakeholders groups support the        All stakeholder groups support the NLSA.
 NLSA or are indifferent to it.              NLSA.                                     NLSA.5


                                                                                                                                                           (CONTINUED)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                          37
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                     SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


                 LATENT                                   EMERGING                                    ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                        ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                                    Having regular funding for NLSA
 There is no funding allocated to NLSA.    There is irregular funding allocated to the   There is regular funding allocated to the     This option does not apply to this
                                           NLSA.                                         NLSA.6                                        dimension.


 This option does not apply to this        Funding covers some core NLSA activities:     Funding covers all core NLSA activities:      This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                design, administration, analysis, and         design, administration, analysis and          dimension.
                                           reporting.                                    reporting.7

 This option does not apply to this        Funding does not cover research and           This option does not apply to this            Funding    covers       research   and
 dimension.                                development activities.8                      dimension.                                    development activities.


                                                                      ENABLING CONTEXT 4:
                                                          Having strong organizational structures for NLSA
 There is no NLSA office, ad hoc unit or   The NLSA office is a temporary agency or      The NLSA office is a permanent agency,        This option does not apply to this
 team.                                     group of people.                              institution or unit.9                         dimension.


 This option does not apply to this        Political considerations regularly hamper     Political considerations     sometimes        Political considerations never hamper
 dimension.                                technical considerations.                     hamper technical considerations.              technical considerations.10


 This option does not apply to this        The NLSA office is not accountable to a       The NLSA office is accountable to a clearly   This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                clearly recognized body.                      recognized body.11                            dimension.


                                                                                                                                                               (CONTINUED)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                             38
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                    SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                 LATENT                                     EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                 ADVANCED



                                                                          ENABLING CONTEXT 5:
                                                                 Having effective human resources for NLSA
 There is no staff allocated for running an   The NLSA office is inadequately staffed to   The NLSA office is adequately staffed to   The NLSA office is adequately staffed to
 NLSA.                                        effectively carry out the assessment. 12     carry out the NLSA effectively, with       carry out the NLSA effectively, with no
                                                                                           minimal issues.                            issues.

 The country does not offer opportunities     This option does not apply to this           The country offers some opportunities to   The country offers a wide range of
 that prepare individuals for work on         dimension.                                   prepare individuals for work on the        opportunities to prepare individuals for
 NLSA.                                                                                     NLSA.13                                    work on the NLSA.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                            39
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                         SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                       Degree to which the NLSA is coherent with other components of the education system
                LATENT                                   EMERGING                                 ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                       SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                                Aligning the NLSA with learning goals
 It is not clear if the NLSA is based on    This option does not apply to this        The NLSA measures performance against        This option does not apply to this
 curriculum or learning standards.          dimension.                                curriculum or learning standards.14          dimension.


 What the NLSA measures is generally        This option does not apply to this        What the NLSA measures is questioned by      What the NLSA measures is largely
 questioned by stakeholder groups.          dimension.                                some stakeholder groups.15                   accepted by stakeholder groups.


 There are no mechanisms in place to        There are ad hoc reviews of the NLSA to   There are regular internal reviews of the    This option does not apply to this
 ensure that the NLSA accurately            ensure that it measures what it is        NLSA to ensure that it measures what it is   dimension.
 measures what it is supposed to measure.   intended to measure.                      intended to measure.16

                                                                       SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 2:
                                                    Providing teachers with opportunities to learn about the NLSA
 There are no courses or workshops on the   There are occasional       courses   or   There are some courses or workshops on       There are widely available, high-quality
 NLSA.                                      workshops on the NLSA.17                  the NLSA offered on a regular basis.         courses or workshops on the NLSA
                                                                                                                                   offered on a regular basis.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                         40
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                            SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                              ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                       Degree to which the NLSA meets technical standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way
                 LATENT                                       EMERGING                                     ESTABLISHED                                       ADVANCED



                                                                            ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                         Ensuring the quality of the NLSA
 No options are offered to include all         This option does not apply to this             At least one option is offered to include all   Different options are offered to include all
 groups of students in the NLSA.               dimension.                                     groups of students in the NLSA.18               groups of students in the NLSA.


 There are no mechanisms in place to           This option does not apply to this             There are some mechanisms in place to           There are a variety of mechanisms in
 ensure the quality of the NLSA.               dimension.                                     ensure the quality of the NLSA.                 place to ensure the quality of the NLSA.19


 There is no technical report or other         There is some documentation about the          There is a comprehensive technical              There is a comprehensive, high-quality
 documentation about the NLSA.                 technical aspects of the NLSA, but it is not   report, but with restricted circulation.        technical report available to the general
                                               in a formal report format.                                                                     public.20

                                                                            ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                        Ensuring effective uses of the NLSA
 NLSA results are not disseminated.            NLSA results are poorly disseminated.          NLSA results are disseminated in an             This option does not apply to this
                                                                                              effective way.21                                dimension.


 NLSA information is not used, or is used in   This option does not apply to this             NLSA results are used by some                   NLSA information is used by all
 ways inconsistent with the purposes or        dimension.                                     stakeholder groups in a way that is             stakeholder groups in a way that is
 the technical characteristics of the                                                         consistent with the purposes and                consistent with the purposes and
 assessment.                                                                                  technical   characteristics of  the             technical   characteristics of  the
                                                                                              assessment.                                     assessment.22
 There are no mechanisms in place to           This option does not apply to this             There are some mechanisms in place to           There are a variety of mechanisms in
 monitor the consequences of the NLSA.         dimension.                                     monitor the consequences of the NLSA.23         place to monitor the consequences of the
                                                                                                                                              NLSA.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                        41
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

National (or System-Level) Large-Scale Assessment (NLSA): Development-level rating justifications

1. Le Programme National de l’Evaluation des Apprentissages (National Program for Assessment of Learning) was first administered five to 10 years ago and is
administered one to two times every 10 years.

2. The policy document is Le Programme National de l’Evaluation des Apprentissages (National Program for Assessment of Learning), a circular issued by the
Ministry of National Education, Higher Education, and Scientific Research in 2009.

3. The policy document is available to the public.

4. There is a common understanding that the NLSA will take place in coming years. There is no written NLSA plan for the coming years.

5. Think tanks, nongovernmental organizations or equivalent strongly support the NLSA. Teacher unions, educators, and the media support the NLSA.
Policymakers, students, and parents are neutral regarding the NLSA. It is unclear how much universities and employers support or oppose the NLSA.

6. There is regular funding allocated to the NLSA.

7. Funding covers: assessment design, assessment administration, data analysis, data reporting, long- or medium-term planning of program milestones, and staff
training.

8. Funding does not cover research and development activities.

9. The National Center for Evaluation, Exams, and Orientation (NCEEO) and Regional Academies for Education and Training (AREFs) are responsible for running
the assessment. Instrument development is carried out by NCEEO. AREFs are responsible for financing administration, in-service training, and using the results.

10. Political considerations never hamper technical considerations.

11. The NLSA office is accountable to a clearly recognized body. It is accountable to an external, nongovernmental board or committee.

12. There is permanent or full-time staff, but it is insufficient to meet the needs of the assessment. The following issue has been identified with the performance
of human resources responsible for the NLSA: poor training of test administrators or unclear instructions and guidelines for administering the assessment. In
particular, there is a deficiency in teacher competencies related to using test results.

The following issues have not been identified: delays in administering the assessment due to issues with the design of the questions; errors in scoring that have
led to delays in results being reported; weaknesses in test design; omission of curricular topics; frequent errors in the test questions; frequent errors in data
processing.


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                 42
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


13. The following opportunities are available annually to prepare individuals for work on the NLSA:
    - Funding for attending international programs or courses or workshops on educational measurement and evaluation
    - Internships or short-term employment in the large-scale assessment office

The number of people who take part in such training sessions is limited.

The Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training or NCEEO has also organized workshops with the launch of the new assessment program, for
example as was done during the launch of the L’évaluation des prérequis scolaires (the assessment of schooling prerequisites) in 2009.

14. The NLSA measures performance against curriculum or learning standards.

15. Teacher unions question the importance of assessments.

16. The following mechanisms are in place to ensure that the NLSA measures what it is intended to measure:
    - Regular independent review by qualified experts of the alignment between the assessment instrument and what it is supposed to measure
    - Regular internal review of the alignment between the assessment instrument and what it is supposed to measure

17. There are occasional courses or workshops on the NLSA, and most courses are of high quality.

More training is needed, especially related to analysis and data exploitation, such as though action plans for improvement or policy briefs.

Presentations are not offered. Most teachers do not have access to live courses or workshops, or to online courses. Most courses do not provide teachers with
relevant materials that they can use in their classrooms.

18. Special plans are made to ensure that the large-scale assessment is administered to students in hard-to-reach areas. The large-scale assessment is offered in
the language of instruction for almost all student groups.

Accommodations or alternative assessments are not provided for students with disabilities.

19. The following mechanisms are in place to ensure the quality of the NLSA:
    - All proctors or administrators are trained according to a protocol
    - There is a standardized manual for large-scale assessment administrators.
    - Discrepancies must be recorded on a standard sheet.
    - A pilot is conducted before the main data collection takes place.
    - All booklets are numbered.


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                               43
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

    -   There is double data scoring.
    -   Scorers are trained to ensure high interrater reliability.
    -   There is double processing of data.
    -   External reviewers or observers are present.
    -   Internal reviewers or observers are present.

There is no external certification or audit.

20. There is a comprehensive, high-quality technical report available to the general public.

21. Results are disseminated in the following ways:
    - Results are disseminated within 12 months after the large-scale assessment is administered.
    - Reports with results are made available for all stakeholder groups.
    - The main reports on the results contain information on overall achievement levels and subgroups.
    - The main reports on the results contain information on trends over time overall and for subgroups.
    - The main reports on the results contain standard errors.
    - There is a media briefing organized to discuss results.
    - There are workshops or presentations for key stakeholders on the results.
    - Results are featured in newspapers, magazines, radio, or television.

22. NLSA information is used by all stakeholder groups in a way that is consistent with the purposes and technical characteristics of the assessment.

23. The following mechanisms are in place to monitor the consequences of the NLSA:
    - A permanent oversight committee
    - Themed conferences that provide a forum to discuss research and other data on the consequences of the large-scale assessment

The following mechanisms are not in place:
    - Funding for independent research on the impact of the large-scale assessment
    - Regular focus groups or surveys of key stakeholders
    - Expert review groups




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                           44
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                   SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015




                                              MOROCCO
                             International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA)




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                     45
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                         SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                              ENABLING CONTEXT
         Overall framework of policies, leadership, organizational structures, fiscal and human resources in which ILSA takes place in a country or system,
                                      and the extent to which that framework is conducive to, or supportive of, ILSA activity
                 LATENT                                      EMERGING                                    ESTABLISHED                                     ADVANCED



                                                                             ENABLING CONTEXT 1:
                                                                          Setting clear policies for ILSA
 The country/system has not participated       This option does not apply to this           The country/system has participated in at      The country/system has participated in
 in an ILSA in the last 10 years.              dimension.                                   least one ILSA in the last 10 years.           two or more ILSA in the last 10 years. 1


 The country/system has not taken              This option does not apply to this           The country/system has taken concrete          This option does not apply to this
 concrete steps to participate in an ILSA in   dimension.                                   steps to participate in at least one ILSA in   dimension.
 the next 5 years.                                                                          the next 5 years. 2

 There is no policy document that              There is an informal or draft policy         There is a formal policy document that         This option does not apply to this
 addresses participation in ILSA.              document that addresses participation in     addresses participation in ILSA. 3             dimension.
                                               ILSA.

 This option does not apply to this            The policy document is not available to      The policy document is available to the        This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                    the public. 4                                public.                                        dimension.


                                                                            ENABLING CONTEXT 2:
                                                                        Having regular funding for ILSA
 There is no funding for participation in      There is funding from loans or external      There is regular funding allocated at          There is regular funding approved by law,
 ILSA.                                         donors.                                      discretion.5                                   decree or norm.


 This option does not apply to this            Funding covers some core activities of the   Funding covers all core activities of the      This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                                    ILSA.                                        ILSA.6                                         dimension


 Funding does not cover research and           This option does not apply to this           This option does not apply to this             Funding    covers       research     and
 development activities.7                      dimension.                                   dimension.                                     development activities.


                                                                                                                                                                    (CONTINUED)


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                  46
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                               SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

              LATENT                                 EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                    ADVANCED



                                                                   ENABLING CONTEXT 3:
                                                          Having effective human resources for ILSA
 There is no team or national/system   There is a team or national/system           There is a team and national/system          This option does not apply to this
 coordinator to carry out the ILSA     coordinator to carry out the ILSA            coordinator to carry out the ILSA            dimension.
 activities.                           activities.                                  activities.8

 This option does not apply to this    The national/system coordinator or other     The national/system coordinator is fluent    This option does not apply to this
 dimension.                            designated team member may not be            in the language of the assessment.9          dimension.
                                       fluent in the language of the assessment.

 This option does not apply to this    The ILSA office is inadequately staffed or   The ILSA office is adequately staffed or     The ILSA office is adequately staffed and
 dimension.                            trained to carry out the assessment          trained to carry out the ILSA effectively,   trained to carry out the ILSA effectively,
                                       effectively.                                 with minimal issues.10                       with no issues.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                         47
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                           SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                      SYSTEM ALIGNMENT
                                       Degree to which the ILSA is coherent with other components of the education system

                LATENT                                 EMERGING                               ESTABLISHED                                  ADVANCED



                                                                    SYSTEM ALIGNMENT 1:
                                                           Providing opportunities to learn about ILSA
 The ILSA team has not attended            The ILSA team attended some            The ILSA team attended all international   This option does not apply to this
 international workshops or meetings.      international workshops or meetings.   workshops or meetings.11                   dimension.


 The    country/system       offers   no   This option does not apply to this     The country/system offers some             The country/system offers a wide range
 opportunities to learn about ILSA.        dimension.                             opportunities to learn about ILSA. 12      of opportunities to learn about ILSA.


 This option does not apply to this        This option does not apply to this     Opportunities to learn about ILSA are      Opportunities to learn about ILSA are
 dimension.                                dimension.                             available to the country's/system's ILSA   available to a wide audience, in addition
                                                                                  team members only.                         to the country's/system's ILSA team
                                                                                                                             members. 13




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                    48
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

                                                                               ASSESSMENT QUALITY
                                    Degree to which the ILSA meets technical quality standards, is fair, and is used in an effective way
                  LATENT                                       EMERGING                                   ESTABLISHED                                   ADVANCED



                                                                             ASSESSMENT QUALITY 1:
                                                                            Ensuring the quality of ILSA
 Data from the ILSA has not been                The country or system met sufficient          The country/system met all technical        This option does not apply to this
 published.                                     standards to have its data presented          standards required to have its data         dimension
                                                beneath the main display of the               presented in the main displays of the
                                                international report or in an annex.          international report. 14
 The country/system has not contributed         This option does not apply to this            This option does not apply to this          The country/system has contributed new
 new knowledge on ILSA.                         dimension.                                    dimension.                                  knowledge on ILSA. 15


                                                                             ASSESSMENT QUALITY 2:
                                                                           Ensuring effective uses of ILSA
 If any, country/system-specific results        Country/system-specific results and           Country/system-specific results and         Country/system-specific results and
 and information are not disseminated in        information are disseminated irregularly      information are regularly disseminated in   information are regularly and widely
 the country/system.                            in the country/system.                        the country/system.                         disseminated in the country/system. 16

 Products to provide feedback to schools        This option does not apply to this            Products to provide feedback to schools     Products to provide feedback to schools
 and educators about the ILSA results are       dimension.                                    and educators about the ILSA results are    and educators about ILSA results are
 not made available.                                                                          sometimes made available.                   systematically made available. 17

 There is no media coverage of the ILSA         There is limited media coverage of the        There is some media coverage of the ILSA    There is wide media coverage of the ILSA
 results.                                       ILSA results. 18                              results.                                    results.


 If any, country/system-specific results        Results from the ILSA are used in a limited   Results from the ILSA are used in some      Results from the ILSA are used in a variety
 and information from the ILSA are not          way to inform decision making in the          ways to inform decision making in the       of ways to inform decision making in the
 used to inform decision making in the          country/system.                               country/system.                             country/system. 19
 country/system.
 It is not clear that decisions based on ILSA   This option does not apply to this            This option does not apply to this          Decisions based on the ILSA results have
 results have had a positive impact on          dimension.                                    dimension.                                  had a positive impact on students'
 students' achievement levels. 20                                                                                                         achievement levels.

International Large-Scale Assessment (ILSA): Development-level rating justifications


SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                                   49
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                          SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


1. In the past 10 years, Morocco participated in the Progress in International Reading Literary Study (PIRLS) 2006 and 2011, and the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) 2007, 2011, and 2015.

2. Concrete steps have been taken to participate in PIRLS 2016.

3. There are formal agreements between the Ministry of Education and Vocational Training and the International Association for the Evaluation of Educational
Achievement (IEA) about the participation of the Kingdom of Morocco in TIMSS 2015 and PIRLS 2016. The agreements, signed by the Minister of National
Education and Vocational Training and the IEA, were authorized in 2014. The documents are not publicly available; a fee must be paid to the IEA to access them.

5. The Ministry of National Education and Vocational Training provides regular funding, allocated at discretion. Until 2008, the World Bank sponsored TIMSS.
Funding is not approved by law, decree or norm.

6. Funding covers the following activities:

    -   International participation fees
    -   Implementation of the assessment exercise
    -   Processing and analysis of data collected from implementation of the assessment exercise
    -   Reporting and dissemination of assessment results
    -   Attendance at international expert meetings for the assessment exercise

7. Funding does not cover research and development.

8. The National Research Coordinator, appointed by the Minister of National Education and Vocational Training, is responsible for the international assessment.
There is also a team responsible for carrying out the assessment.

9. The national coordinator is fluent in the language of the assessment.

10. The team is sufficiently staffed, has previous experience working on international assessments, and has the necessary training or experience to carry out
required assessment activities effectively.

Team members have attended all of the international meetings related to the assessment.

The only noted issue in carrying out the assessment is a necessity for more capacity building in assessment, specifically, data analysis and results exploitation in
terms of pedagogical projects.



SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                                   50
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                        SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

The following issues have not been identified:
    - There have been errors or delays in the printing or layout of the test booklets.
    - There have been errors or delays in the administration of the assessment.
    - There have been complaints about poor training of test administrators.
    - There have been issues with translation of the assessment instruments.
    - There have been errors or delays in scoring student responses to questions.

11. The ILSA team attended all international workshops or meetings.

12. The following opportunities are offered:

    -   Workshops or meetings on using international assessment databases
    -   Funding for attending international workshops or training on international assessments

The following opportunities are not offered:

    -   University courses on the topic of international assessments
    -   Online courses on international assessments

13. The following groups benefit from opportunities to learn about international assessments:

    -   Individuals working directly on the specific international assessment exercise
    -   Inspectors
    -   Teachers

The following groups do not benefit from opportunities to learn about international assessments:

    -   University students studying assessment or a related area
    -   Professionals or university staff interested in assessment

14. Morocco met all technical standards required to have its data presented in the main displays of the international report.

15. Morocco has contributed to the global knowledge base on international assessments through the following:

    -   A concise report on PIRLS, TIMSS, and PNEA, Morocco’s national large-scale assessment program
    -   Development of instruments to assess examination prerequisites for teachers to use in the classroom throughout the year

SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                          51
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                                       SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015

16. Country-specific results were disseminated in the following ways:

    -   Copies of the national report were distributed to key stakeholders.
    -   Copies of the international report were distributed to key stakeholders.
    -   Morocco's results were communicated through a press release.
    -   Results received coverage on television or radio, or in newspapers.
    -   Brochures and PowerPoint presentations with Morocco's results were made available online or distributed to key stakeholders.
    -   Products providing feedback to the schools or educators about the results were made available.
    -   Regional forums were organized in regions and were attended by all stakeholders in 2010.

Country-specific results were not disseminated through a national report made available online.

17. Products to provide feedback to schools and educators about ILSA results are systematically made available.

18. There are editorials or columns commenting on the international assessment results.

Assessment results are not on the front page of the newspapers or the main story on the TV news.

19. Results from the ILSA have been used in the following ways:

    -   Tracking the impact of reforms on student achievement levels
    -   Informing curriculum improvement
    -   Informing teacher training programs
    -   informing other assessment activities in the system
    -   Informing resource allocation

    In addition, the national strategy of the Ministry is partially based on results of TIMSS, PIRLS, PNEA, and other assessments, and done in coordination with
    the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), the Japan International Cooperation Agency
    (JICA), and others.

20. It is not clear that decisions based on ILSA results have had a positive impact on students’ achievement levels.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                               52
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                 SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


Acknowledgments
This report was prepared by the World Bank SABER--Student Assessment Team (Marguerite Clarke, World Bank Senior
Education Specialist, Julia Liberman, World Bank Operations Officer, Rachel Cooper, World Bank Education Consultant,
and Vidyasri Putcha, World Bank Education Consultant). The report was made possible with the inputs and contributions
of Mohammed Sassi, Director of the National Center for Evaluation, Examinations, and Orientation (NCEEO); and Ahmed
Chaibi, Head of the Evaluation Division at NCEEO, who oversaw the data collection for the SABER--Student Assessment
exercise in Morocco. The report benefited from feedback and review by Kamel Braham, World Bank Program Leader for
education projects in Morocco.




References

Clarke, M. 2012. “What Matters Most for Student Assessment Systems: A Framework Paper.” READ/SABER Working Paper
Series. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Education Policy and Data Center. 2014. “Morocco National Education Profile.” Education Policy and Data Center,
Washington, D.C. Data retrieved from http://www.epdc.org/sites/default/files/documents/EPDC%20NEP_Morocco.pdf.

UNESCO. 2014. “Morocco Education for All National Report.” UNESCO, Paris, France. Data retrieved from
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002317/231799e.pdf

UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Morocco Education Statistics. UNESCO, Paris, France. Data retrieved from
http://www.uis.unesco.org/Pages/default.asp

World Bank. 2015. Morocco Country Indicator Data. World Bank, Washington, D.C. Data retrieved from
http://databank.worldbank.org/data on October 9, 2015.

--------------. 2015. “Morocco Country Overview.” World          Bank,   Washington,   D.C.   Data   retrieved   from
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/morocco/overview#1.

-------------. 2012. “The World Bank Supports the Implementation of Morocco’s Education Emergency Program 2009-
2012.” World Bank, Washington, D.C. Data retrieved from http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
release/2010/06/08/the-world-bank-supports-the-implementation-of-moroccos-education-emergency-program-2009-
2012.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                     53
MOROCCO ǀ SABER-STUDENT ASSESSMENT                                                                      SABER COUNTRY REPORT |2015


                                                                                www.worldbank.org/education/saber




       The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER)
       initiative produces comparative data and knowledge on education
       policies and institutions, with the aim of helping countries
       systematically strengthen their education systems.          SABER
       evaluates the quality of education policies against evidence-based
       global standards, using new diagnostic tools and detailed policy
       data. The SABER country reports give all parties with a stake in
       educational results—from administrators, teachers, and parents to
       policymakers and business people—an accessible, objective
       snapshot showing how well the policies of their country's education
       system are oriented toward ensuring that all children and youth
       learn.

       This report focuses specifically on policies in the area of student
       assessment.



This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. The World
Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown
on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries.




SYSTEMS APPROACH FOR BETTER EDUCATION RESULTS                                                                                                      54
