   SABER–School Feeding




Manual for SABER-SF Exercise

              The World Bank

         The World Food Programme

    The Partnership for Child Development



                                            May 2016




                                             2016
SABER-SF Manual                                                            2015



Contents
   Acronyms
   Acknowledgments
1. Introduction
2. SABER—School Feeding
3. Preparation and Data Collection
   3.1. Consultation with the government
   3.2. Consultation with stakeholders
   3.3. SABER-SF tools
   3.4. Data collection on policies and systems in place
4. Discussion and Validation
   4.1. Defining the methodology of the exercise
   4.2. Planning for SABER-SF workshop
        4.2.1. Recommended participants and facilitators
        4.2.2. Agenda
        4.2.3. Workshop documents
        4.2.4. SABER-SF report
   4.3. SABER-SF Questionnaire
        4.3.1. Policy Goal 1: Policy Framework
        4.3.2. Policy Goal 2: Financial Capacity
        4.3.3. Policy Goal 3: Institutional Capacity and Coordination
        4.3.4. Policy Goal 4: Design and Implementation
        4.3.5. Policy Goal 5: Community Roles—Reaching beyond the School
   4.4. How to define the stage for each indicator and Policy Goal
        4.4.1. The Framework Rubrics
        4.4.2. Excel SABER-SF Scoring Rubrics
        4.4.3. How to use the Excel SABER-SF Scoring Rubrics
        4.4.4. Rationale behind scoring
        4.4.5. Example
5. Publication of SABER-SF Report
   5.1. How to write the SABER-SF report
   5.2. How to clear the report
   5.3. How to publish the report on the SABER website
6. Planning Forward—Building on SABER-SF Findings
7. Timeline and Quality Assurance Measures
   7.1. Timeline
   7.2. Checklist for quality assurance measures
References
Annex
     1. Questionnaire in English
     2. Framework Rubrics
     3. Contact Details for the SABER Team
     4. List of Useful Resources

2|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                2015



Acronyms

CoE            Centre of Excellence
EAC            East African Community
ECOWAS         Economic Community of West African States
FRESH          Focusing Resources on Effective School Health
HGSF           Home-Grown School Feeding
M&E            Monitoring and Evaluation
NSFP           National School Feeding Program
PCD            Partnership for Child Development
PRSP           Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SF             School Feeding
SABER          Systems Approach for Better Education Results
WASH           Water supply, sanitation, and hygiene promotion
WFP            World Food Programme




Acknowledgments
Thanks and admiration to the Technical Team that worked on this guidance manual: Bachir Sarr of PCD,
Shereen Nasef of WFP, and Michelle Louie of the World Bank. We also acknowledge the many colleagues
who have read and commented on drafts of the manual, including but not limited to Emilie Sidaner and
Jelena Liciana of WFP and Andy Chi Tembon of the World Bank. Appreciation is also extended to the
Chief of School Feeding and the Chief of Social Protection and Safety Nets at WFP headquarters

This publication is a collaboration between the World Bank, the World Food Programme, and the
Partnership for Child Development, which reflects the high-level of commitment of the organizations to
support and promote school feeding policies and institutions around the world. We hope readers will find
the manual useful as a source of information and policy ideas.




3|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015



1. Introduction

Recent research shows that almost every country is seeking to implement a national school feeding
program. This enhanced demand, most likely induced by the social shocks from the global food, fuel, and
financial crises, have led the World Bank and the United Nations World Food Programme (WFP) in
collaboration with the Partnership for Child Development (PCD) and other partners to undertake a joint
analysis titled Rethinking School Feeding, which examined global evidence to better understand how to
develop and implement effective school feeding programs as both a productive safety net and a fiscally
sustainable investment in human capital (Bundy et al. 2009).

The renewed focus of government efforts on school feeding provides an important opportunity to revisit
national policies and systems as well as planning for the long-term sustainability of these programs. It
requires a more systematic and policy-driven approach, which can be supported by the SABER process.
SABER—Systems Approach for Better Education Results—is a large exercise launched by the World
Bank’s Education Global Practice in 2011 to benchmark various education domains including school health
and school feeding. SABER reflects the core of the World Bank Group’s Education Strategy: Learning for
All. It recognizes that improving education requires much more than just increasing resources; it requires
the establishment of robust policies and institutions to help countries achieve education results and learning.
Although SABER has 13 domains, this manual focuses on school feeding, which is a component of the
School Health and School Feeding SABER domain. School feeding is a joint area of interest between the
World Bank, the World Food Programme, and Partnership for Child Development. For more information
on SABER, please visit their website: http://saber.worldbank.org.

SABER–School Feeding (SABER-SF) is a useful approach to assessing the school feeding policy situation
and systems in any country to identify the gaps and plan appropriate capacity development plans and/or
road maps with the government and other stakeholders. It helps countries strengthen their national school
feeding programs and/or transition to national school feeding programs with solid policies and systems
when applicable, and assess progress of implementing each indicator.

This manual aims to assist users (government institutions, PCD, World Bank, WFP, and other
stakeholders) to understand, plan, and implement the SABER-SF exercise at the country level. It builds
upon the experiences from national SABER-SF workshops held during 2014. The SABER-SF exercise
should be as inclusive as possible to ensure broad ownership and support for its implementation. SABER
consists of a structured questionnaire whose responses are determined based on consultation with
representatives from relevant stakeholders. Stakeholder engagement and consensus building are integral
parts of the SABER process as described in this manual.

The manual contains a brief explanation of SABER-SF in section 2, followed by a discussion in section 3
of the preparation of the SABER-SF exercise and data collection procedures. Section 4 explains the
methodology and planning process for a SABER-SF workshop, completion of the questionnaire (and the
rationale behind each question or set of questions), and how to use each of the SABER-SF tools including
the Framework Rubrics and the Scoring Rubrics. Section 5 covers the process of publicizing the SABER-
SF report, and section 6 talks about planning for next steps after the SABER-SF exercise. Section 7
provides a timeline for implementing the SABER-SF exercise and quality assurance measures. The manual

4|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


also includes an annex with the SABER-SF questionnaire and the Framework Rubrics. The annex also
details ways to contact the SABER team at the World Bank for any questions or comments in addition to
a list of additional resources. Other resources such as the SABER-SF Feeding report template will be
available online to download from the SABER website under “School Health and School Feeding”
(http://saber.worldbank.org/index.cfm).


This manual was prepared by a technical team comprising the World Bank, the United Nations World Food
Programme, and the Partnership for Child Development.



2. SABER–School Feeding

Recognizing the importance of school health and school feeding, the World Bank’s Education Global
Practice developed a specific SABER domain for School Health and School Feeding to assess the
corresponding policies based on two frameworks detailing best practices in these sectors. Although school
feeding is an integral part of school health programs, a separate framework rubric is dedicated to school
feeding because its costs and scale can be much greater than other school health program components.

Recognizing the importance of policy dialogue and assisting countries in policy development, WFP
encourages the use of SABER-SF as outlined in its 2013 Revised School Feeding Policy. PCD is also using
SABER-SF in countries where it supports governments and partners who are implementing home-grown
school feeding programs.

SABER-SF is based on five internationally agreed upon standards that form the tool’s five core policy goals
that guide countries when they use the SABER-SF methodology to comprehensively assess their national
school feeding program (fig. 1). It is recognized that effective school feeding programs have a national
policy framework, stable and predictable funding, sufficient institutional capacity for implementation and
coordination, sound design and implementation, and community participation. These five standards are
outlined in Rethinking School Feeding, a joint analysis undertaken by the United Nations World Food
Programme and the World Bank with support from the Partnership for Child Development, Imperial
College, and Harvard University (Bundy et al. 2009). This document can be accessed at
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-
1099080042112/DID_School_Feeding.pdf. These five standards, or policy goals, are also detailed in the
document “What Matters in School Health and School Feeding,” which can be downloaded from the World
Bank website:
http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/SHN/Framework_S
ABER-School_Health.pdf.




5|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                         2015


Figure 1: The Five Policy Goals of SABER-SF

          Policy Goals                                Policy Levers                                                     Outcome


              Policy Goal 1




                                                                                                                           Healthy children are able to learn better
                                            •Overarching policies for school feeding in alignment with national-level
           Policy Frameworks                 policy.


              Policy Goal 2                 •Governance of the national school feeding program through stable funding
            Financial Capacity               and budgeting.


              Policy Goal 3                 •School feeding intersectoral coordination and strong partnerships.
                                            •Management and accountability structures, strong institutional
  Institutional Capacity and Coordination    frameworks, and monitoring and evaluation.

              Policy Goal 4                 •Quality assurance of programming, targeting, modalities, and a needs-
       Design and Implementation             based and cost-effective procurement design.


              Policy Goal 5
                                            •Strong community participation, accountability, and ownership.
            Community Roles



Source: Adapted from “What Matters in School Health and School Feeding.”

The foundation for effective implementation is closely linked to a sound policy framework. Therefore, the
primary focus of the SABER-SF exercise is to gather systematic and verifiable information about the quality
of school feeding policies and systems related to the five policy goals mentioned above rather than gathering
data about the implementation of the school feeding program (SFP). SABER-SF is designed to provide a
snapshot of the country’s policy framework at a point in time that can inform at a later stage a more in-
depth analysis of policies and program implementation.

The tools were developed to facilitate data collection and analysis based on the SABER-SF framework.
The Framework Rubrics were first developed and evaluated with 30 countries in two subregions of Africa:
those in the Economic Community of West African States and those in the East African Community. A
questionnaire was then developed jointly by representatives from the education, health, and agriculture
sectors before it was piloted in two countries in Africa, The Gambia and Kenya, in 2011. In 2014 the
questionnaire was revised and piloted by the World Bank, WFP, and PCD in Benin, Bolivia, the Republic
of Congo, Madagascar, Namibia, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Tunisia.

Based on this experience, the steps to implement the SABER-SF exercise are summarized in figure 2 and
explained in detail in the following sections.




6|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


Figure 2: SABER-SF Exercise Process



      Preparation & Data Collection


      Discussion & Validation


      SABER-SF Report Publication


       Planning Forward




3. Preparation and Data Collection


SABER-SF is an inclusive exercise that should include policy makers in different ministries, educational
leaders, relevant nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), donors, and researchers. These stakeholders will
also have access to the data collected by this initiative to analyze and identify strengths and gaps. This
process will enable decision makers to diagnose the state of school feeding policies in their countries and
make informed decisions to improve school feeding policies and systems.

One of the advantages of this participatory approach is to strengthen the collaboration between various
stakeholders and develop a sense of ownership over the process. At the beginning of the process, it is
recommended to have a dialogue with key stakeholders to explain the methodology and purpose of SABER-
SF and agree on how it will be conducted and who should participate.

The consultation process can generate political will to transition a donor-managed school feeding program
to a national one in countries where school feeding is implemented with external funding and operational
support and/or to identify policy gaps to improve existing national policies and systems. This dialogue can
also lead to increased financial capacity and community participation to improve coordination, management
and accountability structures, and monitoring and evaluation.


3.1 Consultation with the government

The consultation process before the SABER-SF workshop can be facilitated by partners (for example, the
World Bank, WFP, or PCD introducing SABER to key government officials), but in all cases it is
recommended that government officials lead the SABER-SF process. Once key government officials agree
to conduct the SABER-SF exercise, the government’s existing school feeding Multisectoral steering
committee or a special task force should lead the preparation and execution of the exercise with the

7|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                             2015


involvement of key stakeholders and partners. The steering committee or task force should be responsible
for the overall implementation of the SABER-SF exercise, including collecting data, coordinating the
workshop, defining roles and responsibilities, securing funding for the exercise, coordinating the invitations
to various ministries and stakeholders, etc. Specifically, they should define the workshop’s objectives,
agenda, and participants. They should also determine the workshop’s dates, organize the workshop’s
program, and coordinate with key speakers and moderators in addition to preparing presentations and key
documents.

The following government sectors are likely to take a leading role:

x    Leading sector or institution in charge of school feeding in the country
x    Education (include an education budget specialist)
x    Health
x    Agriculture
x    Finance
x    Social affairs
x    Others as relevant


3.2 Consultation with stakeholders

All major stakeholders involved in school feeding should participate in the SABER-SF exercise. They
generally include the WFP, World Bank, bilateral donors, international NGOs (such as PSD and Save the
Children), and other relevant stakeholders including community organisations that have a national, regional,
or local scope. Other relevant stakeholders could include parent associations,1 small-holder farmers, and
others depending on their involvement in the school feeding program at the school level in the country.

Involvement of World Bank, WFP, and PCD teams in the country is particularly important because they
have led the process in developing the SABER-SF methodology and can help the government prepare and
execute the exercise in addition to revising and publishing the SABER-SF report. Moreover, their
involvement is important to planning next steps in improving or developing existing policies and systems
in collaboration with the government.

Involving active stakeholders in the policy dialogue can build momentum for the stakeholders’ work to
reform or support school feeding globally. For example, it is part of WFP’s School Feeding Policy (2013
WFP School Feeding Policy) to support countries that are transitioning to national school feeding programs
and to strengthen the government’s capacities, relevant systems, and policies. WFP’s Center of Excellence
(CoE) in Brazil has also executed a number of consultations and capacity-strengthening projects with many
countries to develop supporting policies, to help countries link school feeding to local agriculture, to revise
existing school feeding programming, and to draft action plans with the countries. PCD also works closely
with governments in many countries in Africa and other regions to support home-grown school feeding

1
  Students’ parents, especially in rural areas, are usually small farmers and provide food, storage, fuel, catering, and labor to run
the school feeding program.


8|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015


activities, an approach that sources foods for school meals from local smallholder farmers. The World Bank
collaborates with governments on the policy and funding levels, and the Food and Agriculture Organization
(FAO) has several school feeding projects.

Based on recent experiences from countries that conducted the SABER-SF exercise, most bilateral and
multilateral organizations working at the country level were interested in taking part in the exercise and/or
the workshop to learn about the current state of national policies on school feeding, which may help initiate
discussions with the governments on how to address the identified gaps. Another important partner to
consider is the private sector, which can play a key role in funding national school feeding programs in
many countries.



3.3 SABER-SF tools

SABER-SF includes tools to facilitate the collection and analysis of data in all countries. The tools are user-
friendly and self-explanatory (see box). The Framework Rubric and questionnaire can be downloaded from
http://saber.worldbank.org/index.cfm?indx=11&tb=9

The SABER-SF tools consist of the following:

The Framework Rubrics: This is the main tool of SABER-SF; the Framework Rubrics provide
explanations for each of the five policy goals and their corresponding indicators. In addition, the rubrics
provide definitions for each of the different stages of development for each indicator and policy goal (latent,
emerging, established, or advanced; see example at the end of this section and the Annex).

SABER-SF Questionnaire: The questions are designed based on the five policy goals that guide the
SABER-SF exercise (see fig. 1). The questions ask for information about each policy goal’s indicators in
order to gather information about national school feeding policies and systems.

Scoring Rubrics: This is a useful automated Microsoft Excel scoring system to help verify the stages of
development. By entering the answers from the questionnaire into the Excel spreadsheet, this tool provides
an automated score that describes the stage of development for each indicator and each policy goal (latent,
emerging, established, or advanced).

SABER-SF Report Template: This is a template to report the results of the SABER-SF exercise and the
stages of development for each indicator and policy goal (latent, emerging, established, or advanced) with
brief explanations of the results using both the country’s context and the Framework Rubrics. It also
includes background information about the country’s education and health context and policies. Upon
receiving clearance by the government, this report is posted on the World Bank’s SABER website (see
http://saber.worldbank.org/index.cfm).

SABER-SF Manual (This Manual): It details all requirements, steps, and tools to conduct the SABER-
SF exercise.




9|P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015


3.4 Data collection on policies and systems in place

One of the initial steps to implementing the SABER-SF exercise is to collect all the government documents
and information related to school feeding policies, systems, financing, and other significant information
about the school feeding program. It also important to collect any existing action plans, consultation reports,
and evaluations that are related to national school feeding that were validated by the government. This will
provide the evidence to make substantiated, informed decisions when answering the SABER-SF
questionnaire. These documents will also be used to analyze existing policies and institutions that are
related to school feeding, align various policies and laws, and identify strengths and weaknesses. The
documents should also be referenced and cited in the SABER-SF questionnaire and SABER-SF report to
provide evidence for the questionnaire’s answers and results.

The following is a list of recommended documents to be collected (when available) by the task force, the
consultant, or the school health unit as the case might be:
   x Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) or equivalent national development strategy (also
        available on the website: http://www.imf.org/external/np/prsp/prsp.aspx)
   x National school feeding policy
   x Legislation related to school feeding and public food procurement
   x National school feeding guidelines/manual
   x Sectoral policies and strategies (education, health, agriculture, social welfare)
   x Existing action plans/road maps for national school feeding in the country
   x Existing consultation reports about the national school feeding program and policies in the country
        that are done by WFP, WFP CoE, FAO, World Bank, PCD, or other entities
   x Official document instating a school feeding unit
   x Beneficiary figures of school feeding programs (at least three years if possible), for donor-
        supported SFPs and national SFPs (NSFPs)
   x Sectoral budget lines and plans for all levels (national, regional, local)
   x National school feeding standards (targeting criteria and methodology, food modalities, and the
        food basket and menus, food management, procurement, and logistics). (In some countries, these
        are issued in the form of manuals or guidelines.)
   x Documents and reports on school feeding program(s) in the country that are supported by donors,
        the community, and others
   x List of external donors and work plans (budgets, activities)
   x List of private sector partners
   x Multisectoral committee meeting reports and minutes
   x Memoranda of Understanding between government sectors and/or partners
   x National Monitoring or Information Management System Plans and reports
   x National school feeding monitoring and evaluation plan
   x Situation analysis report on NSFP and/or any other impact evaluations of the program
   x Most recent evaluation reports, reviews, and studies on school feeding from the World Bank and
        others
   x Recent assessments on vulnerability and education (World Bank website, etc.)



10 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                   2015




4. Discussion and Validation


If a multisectoral steering committee is in charge of school feeding, it should lead the organization of the
SABER-SF workshop. If a multisectoral steering committee does not exist, then a task force composed of
stakeholders should be created to organize the workshop. Once a national steering committee or a task force
is assigned responsibility for the SABER-SF exercise, the next step is to define how to implement this
assessment during a national workshop and arrange all the related details. It is also important to fully
understand all of the SABER-SF tools before the workshop. Therefore, the steering committee should
review all the tools together to ensure that all members share a common understanding of the tools.



4.1      Defining the methodology of the exercise

The steering committee will need to decide how to carry out the SABER-SF exercise. Two options are
available to implement the SABER-SF exercise:

                                                                                             The workshop as an
Option 1: The questionnaire can be answered and results validated during
                                                                                                added value:
a workshop in the presence of all major stakeholders, or participating
government officials and stakeholders involved in the national school                       Holding a workshop with
feeding program can answer the questions during the workshop and validate                   key informants from
the results in the plenary sessions. It is highly recommended that                          various ministries along
participants review the questionnaire before the workshop.                                  with donors and
                                                                                            stakeholders working on
Option 2: Alternatively, a consultant or government official from the                       school feeding is a very
steering committee can gather data on policies, conduct initial interviews,                 good opportunity for all
answer the questionnaire, and score each indicator and policy goal using                    stakeholders to meet face-
the Scoring Rubrics before the workshop.2 Participating government                          to-face, discuss their
                                                                                            views together, and plan
officials and stakeholders involved in the national school feeding program
                                                                                            future steps.
will validate the answers to the questions during the workshop.

Most of the pilot countries that completed the SABER-SF questionnaire in 2014 chose the first option,
which is recommended whenever possible because it promotes stakeholders’ engagement and ownership.
This option has also proven to be a good mechanism to ensure quality results when it is well facilitated.

No matter the method chosen, clear roles should be defined prior to the SABER exercise. The steering
committee or task force that will lead the SABER-SF process should be clearly identified. The responsible
entity should then identify the workshop’s funding needs and sources and define a work plan with clear
deadlines. It should develop a checklist that includes all the logistical requirements: venue selection,

2While holding a workshop is highly recommended, in situations where the workshop is not possible, findings can be validated
with the government in a meeting or small consultation.




11 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                    2015


transportation, electronic equipment, and others. (See section 7.2 on checklist of quality assurance
measures.)

Validation of the results and conclusions is an important step in the SABER-SF exercise. Therefore, data
sources should be clearly identified in and attached to the SABER-SF questionnaire regardless of which
option is chosen.


4.2 Planning for SABER-SF workshop

The following subsections will cover the details about preparing for the SABER-SF workshop including
participants, facilitators, agenda, required documents, etc.

Ideally a two-day workshop is organized with the purpose of validating the answers to the questions in the
questionnaire or answering the SABER-SF questionnaire and discussing the findings, determining and
agreeing on what the country’s stage of development is for each of the five policy goals (see section 4.4 on
how to define the stage for each indicator and policy goal using the Framework Rubrics), and developing
an action plan. Usually the workshop starts with general presentations on the country’s education sector
with a focus on school feeding and related current policies. Other presentations can introduce the SABER
approach, SABER-SF, and the workshop methodology, including objectives and agenda.

Then, the participants are divided into five groups (each group can have between six and ten participants).
Each group is assigned one of the five policy goals to discuss and to answer the corresponding section of
the questionnaire (see fig. 1). During the group discussions, each group refers to the Framework Rubrics
and enters the answers into the Scoring Rubrics to determine the stage of development for each indicator
and the policy goal. Each group presents their findings in plenary for validation. On the second day, the
groups break out again to discuss an action plan to revise school feeding policies and systems and present
their recommendations in plenary for discussion. The workshop is ideally closed by a presentation
summarizing the results of the SABER-SF exercise and final agreement on all the outcomes of the
workshop.

4.2.1    Recommended participants and facilitators

For meaningful participation and sound deliberations, it is recommended that the number of workshop
participants ranges between 30 and 50 individuals. The list can include the following representatives:

    -    Government officials should include decision makers, such as
            o School feeding directors
            o Focal points in charge of school feeding, health, and/or nutrition in all sectors involved in
                 designing and implementing the country’s school feeding program (education, health,
                 agriculture, finance, social and welfare, and others)
            o Government officials from central, regional, and local levels
    -    Major stakeholders include:
            o Community members representing the national, regional, and local levels
            o Parent-teacher associations
            o Civil society, NGOs

12 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015


               o   Private sector representatives including suppliers
               o   Multi- and bilateral partners and donors

Members of the steering committee can have many roles during the SABER-SF exercise. Thus, it is
important to clearly define the roles of the speakers, facilitators, group moderator(s), and note takers before
the workshop as follows:

Speakers

The workshop usually starts with general presentations on the education system, the national school feeding
program, and policies and systems related to school feeding.

The primary roles of the speakers are to present on the above mentioned topics. Experts from the
government should be selected to be speakers at the workshop. A high-level government official could open
the workshop.

Facilitators

Different approaches are possible regarding facilitation. In general, a team composed of one lead facilitator
supported by four or five people is recommended. Ideally, the facilitators would be members of the
multisectoral steering committee (government officials or partners) that is organizing the workshop.
Facilitators can have specific knowledge of the SABER process, the FRESH3 framework, and the five
SABER-SF core policy goals. They can present on SABER, SABER-SF, the agenda, and the objectives of
the workshop. At the end of the workshop, the lead facilitator should present the outcomes of the workshop.

The lead facilitator can also be assigned the responsibility of leading the whole workshop, monitoring the
sessions and presentations where he or she can introduce speakers at the beginning of the workshop,
announce the different agenda items to the participants, and ensure that the group discussions are
proceeding smoothly.

Group moderators—working groups

When the policy goal working groups break out for group discussions, each group will be assigned a group
moderator to lead the discussions and explain the questions from the questionnaire if necessary. They will
also help with time keeping and logistics, support note taking, keep the conversations focused, provide
additional explanations, etc.

Note takers

Note takers can be selected from the steering committee. They should be responsible for recording the
answers to the questionnaire in each of the working groups as well as recording the main discussion points
and the actions plan points agreed upon within the group.

Assigning participants into groups


3Focus Resources on Effective School Health (FRESH). Details can be accessed at
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0012/001255/125537e.pdf.


13 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                     2015


It is useful to preassign participants into the five groups before the workshop. For example, representatives
from civil society organizations and NGOs can participate in group 5 (discussing policy goal 5: community
roles—reaching beyond the school). The organizer of the workshop (steering committee/task force) should
devise a systematic way of dividing the participants into the appropriate groups beforehand.

Based on the experience of conducting SABER-SF in Tunisia in April 2014, the government’s school
feeding steering committee took the lead in cooperating with WFP to organize the exercise and the
workshop. Assigning the participants to the five different groups before commencing the workshop proved
to be a successful practice, although remaining flexible to accommodate last-minute changes is also
recommended.


4.2.2    Agenda

The team in charge of the workshop preparation will work with stakeholders and facilitators to define the
workshop’s objectives and agenda. Two days for the workshop is a realistic duration to ensure the
appropriate balance between the depth of discussions and length of time. The first day can be dedicated to
the opening ceremony and presentations on the current school feeding situation in the country and the
SABER-SF process, which is then followed by group work to answer the questionnaire and determine the
stages of development in relation to the five policy goals using the Framework Rubrics. At the end of day
1, all the participants can discuss and validate each group’s findings during a plenary session. The second
day can start with a summary of the conclusions from day 1, then once again splitting into the five working
groups to plan for a road map or action plan based on the findings before presenting and discussing it in
plenary before the closing of the workshop. The generic agenda below provides an example of the type of
activities that can be included in the workshop:



          Time                 Activity
          Day 1                Opening ceremony and introduction of participants
                               Workshop objectives and expected results
                               Presentation of country’s school feeding program and
                               other relevant presentations on existing policies and
                               systems
                               Introduction of SABER and SABER-SF
                               Presentation of the workshop methodology
                               Division of task among five working groups
                               according to the five policy goals and participants’
                               expertise
                               Working groups: Completing the assigned
                               questionnaire section and deciding on an initial stage
                               of development for indicator(s) and policy goals
                               Plenary presentations and validation of results
          Day 2                Summary of conclusions based on day 1
                               Reminder of day 2 methodology

14 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


                                  Working groups: Designing an initial road map or
                                  action plan based on the findings of each policy goal
                                  Plenary presentation and validation of action plan
                                  Overall summary of SABER results and workshop
                                  Closing ceremony


Notes:
• It is preferable to keep the discussions at the policy level as much as possible. The workshop is not an
   appropriate forum to discuss design or implementation issues in detail, so the facilitation team has the
   responsibility of keeping discussions focused on the policy level.
• The level of detail in the action plan will vary for each country. Some countries may opt to prepare a
   detailed and thorough action plan, whereas in other countries, the SABER-SF workshop provides an
   opportunity to identify priorities for action, which will inform an action plan in the future.



4.2.3     Workshop documents

In addition to policy documents listed in 3.4, making available to workshop participants the following
documents is recommended:
    x “What Matters Most for School Health and School Feeding: A Framework Paper” (World Bank
         2012)4
    x “Rethinking School Feeding” (Bundy et al. 2009)
    x “State of School Feeding Worldwide 2013” (WFP 2013)
    x Framework Rubrics (available in the Annex)
    x Template of SABER-SF report (available on the SABER website)
    x Example of SABER-SF reports from other countries5
    x This Manual
    x Template of action plan

Each participant should have the following:
   x The questionnaire divided into the five sections (each participant should have the section related
       to her or his working group), preferably in the working language of the government
   x The Framework Rubrics
   x The Scoring Rubrics



4
 Available for download from
http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/SHN/Framework_SABER-
School_Health.pdf.
5
    These can be downloaded from the World Bank SABER website: http://saber.worldbank.org.




15 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                        2015


4.2.4    SABER-SF Report

It is very important to prepare the SABER-SF report using the template available on the World Bank’s
SABER website. A government staff member or consultant can be designated to complete the report using
the conclusions from the first day’s group work including all related references and attachments. This
preliminary report can then be expanded upon to become a validated SABER-SF report within a few weeks
following the workshop. More details on the SABER-SF report can be found in section 5. Finally, the report
once finalized and approved, will be openly available for download from the website.



4.3 SABER-SF Questionnaire

The SABER-SF questionnaire was developed through a worldwide consultative process that started in
2011. The questionnaire was reviewed in 2014 by a technical team composed of staff from the World
Bank, WFP, and PCD. The questions are designed around the five policy goals and their indicators from
the Framework Rubrics. The questionnaire is also informed by experiences from other education
subsystems’ SABER benchmarking processes as well as advice from an advisory committee of experts.

As explained earlier, it is preferable to complete the questionnaire during a workshop that brings together
representatives from the ministries of education, health, and agriculture and other government sectors,
partners, and stakeholders involved in school health and school feeding programs.

Each policy goal’s set of questions should be answered by the group responsible for the specific policy
goal. The questions’ answers should be based on a consensus within the group. Discussions within the
group can help clarify any outstanding questions or provide additional information on the topics covered in
the questionnaire, which should be noted in the general comment and text boxes. The first section of the
questionnaire asks for details of the participants, including name, institutional affiliation, job title, and e-
mail address.

The SABER-SF questionnaire consists of five sections that correspond to the five policy goals identified in
Rethinking School Feeding (Bundy et al. 2009) as essential for effective school feeding policies. The core
goals are further detailed in “What Matters Most for School Health and School Feeding: A Framework
Paper,” a 2012 publication in the SABER Working Paper Series.6 The questionnaire structure is listed in




6
 Available on World Bank SABER website:
http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/SHN/Framework_SABER-
School_Health.pdf.




16 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                              2015


Table 1, and questions under each policy goal are explained in the following subsections. The complete
questionnaire is included in the annex.




17 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                               2015


Table 1: Structure of SABER-SF questionnaire

 Section                                                          Number of
                                                                  Questions

 1. Policy Frameworks                                                  8

 2. Financial Capacity                                                 16

 3. Institutional Capacity and Coordination                            17

 4. Design and Implementation                                          36

 5. Community Roles—Reaching beyond the School                         6

 Subtotal                                                              83



4.3.1    Policy Goal 1: Policy Frameworks

National planning for school feeding should ensure that the government has identified the most appropriate
role for school feeding in its development agenda. The degree to which school feeding is articulated in
national policy and budgeting frameworks varies from country to country, but a policy foundation for the
program helps strengthen its potential for sustainability and accountability as well as the quality of its
implementation. In some developing countries, school feeding is mentioned in the Poverty Reduction
Strategy, linked to the education, nutrition, or social protection sectors, and/or mentioned in sectoral
policies or plans.

In a majority of countries where school feeding programs are currently dependent on external support,
national policies do not include school feeding. A good starting point to begin the transition process to
national ownership is to integrate the program into the national policy, budgeting, and institutional
frameworks where appropriate.

The first section of the questionnaire focuses on policy goals and indicators on school feeding. The
questions, rationale, and examples are listed below.

 Policy Goal/Indicator          Rationale

 1. Policy Framework            Overarching Policies for School Feeding—Sound Alignment with the National Policy

 Indicator 1.1                  This indicator helps determine if the national-level poverty reduction strategy or equivalent
                                national strategy as well as sectoral policies and strategies identify school feeding as an
 National-level poverty         education and/or social protection intervention with clearly defined objectives, targets,
 reduction strategy or          milestones, and sectoral responsibilities. It also examines the alignment of the national
 equivalent national            poverty reduction strategy/PRSP and sectoral policies when school feeding is mentioned in
 strategy as well as sectoral   both.
 policies and strategies
 (education sector plan,        Questions 1.1. to 1.3.




18 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                   2015


    Policy Goal/Indicator          Rationale

    nutrition policy, and social   Question 1.1.a
    protection policy) identify    Is school feeding mentioned    A Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) describes a
    school feeding as an           in the published PRSP or an    country's macroeconomic, structural and social policies and
    education and/or social        equivalent national            programs over a certain period. Its main objective is to reduce
    protection intervention,       strategy?                      poverty through broad-based growth, and it outlines the
    clearly defining objectives                                   financing needs and major sources of financing. Ministries
    and sectoral                                                  use the PRSP to guide their activities, so ministries will likely
    responsibilities.                                             prioritize school feeding if it is mentioned in the document. A
                                                                  participatory process involving domestic stakeholders and
                                                                  development partners can be used in its preparation, and it
                                                                  can be updated with annual progress reports.7 Please
                                                                  reference the date of the PRSP if it mentions school feeding.

                                                                  For example, in Côte d’Ivoire’s PRSP (2009), under the
                                                                  “Objectives for 2013 and 2015 for the Educational System:
                                                                  Targets and Indicators” section, it states “The Government
                                                                  should put in place an educational retention policy to reduce
                                                                  the level of wastage essentially made up of dropouts and
                                                                  repetition. Furthermore, it should stimulate access to and
                                                                  retention at schools through the pursuit of the Integrated
                                                                  School Feeding Sustainability Program, which should be
                                                                  provided with adequate financing.”

                                   Question 1.1.b                 With Education for All, almost all countries have published
                                   Is school feeding mentioned    education sector policies (EFA plans). Mainstreaming school
                                   in any published sectoral      feeding into the national education sector plan is critical to its
                                   policy, strategy, or law       sustainability. It offers the added advantage of aligning
                                   (such as education sector      support for school feeding with the processes designed to
                                   plan, nutrition strategy,      harmonize development partner support for education, such
                                   social protection policy,      as the Global Partnership for Education. It is also important
                                   etc.)?                         that other sectors involved in school feeding programs
                                                                  (health, agriculture, social affairs, etc.) define objectives and
                                                                  responsibilities for the policy and program.

                                   Question 1.2. (If NO to 1.1a   This question is to be answered only if school feeding is not
                                   and 1.1b)                      included in the PRSP/equivalent strategy or any published
                                   Was school feeding             sectoral policy, strategy, or law. This question seeks to learn
                                   discussed during the           if the national government considers school feeding as a
                                   preparation of the PRSP or     potential area of interest.
                                   the equivalent national
                                   strategy, or a sectoral
                                   policy, strategy, or law?




7
    PRSPs can be checked and downloaded from http://www.imf.org/external/np/prsp/prsp.aspx.


19 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator         Rationale

                               Question 1.3.a (If YES to       This question examines more in-depth how school feeding is
                               1.1a or 1.1b)                   included in the PRSP or equivalent strategy, or sectoral
                               In the PRSP or the              policy, strategy, or laws. Responders should have a copy of
                               equivalent national strategy,   the PRSP and sectoral policies where school feeding is
                               or a sectoral policy,           mentioned when answering the question. The government
                               strategy, or laws where         should have defined what it wants to achieve with school
                               school feeding program is       feeding and have identified targets and milestones to reach to
                               mentioned, has the              meet the policy or program’s objectives. The government
                               government defined:             should have also clearly defined the roles of various sectors
                               Objectives                      such as education, health, and agriculture to outline each
                                                               sector’s responsibility for better accountability. If none of the
                               Targets                         boxes are selected, it is assumed that the PRSP and sectoral
                                                               policies do not include objectives, targets, milestones, and
                               Milestones                      sectoral responsibilities.

                               Sectoral responsibilities       Objective: A specific result that is to be achieved with
                                                               available resources over a period of time.

                                                               Target: Well-defined level of achievement for each objective
                                                               that the government sets out to accomplish in a given period
                                                               of time.

                                                               Milestone: Well-defined and significant step toward
                                                               achieving your target.

                                                               Sectoral responsibilities: Duties and major activities that are
                                                               assigned to each ministry or relevant body.

                               Question 1.3.b (If YES to       It is important that sectoral policies or strategies are aligned
                               1.1a and 1.1b)                  with the PRSP or equivalent national strategy with regard to
                               Are published sectoral          school feeding because sectoral policies are likely based on
                               policies or strategies          the PRSP. The sectoral policy can provide more specific
                               aligned with the national-      details on school feeding than the PRSP.
                               level poverty reduction
                               strategy or equivalent          For example, in Sierra Leone’s PRSP 2013–2018, school
                               national strategy?              feeding is mentioned under the initatives to improve social
                                                               protection and gender equality. In the July 2011 International
                                                               Monetary Fund Country Report 11/195, there is a
                                                               recommendation to expand the coverage of the national
                                                               school feeding program to increase access, improve
                                                               perfromance, minimize stunting, and provide other benefits.
                                                               In Sierra Leone’s Education Sector Plan 2007–2015, the
                                                               need to expand school feeding activities is also highlighted.

 Indicator 1.2                 This indicator helps determine if there is an evidence-based, technical, quality policy related
                               to school feeding in place, which addresses the four other school feeding policy goals.
 An evidence-based
 technical policy related to   Questions 1.4. to 1.8.



20 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                              2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator         Rationale

 school feeding outlines the   Question 1.4.                    This can be a national school feeding policy or any
 objectives, rationale,        Is there a published national    nationally recognized policy document or law that (1)
 scope, design, and funding    policy on school feeding?        provides evidence of the government’s recognition of
 and sustainability of the                                      school feeding as a strategically important intervention and
 program and                                                    (2) encapsulates the government’s policy on school feeding.
 comprehensively
 addresses the other four                                       Please include the reference for the national school feeding
 policy goals (institutional                                    policy.
 capacity and coordination,
                               Question 1.5. (If YES to 1.4.)   Please check the boxes where it applies and list all other
 financial capacity, design
                               Which sectors were involved      sectors that were involved in developing and drafting the
 and implementation, and
                               in developing the policy?        national school feeding policy. Involvement means more
 community participation).
                                                                than just approving the final drafts. It means these sectors
                                                                were consulted from the beginning of the process and were
                                                                represented in the committee or group of consultants
                                                                drafting the policy. Involvement also means that the sectors
                                                                were consulted on their roles in school feeding and versions
                                                                of drafts were shared with them.

                               Question 1.6. (If YES to 1.4.)   A good policy clearly identifies problems, defines the
                               Does the policy include the      objectives and expected outcomes in a manner that
                               following:                       corresponds to the country’s context, and comprehensively
                                                                addresses the four other school feeding policy goals
                               Objectives
                                                                (financial capacity, institutional capacity and coordination,
                               Rationale                        design and implementation, and community participation).

                               Scope                            Successful national school feeding programs in middle-
                                                                income and high-income countries tend to rely on local
                               Design, implementation
                                                                procurement of commodities, whereas programs in low-
                               Funding mechanism                income countries are usually dependent on external sources
                                                                of food aid. Links with agriculture development can kick-
                               Links to local production and    start the transition process by establishing sustainable
                               sourcing and/or links with       sources for some commodities and contribute to local
                               agriculture
                                                                economic development. Home-Grown School Feeding is
                               Institutional arrangements       one type of SFP designed to link school feeding to
                               and coordination                 agricultural development where feasible.

                               Community roles

                               Question 1.7. (If YES to 1.4.)   A sound situation analysis is essential to developing
                               Has a situation analysis of      effective school feeding policies. A comprehensive situation
                               needs been used to inform        analysis describes and analyzes the nature and extent of the
                                                                problems affecting school-aged children and their causes;
                               the policy?
                                                                determines the nutritional needs of school-aged children and
                                                                challenges to their full development; and describes the
                                                                current status, resources, and capacity in the country for
                                                                implementing school feeding programs that correspond to
                                                                the identified gaps. Stakeholders involved in the SABER-SF
                                                                exercise could have been part of the policy development


21 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                               2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator         Rationale

                                                                process and used a situation analysis to inform their
                                                                decisions about the school feeding policy.

                               Question 1.8. (If YES to 1.4.)   Aligning sectoral policies with national plans ensures
                               Is the national school feeding   internal consistency and clarity of objectives and strategies
                               policy aligned with the          to guide effective implementation. For example, there is a
                                                                lack of alignment if the PRSP calls for targeted school
                               national poverty reduction
                                                                feeding and the school feeding policy calls for universal
                               strategy and relevant sectoral   school feeding.
                               policies and strategies?
                                                                It is increasingly important that school feeding is included
                                                                in sector plans. These plans form the basis for basket
                                                                funding or sector-wide approaches that determine the
                                                                allocation of donor resources.



4.3.2    Policy Goal 2: Financial Capacity

Stable funding is a prerequisite for a program’s or policy’s sustainability. Typically governments plan and
budget for their priorities on an annual basis based on a national planning process. The degree to which
school feeding is included in this planning and budgeting process will determine whether the program gets
resources from the government’s budget (central or local) and whether it has specific budget line
allocations. In most countries where implementation is supported by external partners, funding for the
program comes from food aid and from government in-kind or cash contributions. As the program becomes
nationally owned, it needs a stable and independent funding source(s). This may be through government
core resources or through development funding. In the long term, a national budget line for school feeding
is needed.


The second section of the questionnaire focuses on financial capacity for school feeding. The questions,
rationale, and examples are listed below.

 Policy Goal/Indicator         Rationale

 2. Financial Capacity         Governance of the National School Feeding Program: Stable Funding and
                               Budgeting

 Indicator 2.1                 This indicator helps determine if the national budget line(s) (central or local) and
                               funding are allocated to school feeding and if funds are disbursed to the
 National budget line(s)       implementation levels (national, district, and/or school) in a timely and effective
 and funding are allocated     manner.
 to school feeding; funds
 are disbursed to the          Questions 2.1. to 2.16.
 implementation levels
 (national, district, and/or   Question 2.1.                     Government funding could be through the central
 school) in a timely and       Is school feeding included in     government’s or local governments’ budgets.
 effective manner              the national planning process     Typically, governments plan and budget for their
                                                                 priorities on an annual basis based on a national


22 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                         2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         and funded by the               planning process and are usually guided by the
                         government?                     PRSP.

                                                         Government (central or local) could be partially or
                                                         fully funding school feeding programs.

                         Question 2.2. (If YES to 2.1)   As the program becomes nationalized, it needs a
                         Is there a budget line for      stable and independent funding source. This may
                         school feeding in the central   be through government core resources or through
                         government budget?              development funding. In the long term, a national
                                                         budget line for school feeding is needed, which
                                                         ensures funding for the program and demonstrates
                                                         the government’s commitment to school feeding.

                                                         A budget line in this case is a certain line in the
                                                         budget that is assigned specifically to school
                                                         feeding.

                         Questions from 2.3.a to 2.3.d   These questions examine the budget allocated to
                                                         school feeding from the government and other
                                                         sources. It also identifies the main funding sources
                                                         for school feeding in the country. Respondents
                                                         should have copies of the budget and financial
                                                         documents on hand when answering these
                                                         questions.

                         Questions from 2.3.e to 2.3.g   These questions highlight the engagement of the
                                                         private sector and examine the type of engagement,
                                                         whether it is through in-kind contributions, pro-
                                                         bono services, and/or provision of cash funds.

                                                         If the private sector wants to provide cash
                                                         contribution to the national school feeding
                                                         program, there should be mechanisms in place for
                                                         the government to accept cash from the private
                                                         sector for the school feeding program’s budget.

                         Question 2.4.a (If YES to       In some cases, the government allocates funds to
                         2.1)                            school feeding programs that are managed by
                         Are funds from the              donors, such as WFP. These programs would not
                         government allocated to         be considered national school feeding programs
                         operate a national school       because they are operated by donors. This question
                         feeding program (a school       tries to examine if the funds allocated by the
                         feeding operation managed       government (central/local) are for programs that
                         by central, regional, or        are run by the central/local authorities or not, in
                         government or local             other words, funds are allocated to operate a
                         authorities)?                   national school feeding program (NSFP).



23 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                          2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         Question 2.4.b (If YES to         If the government allocates budget to its national
                         2.4a)                             school feeding program, it usually calculates the
                         What is the allocated budget      budget per child/per year in the annual planning
                         per child/per year for the        process. A budget is a calculated estimate of how
                         national school feeding           much money the government believes the school
                         program, if any (please           feeding program needs to feed participating
                         indicate the currency used)?      children.

                                                           Please provide details in the text box below the
                                                           question or in the text box at the end of the section.

                         Question 2.5.                     For a school feeding program to be fully sound and
                                                           independent, budget allocation should be sufficient
                         a. (If YES to 2.4a): Is the       to cover all expenses required to run a NSFP.
                         national budget (at the central
                         level) allocated for school       This question examines the budget allocation at the
                         feeding enough to cover all       central level as the following questions will cover
                         the expenses of running the       regional and school levels.
                         program in line with national
                         policies and needs?

                         b. If NO, please explain.

                         Question 2.6.                     In many countries, the ministries of health,
                                                           agriculture, social affairs, and others are involved
                         a. Does each ministry (other      in school feeding to a degree. This question aims to
                         than the Ministry of              determine whether these ministries have a budget
                         Education) involved in the        allocated for school feeding or if these ministries
                         program have a budget             receive funds indirectly from another ministry or
                         allocated to school feeding?      partners.

                         b. If YES, please list the        For example, the Ministry of Health can have a
                         ministries                        budget to conduct visits to school feeding
                                                           warehouses or to sample schools to check the food
                                                           safety of school feeding meals.

                          Questions from 2.7 to 2.12       This set of questions aims to determine financial
                                                           capacity at decentralized levels (regional and
                                                           school levels). In some countries, the Ministry of
                                                           Education has regional offices and each office is in
                                                           charge of school feeding in its geographical region,
                                                           whereas in other countries each school has a
                                                           budget to plan and implement school feeding
                                                           activities.

                                                           Budget lines are different from budget plans. A
                                                           budget line refers to funds in the budget solely
                                                           allocated to school feeding, whereas a budget plan


24 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                         2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                                                          is a planning tool to determine the needs and the
                                                          corresponding resources required. It is not a
                                                          commitment.

                         Question 2.13. (If YES to 2.7    Implementers here represent any entity that is
                         or/and 2.10)                     responsible for carrying out one or more of the
                         Do implementers have the         school feeding functions, such as purchasing food.
                                                          Depending on the modality in the country, this
                         capacity (technical capacity
                                                          could be the Ministry of Education, local
                         and enabling process) to plan    municipalities, schools, community/cooks, NGOs,
                         and budget as well as request    and/or others.
                         resources from the central
                         level as needed?                 Implementers should have the capacity to prepare
                                                          budget plans and understand the administrative
                                                          processes required to run the program. Discussions
                                                          about this question may involve how this capacity
                                                          is developed.

                         Question 2.14.                   Generally, mechanisms should be in place to
                         Are school feeding funds         facilitate disbursements of funds from the Ministry
                         currently being disbursed to     of Finance to the line ministries and from the line
                         the implementers in a timely     ministries to their respective regional offices and to
                         and effective manner?            the schools. Forecasting can be helpful to avoid
                                                          funding gaps due to budget calendars.
                         Question 2.15. (If YES to
                         2.14.)                           Any delays in fund disbursement negatively affects
                                                          the national school feeding program and timely
                         How are funds disbursed?
                                                          provision of school meals to children, which is
                         Please identify any existing     why obstacles need to be discussed in detail here.
                         mechanisms in place to
                         enable effective disbursement
                         of funds to the
                         implementation level.

                         Question 2.16. (If NO to
                         2.14.)
                         a. How are funds
                             disbursed? Please
                             identify any perceived
                             obstacles to this process.
                         b. Please identify any
                             ongoing dialogue in
                             process to strengthen
                             mechanisms for funds
                             disbursement.




25 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                          2015


4.3.4    Policy Goal 3: Institutional Capacity and Coordination

School feeding programs are complex interventions that require coordination and significant institutional
capacity to procure and deliver large quantities of food to targeted schools, to ensure the quality of the food,
and to manage resources in an efficient and transparent way.

Capacity requirements can include expertise in procurement and transportation of high quantities of food,
management of frequent fund disbursements, food preparation, enforcement of nutritional quality and
safety standards of food, monitoring and evaluation, etc.

Effective policies and their implementation depend on the effective coordination of actors across different
sectors, from central to school levels. Defining the roles and responsibilities of different actors as well as
how they can coordinate their work to deliver school feeding is crucial. Different arrangements have proven
to be efficient, provided that the school feeding program’s organization corresponds to existing mandates
and is matched with adequate capacities, including experienced and trained personnel at different levels
with clearly defined responsibilities.

The third section of the questionnaire focuses on institutional capacity and coordination for school
feeding. The questions, rationale, and examples are listed below.

 Policy Goal/Indicator       Rationale


 Institutional Capacity      School Feeding Coordination—Strong Partnerships and Intersector
 and Coordination            Coordination

 Indicator 3.1               This indicator helps determine if a multisectoral steering committee coordinates the
                             implementation of a national school feeding policy.
 Multisectoral steering
 committee coordinates       Questions from 3.1. to 3.5.
 implementation of a
 national school feeding     Question 3.1.a                In many countries, there exists a national school
 policy                      Is there a national formal    feeding steering committee with a clear mandate.
                             steering committee in
                             place?

                                                           Establishing formal coordination mechanisms at both
                             Question 3.1.b                the decision-making and technical levels is very
                             (If YES to 3.1a)
                                                           important to coordinating the implementation of the
                             What is the mandate of the
                             steering committee):          national school feeding policy. When a national
                             Coordinating the              school feeding policy does not exist, steering
                             implementation of a           committees are sometimes formed to formulate a
                             National School Feeding       school feeding policy and/or to coordinate the
                             Policy                        implementation of school feeding program(s) and
                                                           ensure its quality.
                             Formulating a National
                             School Feeding Policy




26 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                          2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale


                         Coordinating the
                         implementation of school
                         feeding program at the
                         national level without a
                         National School Feeding
                         Policy
                                                         Please provide details about the steering committee.
                         3.1c & d (If YES to 3.1a)

                         Questions 3.2 to 3.3.b (If      This set of questions covers the involvement of
                         YES to 3.1.a)                   various sectors in the steering committee, including
                                                         different ministries, partners and members of civil
                                                         society, the private sector, etc.

                                                         Involvement of relevant stakeholders in the steering
                                                         committee is very important because effective
                                                         intersectoral coordination has proven to be essential
                                                         to ensuring the close articulation of activities across
                                                         different sectors.

                                                         A sound school feeding policy and a well-designed
                                                         school feeding program not only include the
                                                         involvement of many sectors (such as education,
                                                         health, agriculture, and local government) but are
                                                         also linked with other school health and nutrition or
                                                         social protection programs.

                                                         A steering committee established for a program that
                                                         is mainly managed by a partner organization should
                                                         not be considered to be a national steering
                                                         committee.

                                                         Often nongovernmental actors such as the private
                                                         sector, international organizations, NGOs and other
                                                         civil society actors are involved in the program; so it
                                                         is important to include them in the steering
                                                         committee.

                         Question 3.4.                   The active involvement of the Ministry of
                         a. Has the Ministry of          Agriculture has proven to be important to link school
                            Agriculture been             feeding programs to the agriculture sector and to
                            involved in making the
                                                         include domestic and local food products in school
                            connection between
                            school feeding and           meals’ food baskets/menus.
                            national agricultural
                            production?                  Please describe how the Ministry of Agriculture has
                                                         connected the school feeding program to national
                         b.   If yes, please describe.   agricultural production.



27 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                               2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator        Rationale


                              Question 3.5.                   Besides having a steering committee for school
                              a. Is school feeding            feeding, inclusion of school feeding in larger
                                 discussed in any             national committees and coordination bodies have
                                 national-level               been instrumental in making the results of the
                                 coordination body            program a collective responsibility of multiple
                                 (technical working           sectors. School feeding is a multisectoral school
                                 group, larger steering       health intervention, so it is important that it is
                                 committee, or                discussed at the national level in relation to school
                                 coordinating body or         health and nutrition, food security, and/or nutrition.
                                 the like) that deals with
                                 school health and            School feeding may be discussed in other
                                 nutrition, food security,    coordination bodies dealing with broader issues, such
                                 or nutrition?                as the education sector technical working group, the
                                                              social protection coordination body, a food security
                              b. If yes, what is the name     and nutrition coordinating body, etc.
                                  of this body?
 Indicator 3.2                This indicator looks at the national school feeding management unit, accountability
                              structures, and coordination mechanisms and their quality.
 National school feeding
 management unit,             Questions 3.6. to 3.14.
 accountability structures,
 and coordinating with        Question 3.6.                  Best practice is for school feeding programs to have an
 school-level structures      a. Is there a specific         institution at the central level that is mandated and
                              ministry or institution        accountable for the implementation of the program.
                              with the mandate of            This institution should have adequate resources,
                              managing and                   dedicated and well-trained staff, systems and
                              implementing the school        procedures, and technology at central and subnational
                              feeding program?               levels to run school feeding programs. It also requires
                                                             a strong commitment from the education sector if
                              b. (If YES to 3.6.a) Please    another agency is designated to lead the school feeding
                              specify which ministry or      program.
                              institution has this
                              mandate.

                              Questions from 3.7.            An effective school feeding unit has to have a clear
                              to3.10.                        mandate with staffing based on an assessment of
                                                             staffing needs. Further questions ask about the number
                                                             of staff in the unit and how many of them are fully
                                                             dedicated to school feeding. Please attach a copy of the
                                                             unit’s mandate or provide a description of it.

                              Question 3.11. Are there       Good coordination between actors from central,
                              coordination mechanisms        regional, and school levels is key to ensuring effective
                              in place between               implementation.
                              government (national,




28 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                          2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale


                         regional, or school level)    Coordination can take many forms. For this exercise,
                         stakeholders?                 coordination refers to areas of communication,
                                                       reporting, and problem solving.
                         Question 3.12. (If formal
                         coordination mechanisms
                         are in place on 3.11)
                         Please give a brief
                         description of how these
                         coordination mechanisms
                         function, and more
                         specifically, a description
                         of the national unit’s
                         mandate of ensuring this
                         coordination process.

                         Question 3.13.                Regular training for staff at the national and regional
                         Is there any pre- or in-      levels is vital to ensuring the achievement of the
                         service training program      NSFP’s objectives and to addressing any challenges.
                         in place to train staff on
                         school feeding program        Such trainings are also a good opportunity to introduce
                         management and                staff to the latest innovation and new techniques in
                         implementation?               school feeding.
                         Yes, trainings provided to
                         staff at the national level

                         Yes, trainings provided to
                         staff at the
                         regional/district level

                         No

                         Questions 3.14.               The regional and/or district level is the intermediate
                         Do regional/district          level between national and school levels. Thus, they can
                         offices have:                 have a major role to play. It is of great importance that
                         Sufficient staff to fulfill   this level has sufficient staff and sufficient resources to
                         assigned responsibilities     carry out their responsibilities.
                         Sufficient resources to
                         fulfill assigned
                         responsibilities
                         None

 Indicator 3.3           This indicator looks into school-level management and accountability structures.

                         Question 3.15. to 3.17.




29 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                            2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator     Rationale


 School-level management   Question 3.15.                 Detailed program guidelines and procedures, which
 and accountability        Do schools have a              regulate the functioning of the program at all levels,
 structures are in place   mechanism to manage            especially at the school level, help ensure that staff
                           school feeding, based on
                                                          have clear guidance and standards to carry out an
                           national guidance (such
                           as national                    effective school feeding program that meet the desired
                           implementation                 objectives.
                           guidelines, a manual, or a
                           school feeding decree)?        The presence of such documents at the school level is
                                                          very important so that school-level actors learn about
                                                          the details of the NSFP and how to implement it
                                                          effectively. It is important to ensure accessibility and
                                                          availability of such a manual to all schools nationwide.

                                                          For example, the School Feeding Reference Manual of
                                                          Namibia is a school feeding manual that is available
                                                          at the school level with all the details related to
                                                          managing and implementing school feeding activities
                                                          at the school level, such as cooking instructions, food
                                                          service, post–food service routines, etc. The manual
                                                          also outlines suggested ideas for recycling empty food
                                                          bags.

                           Question 3.16. (If YES to      This question examines the extent of applicability
                           3.15)                          and/or presence of these mechanisms in schools.
                           Are these mechanisms in
                           place in:
                           Some schools (1% to 50%)

                           Most schools (51% to 90%)

                           All schools (91% to 100%)

                           None (0%)

                           Question 3.17.                 Regular training for staff at the school level is vital to
                           Is there any pre- or in-       ensuring the achievement of the NSFP’s objectives and
                           service training program       to address any challenges.
                           in place to train relevant
                           staff at the school level on
                           School Feeding Program
                           management and
                           implementation?




30 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                        2015


4.3.4    Policy Goal 4: Design and Implementation

An evidence-based school feeding program design is fundamental to the program’s success. Important
elements of that include targeting the right beneficiaries and selecting the right modalities of food delivery
and a food basket of the right quality. Additionally, local procurement is an important factor to developing
and implementing sustainable school feeding programs while simultaneously using the purchasing power
of the program as a stimulus for the local agricultural economy.

This policy goal has four indicators. The introductory section of the questionnaire is intended to gather data
to better understand the characteristics of school feeding program(s) in the country. Questions under
indicator 4.1 need to be answered whether or not there is a school feeding operation managed by the
government (central, regional, or local). Questions under indicators 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4 are answered only if
there is a school feeding program managed by the government (central, regional, or local) since the
importance of the whole exercise is to assess and revise design elements of the national school feeding
program. It is particularly important to assess the country’s capacity to run or take over effective school
feeding programs and to determine areas that need to be strengthened. If the school feeding program is not
operated by the government (central, regional, or local), the indicators will be scored latent, which means
that the government is in early stages with regard to the design and implementation of national school
feeding programs.

The forth section of the questionnaire focuses on design and implementation for school feeding. The
questions, rationale, and examples are listed below.

 Policy Goal/Indicator       Rationale

 4. Design and               Quality Assurance of Programming and Targeting, Modalities, and
 Implementation              Procurement Design, Ensuring a Design That Is Both Needs-Based and Cost-
                             Effective.

 National school feeding     Questions 4.1. to 4.4.    This set of questions helps stakeholders discuss and
 program                                               determine whether the school feeding program is
                                                       nationally owned or delegated to development
                                                       partners.

                                                       For the purpose of this questionnaire, national school
                                                       feeding programs are school feeding programs that are
                                                       operated and managed by the government (central,
                                                       regional, or local), while funding can be from the
                                                       government/nongovernment. A country can have
                                                       mixed programs where part of the school feeding
                                                       program is operated and managed by the government
                                                       (central, regional, or local) and other part(s) is/are
                                                       operated and managed by international/national NGOs
                                                       and organizations. In this case, please provide answers
                                                       based on the national school feeding programs that are
                                                       operated only by the government (central, regional, or
                                                       local).



31 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                  2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator           Rationale

                                                              The questions also gather statistics on the number of
                                                              beneficiaries and program coverage.

 Indicator 4.1                   This indicator helps determine if a functional monitoring and evaluation (M&E)
                                 system is in place as part of the lead institution’s structure, and if the information
 A functional monitoring         from the monitoring system is used to improve implementation. It also takes into
 and evaluation (M&E)            account the existence of baseline studies or impact evaluation studies.
 system is in place as part of
 the structure of the lead
 institution and used for
 implementation and
 feedback

                                 Question 4.5.                It is important to have a national monitoring and
                                 Is there a government        evaluation system in place to monitor the quality of the
                                 monitoring and               school feeding program.
                                 evaluation (M&E) plan
                                 or strategy for school       Please attach and reference the M&E plan.
                                 feeding?

                                 Question 4.6. (If YES to     If the government has an M&E plan or strategy it
                                 4.5)                         should include data collection tools, a data collection
                                 a. Please identify which     process, data analysis, systematic reporting of the data
                                 of the following             analysis, developed program indicators, M&E
                                 components are               guidelines, a systematic impact evaluation, a program
                                 included in the M&E          baseline, and a budget for an M&E report.
                                 plan or strategy:
                                 Data collection tools        These standards can serve as a quality check for the
                                                              national M&E plan/strategy where it exists.
                                 Data collection process
                                                              There is a space to add more details about the M&E
                                 Data analysis                plan or strategy under the narrative part of the question.
                                 Systematic reporting of
                                 data analysis

                                 Program indicators are
                                 developed

                                 M&E guidelines

                                 Systematic impact
                                 evaluation

                                 Program baseline report

                                 Budget for M&E

                                 b. Please briefly
                                 describe any
                                 information regarding
                                 the quality of the M&E

32 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                        2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         plan or strategy
                         components listed
                         above.
                         Question 4.7. (If YES to     When the M&E system for school feeding is integrated
                         4.5)                         into a national monitoring or education management
                         Is this M&E system           information system, it helps collect and produce
                         integrated into a national   comparative data on the effect of school feeding on
                         monitoring or education      education indicators such as enrolment, retention,
                         management                   attentiveness, and child nutrition.
                         information system?
                                                      Additionally, it can provide information and produce
                                                      comparative data on complementary activities, such as
                                                      FRESH and WASH indicators. This information is
                                                      useful for the education sector and thus links school
                                                      health and school feeding under the education
                                                      umbrella.

                                                      For example, information on the prevalence of
                                                      intestinal parasitic infections and deworming activities
                                                      can be utilized to ensure that (1) children are healthy
                                                      and attentive at school and (2) children’s bodies are
                                                      absorbing the nutrients from the school meals.

                         4.8. (If YES to 4.5)         This question examines the frequency in which data are
                         Are data collected and       collected and reports are produced by the government
                         progress reports on          at various levels.
                         school feeding produced
                         by the government:           Discussing this question helps identify gaps in the data
                         a. At national level         collection and/or reporting process where they exist and
                                                      pinpoints the level(s) where there are significant gaps.
                         Intermittently

                         Regularly (fixed times)

                         b. At regional level

                         Intermittently

                         Regularly

                         c. At school level

                         Intermittently

                         Regularly

                         Question 4.9. (If YES to     Proper M&E systems produce valuable information
                         4.8)                         and data. One of the main functions of M&E systems is
                         a. Are the M&E data          to provide feedback on progress made toward achieving
                         used to refine and           objectives, and thus this enables stakeholders to make


33 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                            2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator       Rationale

                             update programs or          informed decisions, corrective measures, and revisions
                             components of               regarding various aspects of the program.
                             programs?
                             b. (If YES to 4.9.a),       This question checks if the M&E system is being used
                             Please indicate which       to review some of the main elements of the school
                             program components          feeding program. It also encouarges participants to
                             have been reviewed          mention an example where M&E helped them review
                             based on M&E data:          those elements.

                             Targeting or beneficiary
                             selection

                             Food modalities (such as
                             breakfast, lunch, snack,
                             take home rations), food
                             basket, or menu design

                             Procurement and logistics
                             arrangements

                             Other

                             Describe an example

                             Question 4.10.              Carrying out a baseline evaluation is important for
                             Have there been any         measuring progress over time against a “reference
                             baseline and impact         point” and for setting realistic objectives and targets.
                             evaluations carried out,
                             or are any planned?         Carrying out impact evaluations provides in-depth
                                                         analysis of various elements of the program, measures
                                                         success toward achieving intended objectives, and
                                                         analyzes the effectiveness of the school feeding
                                                         program. It requires more resources and skills than
                                                         monitoring activities and therefore is usually conducted
                                                         every couple of years or when needed.

 Indicator 4.2               This indicator helps determine if the national school feeding program’s design
                             identifies appropriate target schemes and targeting criteria that correspond to the
 Program design identifies   national school feeding policy and the situation analysis. This indicator is to be
 appropriate target groups   assessed only if the answer to question 4.1. was YES.
 and targeting criteria
 corresponding to the        Questions 4.11. to 4.18.
 national school feeding
 policy and the situation
 analysis.

                             Question 4.11.                A good situation analysis is important to
                             Has a situation analysis*     understanding the school feeding program’s needs,
                             assessing the needs for       strengths, and challenges. It is very important to
                             school feeding and            determining the targeting criteria and methodology,


34 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         context of implementation   local habits and tastes, availability of local food, and
                         been conducted?             procurement and logistics arrangements, among
                                                     other factors.

                                                     *Here we are referring to the same situation analysis
                                                     under question 1.7 of Policy Goal 1.

                         Question 4.12.              In some contexts, countries chose universal coverage
                         Is the national school      of school feeding for all primary school students and
                         feeding program universal   may add other education levels as well.
                         or targeted?
                         Universal                   This means universal coverage to all primary
                                                     education; every student in every public primary
                         Targeted                    school in the country is entitled to be covered by the
                                                     school feeding program.

                                                     For example, in Bolivia’s School Feeding Law, Law
                                                     No. 622 for December 29, 2014, Article 3 ensures all
                                                     public school students are beneficiaries of the school
                                                     feeding program, which uses food from local
                                                     production programs.

                                                     The Supreme Court in India passed a number of
                                                     orders to support the universal coverage of school
                                                     feeding in all state governorates. One of these is
                                                     interim order dated November 28, 2001, in which the
                                                     Supreme Court ordered that cooked meals had to be
                                                     given to children and instructed all states to
                                                     implement the Mid-Day Meal Scheme program.

                                                     For example, the School Feeding Reference Manual
                                                     of Namibia: Although the ultimate long-term goal of
                                                     the Ministry of Education in Namibia is to implement
                                                     a universal school feeding program that ensures a
                                                     nutritious meal to all Namibian children, the school
                                                     feeding program currently is target-based on
                                                     geographical areas: “Targeting will be conducted at
                                                     the level of geographical areas with no selection of
                                                     individual learners within schools. Geographical
                                                     targeting will be based upon analysis of the country’s
                                                     situation and the problems which school feeding is
                                                     addressing. This analysis will be informed by
                                                     national vulnerability assessments, food and nutrition
                                                     assessments and poverty studies, such as the
                                                     Namibian Household Income and Expenditure
                                                     Surveys (NHIES).”




35 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                           2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         Question 4.13.                   If the school feeding program is targeted, there is
                         a. If it is targeted, does the   usually a logic—identified criteria and methodology
                         national program have            on how to implement the targeting. It is usually done
                         established targeting            through food security surveys, national vulnerability
                         criteria and methodology?        assessments, and other national surveys.

                         b. (If YES to 4.13a)             If the school feeding program is targeted, please
                         Please explain the               explain the targeting criteria and methodology.
                         targeting criteria and
                         methodology

                         Question 4.14. (If YES to        The alignment of the targeting criteria with the
                         4.11 and 4.13a)                  objectives of the school feeding program, as outlined
                         Do the targeting criteria        in the policy (where it exists) and/or needs that were
                         and methodology                  identified in the situation analysis (where it exists),
                         correspond to the:               is key to determining the effectiveness of the
                         Objectives of the school         targeting, and whether is it based on an analysis of
                         feeding policy                   needs or based on budget, logistical, or other
                                                          constraints.
                         Needs identified in the
                         situation analysis
                                                          For example, a situation analysis may highlight food
                                                          insecure areas that should be targeted. Targeting
                                                          criteria will be in alignment with the situation
                                                          analysis if they target those identified areas.

                         Question 4.15. (If YES to        This question is asking whether or not the cost of the
                         4.13a)                           school feeding program was a factor when deciding
                         When deciding the                on the targeting criteria. The question seeks to
                         targeting criteria, has cost     determine whether taking the cost into consideration
                         been taken into                  was done in a realistic way that matches the
                         consideration?                   objectives of NSFP as established in the policy
                                                          and/or needs identified in the situation analysis.

                                                          For example, if one of the targeting criteria is to
                                                          target the most remote areas in a country, transport
                                                          costs to these remote areas (which are usually higher
                                                          than other areas) should be taken into consideration.

                         Question 4.16.                   This question asks about the availability of resources
                         Has the program secured          for a targeted or universal school feeding program
                         the resources to respond         and how the availability of resources affected the
                         to the criteria and              decision to have a targeted or universal school
                         methodology of a targeted        feeding program.
                         or universal school
                         feeding program?
                         No or only partially

                         Yes, in most instances


36 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator           Rationale

                                 Yes, nationwide

                                 Question 4.17.                This question asks if the government has calculated
                                 a. Has the program’s          the school feeding program’s cost using the child as
                                 actual cost per child per     the unit. Please specify the cost per child per year
                                 year been calculated?         and the currency.

                                 c. (If YES to 4.17a)
                                 d. What is the program’s
                                    actual cost per child
                                    per year (please
                                    indicate the currency
                                    used and provide
                                    information for the
                                    past two years)?

                                 Question 4.18. (If YES to     As mentioned under question 4.9, M&E is important
                                 4.13a)                        in revising many elements of the program’s design.
                                 Is M&E information used       This question explores whether or not the data
                                 to refine and update
                                                               produced from M&E are used to revise or update the
                                 targeting and coverage on
                                 a periodic basis?             targeting and coverage criteria over time.

 Indicator 4.3                   This indicator explores national standards on food modalities and the food basket
                                 and/or menus in place and the quality of those standards if they exist (for
 Food modalities and the         example, do they correspond to the objectives, local habits and tastes, availability
 food basket and/or menus        of local food, food safety, nutrition content requirements, etc.). In addition, the
 correspond to the               questions ask whether or not these standards are known and implemented at the
 objectives, local habits and    school level.
 tastes, availability of local
 food, food safety
 (according to WHO
 guidelines), and nutrition      Questions 4.19. to 4.23.
 content requirements

                                 Question 4.19. Are there      It is recommended that a national school feeding
                                 national standards on food    program is based on national standards for food
                                 modalities and the food       modalities and that the food basket and/or menus are
                                                               decided upon, studies, needs, and available
                                 basket and/or menus for
                                                               resources.
                                 school feeding?               Food modalities include deciding on what is
                                                               appropriate for the national school feeding program.
                                 No
                                                               Choosing which school feeding modality to follow
                                                               can be based on their effects and benefits. Some
                                 Yes
                                                               food modalities are meals, snacks or high-energy
                                 In process of being           biscuits, take-home rations, cash or vouchers, etc., or
                                 developed
                                                               various modalities can be mixed together.

                                                               Linking school feeding programs to local
                                                               agriculture, economy, and/or supply chain is one
                                                               mechanism that can be used to introduce fresh



37 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                            2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                                                          vegetables and fruits to the food basket while
                                                          benefiting the local economy.

                                                          It is important to mention in this context that
                                                          complementary actions such as food fortification and
                                                          deworming should be considered when designing the
                                                          national school feeding program depending on needs
                                                          and as appropriate.

                         Question 4.20. (If YES to        The national standards of food modality and the food
                         4.19.)                           basket and/or menu should be aligned with:
                         Do these standards
                         correspond to:                   The objectives of the national school feeding
                         The objectives of the            program/policy: If the program and/or policy
                         program/policy                   promotes links with local agriculture, the modalities
                                                          and food basket should be in line with this and
                         Nutritional content              support its implementation.
                         requirements (for example,
                         recommended daily intakes)       The nutritional content requirements (such as
                         and the duration of the          recommended daily intakes) and the duration of the
                         school day
                                                          school day: These should be based on international
                         Local habits and tastes          and national standards and provide students with at
                                                          least the minimum daily intake that can support them
                         The availability of local food   for the rest of the day. The requirements should take
                                                          into consideration the socioeconomic conditions of
                         Food safety (according to
                                                          households in certain areas, vulnerability
                         WHO guidelines)
                                                          assessments, food and nutrition assessments, and
                                                          poverty studies.

                                                          Example: In specific countries or areas, when there
                                                          is a high prevalence of micronutrient deficiencies,
                                                          the nutritional content requirements could be very
                                                          specific to address this issue, and school feeding can
                                                          play a beneficial role by providing children with
                                                          school meals fortified with the appropriate
                                                          micronutrients.

                                                          The local habits and tastes: It is very important to
                                                          provide food that takes local tastes and cultural or
                                                          religious eating habits into consideration. Food
                                                          provided to schoolchildren should be nutritious and
                                                          at the same time acceptable to students and
                                                          community.

                                                          The availability of local food: Food should be
                                                          purchased as locally as possible. When deciding on
                                                          modalities and food basket menus, the availability of
                                                          local food, production time, and food supply chain



38 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                        2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                                                     should be taken into consideration to avoid any
                                                     breaks in the pipeline.

                                                     Food safety (according to WHO guidelines):

                                                     The Codex Alimentarius developed by WHO and
                                                     FAO specifies “international food standards,
                                                     guidelines, and codes of practice that contribute to
                                                     the safety, quality, and fairness of international food
                                                     trade.” When formulating national policies and plans
                                                     regarding food, it is advisable to adopt standards
                                                     from the Codex Alimentarius or, in their absence,
                                                     adopt other generally accepted international food
                                                     standards.

                                                     Understanding the Codex in various languages:

                                                     http://www.codexalimentarius.org/about-
                                                     codex/understanding-codex/en/

                                                     E-learning course about the Codex:

                                                     http://www.fao.org/food/food-safety-quality/capacity-
                                                     development/participation-codex/codex-course/en/

                                                     Among others: Many guidelines and standards could
                                                     be reviewed and assessed when deciding the food
                                                     modality and food basket and/or menu, among
                                                     which are the WHO’s five keys to safer food:

                                                         x    Keep clean
                                                         x    Separate raw and cooked
                                                         x    Cook thoroughly
                                                         x    Keep food at safe temperatures
                                                         x    Use safe water and raw materials

                                                     More information can be found at the following
                                                     links:

                                                     http://www.who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/food-
                                                     hygiene/5keys/en/

                                                     http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs399/en/

                         Question 4.21.              This question explores whether or not the standards
                         a. Are these standards      for food modalities and food basket and/or menus
                         generally known at school   are known at the school level and to what extent.
                         level?
                         No




39 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                              2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator        Rationale

                              Yes, partially

                              Yes, fully                    This question explores whether or not the standards
                                                            for food modalities and food basket and/or menus
                              b. Are these standards
                                                            are implemented at the school level, and to what
                              generally implemented at
                                                            extent.
                              school level?

                              No

                              Yes, partially

                              Yes, fully

                              Question 4.22.                As mentioned under Question 4.9, M&E is
                              Is the M&E information        important when revising many elements of the
                              used to update food           program’s design. This question explores if the data
                              modalities and the food       produced from M&E are used to revise or update
                              basket or menus on a          national food modalities and the food basket and/or
                              periodic basis?               menus over time.


                              Question 4.23.                It is also important to ensure that nutrition education
                              a. Is nutrition education     is integrated into national school feeding programs,
                              part of the national school   and that it is targeting the right audience (cooks,
                              feeding program?              teachers, students, etc.) to maximize the benefits of
                                                            school feeding programs. Please describe who
                                                            benefits from the nutrition education.
                              b. (If YES to 4.23a)
                              Please explain briefly the
                              population targeted by the
                              nutrition education and
                              what it covers.

 Indicator 4.4                This indicator explores national standards or established processes for food
                              management in addition to determining whether or not procurement arrangements
 Procurement and logistics    and logistics are in place, and if they are based on procuring as locally as possible.
 arrangements are based on    It also determines if these standards take into account the costs, capacities of
 procuring as locally as      implementing parties, production capacity in the country, quality of the food, and
 possible, taking into        stability of the pipeline.
 account the costs,
 capacities of implementing   Please note that this policy goal also covers some additional questions about
 parties, production          linking school feeding programs to local agriculture.
 capacity in the country,
 quality of the food, and
 stability of the pipeline.
                              Questions 4.24. to 4.32.

                              Question 4.24.                It is recommended that a national school feeding
                                                            program is based on national standards or


40 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         Are there national           established processes for procurement and logistics.
                         standards for procurement    Please attach and include the reference for the
                         and logistics?               national standards for procurement and logistics.
                         No

                         Yes

                         In process of being
                         developed

                         Question 4.25. (If YES to    The new trend regarding school feeding programs,
                         4.24)                        according to evidence-based analysis, is to procure
                         Are the national standards   food as locally as possible to develop local
                         based on procuring food      agriculture. This should happen while taking into
                         as locally as possible?      account the cost, production capacity in the country,
                                                      measures to ensure the stability of the food supply,
                                                      and other measures.

                         Question 4.26. (If YES to    This question explores whether or not the cost of
                         4.24)                        procuring food as locally as possible was a factor
                         Do the national standards    that is taken into consideration. Procuring local food
                         take into account the        can have a significant impact on cost, particularly
                         costs?                       for developing countries and countries with arid
                                                      areas.

                         Question 4.27. (If YES to    It is advisable when developing standards for food
                         4.24)                        management, procurement and logistics to have full
                         Do the national standards    knowledge about the capacities of the implementing
                         take into account the        parties that are part of school feeding and their
                         capacities of                limitations to avoid any breaks in the pipeline and/or
                         implementing parties?        any other potential problems.

                                                      For example, if a national procurement standard
                                                      allows food procurement for school feeding from
                                                      farmers’ associations, then the stakeholders should
                                                      have surveyed the market and know how many
                                                      farmer associations exist around the target areas and
                                                      their capabilities to deliver and transport quantities
                                                      to schools in timely manner.

                         Question 4.28. (If YES to    It is advisable when developing standards for
                         4.24)                        procurement and logistics to have full knowledge
                         Do the national standards    about the production capacity in the country, that is,
                         take into account the        school feeding food menu items that are produced
                         production capacity in the   locally, their quantities, surplus that can used for
                         country?                     school feeding, time of production, seasonal effects
                                                      on production, shortfalls, factors that can cause
                                                      shortage in supply, etc.



41 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                       2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                         Question 4.29. (If YES to     When standards are promoting the procurement of
                         4.24)                         food as locally as possible, it is important to ensure
                                                       that the food supply and production of the required
                         a. Do the national            food commodities are stable throughout the period of
                         standards include             assistance (school feeding program) to avoid breaks
                         measures to ensure the        in the pipeline.
                         stability of food supply?
                                                       When a school feeding program is dependent on
                         b. Is an analysis of food     local procurement, it is important to monitor the
                         requirements and supply       demand-supply equations, to notice and record any
                         options for school feeding    shortage or surplus in the supply side, and to
                         programs done regularly?      understand the reasons for the shortage or surplus to
                         (For example, has the         better plan for the program.
                         percentage of food
                         demanded by the program
                         that can be sourced locally
                         been established, and is it
                         monitored?)

                         c. (If YES to 4.29a and
                                                       If there is a monitoring mechanism in place, please
                         4.29b)
                                                       provide details about it and how it is implemented.
                         Please explain the
                         mechanisms for
                         monitoring food
                         requirements and supply
                         and ensuring stability of
                         food supply.

                         Question 4.30. (If YES to     This set of questions helps determine if the national
                         4.24),                        school feeding program has established food quality
                                                       norms and food quality control mechanisms, and the
                         a. Do the national            presence of national bodies in charge of this.
                         standards take into
                         account food quality          This means, what are the documented procedures to
                         norms and food quality        check on food safety and food quality. Please also
                         control mechanisms?           reference the Codex for internationally accepted food
                                                       safety standards.
                         b. Is there a national body
                         in charge of controlling
                         and certifying food
                         quality?

                         c. (If YES to 4.30b)

                         What is the name of that
                         body?

                         Question 4.31. (If YES to     Availability of the guidelines governing the
                         4.24)                         procurement process to the public is an added value

42 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                             2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator      Rationale

                            Are the guidelines               to the transparency of the procurement process and
                            governing the                    allows for systemic revisions and updates of these
                            procurement process              guidelines.
                            available to the public
                            (transparent)?                   Ideally, these guidelines should be available through
                                                             government websites or online national information
                                                             resource platforms. Otherwise, the information could
                                                             be broadcasted or published annually in public
                                                             newspapers, via radio or TV, or by other means.

                            Question 4.32. (If YES to      As mentioned under Question 4.9, M&E is important
                            4.24)                          to revising many elements of the program design.
                            Is the M&E information         This question explores whether or not the data
                            used to refine and update      produced from M&E are used to revise or update the
                            procurement and logistics procurement and logistics arrangement over time.
                            arrangements?
 Questions 4.33. to 4.36.   This set of questions helps determine the extent that school feeding is linked to local
                            agriculture and the economy in the country and community involvement. In
                            addition to establishing a safety net, school feeding can alleviate poverty among
                            small-holder farmers, create jobs locally, and enhance profit-making opportunities
                            for community members (for example, in processing, cooking, etc.). This in turn
                            can improve program ownership by parents who are members of the community.



                            Question 4.33.                    These questions deal with the linkages between
                            a. Have there been                school feeding and support to local farmers to
                            discussions on procurement        alleviate food insecurity and reduce poverty. Local
                            modalities for school             farmers’ involvement can generally supplement
                            feeding that can be more          community involvement in school feeding
                            locally adopted, including        programs. Local procurement can reduce costs and
                            the possibility of linking        promote in the long-term nutritional habits that
                            procurement with                  correspond to local production. The discussions can
                            agriculture-related activities    take place in the steering committee or at the
                            (that is, local-level support     national level as part of the government’s poverty
                            to small-scale farmers)?          reduction strategy.

                            b. Please describe

                            Question 4.34.                    These questions are follow-ups to the previous
                            a. Are there service              question linking school feeding to community
                            provision models that could       involvement and poverty reduction. When
                            potentially create jobs and       community members provide services, there tends
                            profit-making opportunities       to be more quality control and ownership of the
                            for community members             objectives of the programs. Service provision
                            (such as in processing,           models can promote job creation, incentives to help
                            cooking, etc.)?                   reduce poverty, and development of the local


43 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                           2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator       Rationale

                                                            economy with potential investment in school
                             b. Please describe             maintenance.

                             Question 4.35.                 These questions will gather more information on
                             a. What percentage of the      local production and small-holder farmers. In some
                             total food requirements of     countries food cannot be procured locally but
                             the school feeding program     procured from large-scale producers that are not
                             is currently being produced    necessarily within the school’s community.
                             locally or imported from
                             foreign source (outside of
                             national borders)?

                             b. From the locally
                             produced food, what is the
                             percentage sourced from
                             small-scale farmer
                             associations, community
                             groups, or local businesses?

                             c. Please explain


                             Question 4.36.                 This question will provide more information on the
                             Are there complementary        training and capacity building for complementary
                             programs with budgets that     programs. Training small-holder farmers on
                             provide capacity building      innovative production techniques can increase
                             for small-holder farmers       yield, limit crop deterioration by pests, and provide
                             and the community for the      more resources to famers to improve their
                             following?                     livelihoods. Storage techniques are important to
                             Production                     limit spoilage, and processing and preparation
                                                            techniques can improve food acceptability and food
                             Storage                        safety.

                             Food processing                Resources are needed for training and capacity
                                                            building and therefore should be included in the
                             Preparation                    overall budget.

                             Marketing


4.3.5    Policy Goal 5: Community Roles—Reaching beyond the School

School feeding programs that respond to community needs tend to be the strongest programs and the ones
most likely to make a successful transition from donor assistance. These programs are often locally owned
and incorporate parental or community contributions. Parents and local stakeholders can be empowered to
hold the programs accountable and to ensure that their children are receiving nutritional school meals. It is
important to have the various roles of community participation clearly identified in formal documents, such

44 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                            2015


as a school feeding policy, relevant decree, manual, guidelines, etc. The community can participate in
designing, implementing, managing, evaluating, and/or contributing resources to the school feeding
program. However, communities have to be well prepared to play various roles in the school feeding
program.

The fifth section of the questionnaire focuses on community roles with school feeding. The questions,
rationale, and examples are listed below.

 Policy Goal/Indicator      Rationale

 5. Community Roles—        Community Participation and Accountability over School Feeding Program
 Reaching beyond the        Create a Sense of Ownership of the Programs.
 School


 Indicator 5.1              This indicator determines the degree of community involvement in the school
                            feeding program, ranging from designing the program to holding the program
 A school committee of      accountable. The indicator also provides information on whether the
 parents, teachers, and     community’s role is institutionalized or informal and elicits discussion on the
 community members          factors that hinder community participation in school feeding activities.
 implements or oversees
 the local school feeding   Questions 5.1 to 5.5
 program


                            Question 5.1.                 The first question asks about the presence of a
                            a. Are the roles and          formal framework that regulates the roles and
                            responsibilities of the       responsibilities of the community in the school
                            community through school      feeding program. Many of the countries that have
                            feeding management            developed school feeding policies have included a
                            committees clearly defined    section on roles and responsibilities of all
                            in a policy (such as in the   stakeholders including the roles of the community.
                            national school feeding
                            policy or other policy        The roles and responsibilities of the community can
                            document, law, or             be related to the systems and accountability
                            guidelines)?                  mechanisms that are in place to monitor the local
                                                          school feeding program. The roles and
                                                          responsibilities of the community in the school
                            c.   (If YES to 5.1a)         feeding program can be documented in the national
                                 Please indicate in       school feeding policy, laws, decrees, guidelines, etc.
                                 which documents
                                                          In is important to mention the title, date, and other
                                 below (please
                                                          details about the document where roles and
                                 mention the name and
                                                          responsibilities of community in school feeding are
                                 the date of release of
                                                          mentioned.
                                 this document)

                            Questions 5.2.                Whether the role of the community through school
                            a. Are there school feeding   feeding committees is highlighted in formal
                            management committees?        documents or not, it is important to understand if
                                                          there are actually school feeding management

45 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                         2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                                                       committees or not, and the composition of such
                                                       committees.
                         b. Please check who is
                         involved in the school        In some cases, there are committees in schools, but
                         feeding management            they are not specific to school feeding. School
                         committee:                    feeding may or may not be in their scope of work.

                         Teachers                      If none of the options (teachers, parents, community
                                                       members, others) are selected, it will be assumed
                         Parents
                                                       that they are not part of the school committee.
                         Community members

                         Others

                         Questions 5.3. (If YES to     This question explores the main roles and
                         5.1a)                         responsibilities of the community as outlined in
                         What are the main roles       formal documents. Participants should check all
                         assigned to the               that apply. If none of these options are selected, it
                         community, through            is assumed that the committee does not have any of
                         school feeding                these roles.
                         management committees
                         or associations:              The community in the form of school committees
                         x Designing or sharing in     and associations can have various ways of
                           designing of the school     participating in school feeding activities. This
                           feeding program             ranges from designing or sharing in the design of the
                         x Implementing the school     school feeding program (including determining the
                           feeding program (cooking,   appropriate modality, food menu, etc.), actual
                           distributing, purchasing,   implementation of school feeding program by
                           etc.)                       providing all or part of the food menu (in-kind),
                         x Managing the school
                                                       providing cash, cooking meals, distributing meals,
                           feeding program
                                                       etc. Their contribution could also be in the form of
                         x Providing feedback about
                           the school feeding
                                                       managing the school feeding program (by managing
                           program                     either the programmatic side that includes
                         x Monitoring the school       contracting suppliers, transporters, preparing
                           feeding program             reports, etc., or the financial side that includes
                         x Holding school feeding      keeping book ledgers and managing a treasury or
                           programs accountable at     both). Communities also have a major role to play
                           o Local level or school     in providing feedback about the program and
                                 level                 monitoring the program (quality of the food
                           o Regional level            provided to children, breaks in pipelines, hygiene
                           o National level
                                                       measures in place for cooking the food, etc.). They
                         x Other roles
                                                       also have a role in holding the program accountable
                                                       on national, regional, and local levels if they witness
                                                       any shortfalls, flaws, or inefficiencies in the
                                                       program. Other roles and responsibilities that are
                                                       practiced by the community and not mentioned




46 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                         2015


 Policy Goal/Indicator   Rationale

                                                       under any formal document can be mentioned in the
                                                       textbox.

                         Question 5.4.                 Community participation, accountability, and
                         If there are systems and      ownership are facilitated when communities can
                         mechanisms in place that      hold school feeding programs accountable at the
                         enables the community to      national, regional, and local levels. Please describe
                         hold school feeding           the systems and mechanisms in place that enable the
                         program accountable at        community to hold the school feeding program
                         the national, regional,       accountable on various levels.
                         and/or local levels, please
                         describe them.                For example, in Namibia’s School Feeding
                                                       Reference Manual of Namibia, under the
                                                       document’s section on the roles of communities
                                                       (school level), a specific responsibility includes an
                                                       accountability mechanism as follows:
                                                       Report to school officials any suspicious behavior
                                                       observed on and around the school premises and
                                                       storeroom facilities.

                         Question 5.5.                 For community members to undertake their
                         a. Are there any trainings    assigned roles and responsibilities, regular trainings
                         in place for school feeding   should be organized for them. Training can take the
                         management committees?        form of distance learning through local or national
                                                       radio or TV programs, brochures, and other
                         c. (If YES to 5.5a)           mediums.
                         Please indicate details of
                         this training (frequency,     If trainings and/or briefings have taken place, please
                         which organization            provide details about them as indicated by the
                         conducts it, and main         question.
                         topics of training).

                         Question 5.6.                 Please provide details on additional roles and
                         Please elaborate on the       responsibilities that are beyond the ones mentioned
                         following:                    in formal documents. These questions also ask for a
                         a. How do communities         description of the community’s involvement in the
                         work with the school          school feeding program in case there are no laws,
                         feeding programs?             policy, or guidelines written to regulate their
                                                       involvement.

                         b. What are the main          It is also important to identify the main constraints
                         constraints facing            that limit community participation.
                         community involvement?




47 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                    2015


4.4 How to define the stage for each indicator and policy goal

4.4.1 The Framework Rubrics

The SABER-SF Framework Rubrics can be used to summarize and explain the whole SABER-SF exercise.
The rubrics define what each stage of development (latent, emerging, established, and advanced) means for
each indicator and policy goal. It is considered the main tool to guide the assessment because participants
in the SABER-SF exercise use the Framework Rubrics to determine the stage of development for each
indicator under the five policy goals. The stage of development for the policy goal is based on the answers
collected from the questionnaire, the indicators’ stages of development, and discussions during the
workshop.

By studying the Framework Rubrics and comparing it to the policy development status in the country, it
will be clear what stage the country is at for each policy goal’s indicator(s)—thus, benchmarking the
countries’ policies against the five internationally agreed upon best practices for school feeding. (See the
Annex for detailed Framework Rubrics.)

Generally, the four stages of latent, emerging, established, and advanced correspond to the definitions
shown in figure 3.

Figure 3: General Definitions of the Four Stages

                 Latent:                            Emerging:
         No or very little policy        Initial or some initiatives toward
             development                         policy development

                              Definition of each
                                    stage

                                                    Advanced:
               Established:
                                              Development of a
       Some policy development
                                        comprehensive policy framework


Source: Adapted from “What Matters in School Health and School Feeding.”



4.4.2 Excel SABER-SF Scoring Rubrics

As an additional aid, an automated scoring system is available. The SABER-SF Scoring Rubrics are a
Microsoft Excel file divided into five worksheets corresponding to the five policy goals of SABER-SF’s
framework: Policy Frameworks, Financial Capacity, Institutional Capacity and Coordination, Design and
Implementation, and Community Roles—Reaching beyond the School. The score is automatically
calculated for each indicator and policy goal based on the answers collected from the questionnaire. This
additional tool can be used during the group discussions to inform the discussion and to identify any
potential inconsistency between the answers to the questionnaire and the final stage attributed to each


48 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                 2015


indicator and policy goal. It is not a substitute for the conclusions reached by the informed and
knowledgeable participants.


4.4.3 How to use the SABER-SF Scoring Rubrics

    1. Proceed by opening the filled questionnaire.
    2. In the column labeled “Answer,” please enter 1 for the appropriate cell if the answer is YES.
    3. If No or no choice, please leave blank or enter “0.” Repeat for each question that is scored.
    4. Please note that 1 does not indicate a score here, “1” means Yes, and “0” or blank means No, or no
       selected choice.
    5. When all questions are answered for a particular indicator, the sheet will automatically provide a
       stage of development in the yellow row at the end of each indicator.
    6. The total score for a policy goal is automatically calculated by summing all indicators and taking
       the average. The result is shown at the bottom on the brown row at the end of each sheet. The
       corresponding stage of development (latent, emerging, established, or advanced) is also
       automatically generated.




49 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015


Figure 4: Illustrative Diagram of the SABER-SF Scoring Rubrics Scoring Rubrics

                                                                                                        Column C: Enter 1
                                                                                                        for every ‘’Yes’’ or
                                                                                                        selected choice




                                                                                                        The stage of
                                                                                                        development of
                                                                                                        the indicator is
                                                                                                        automatically
                                                                                                        calculated upon
                                                                                                        entering the
                                                                                                        answers of the
                                                                                                        questions



                                                                                                        The stage of
                                                                                                        development of the
                                                                                                        policy goal is
                                                                                                        automatically
                                                                                                        calculated upon
                                                                                                        entering the
                                                                                                        answers of the


Note: Questions in a light font in the Excel tool do not have scores. They are designed to stimulate the
discussions and add information to the SABER-SF reports. Usually they are narrative questions.

4.4.4 Rationale behind scoring

In the SABER-SF scoring Excel file, the responses for each indicator are given a weighted score ranging
from 0 to 1 based on how the indicator helps differentiate the four stages of development. The total score
for an indicator will fall into one of the following ranges: 0 to 0.24 (LATENT stage), 0.25 to 0.49
(EMERGING stage), 0.5 to 0.74 (ESTABLISHED stage), or 0.75 to 1 (ADVANCED stage). Questions are
given various scores that match the criteria in the Framework Rubrics, which define the most important
factors for each indicator or policy goal.



50 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                              2015


4.4.5 Example

The relationship and order between the various SABER-SF tools (questionnaire, Framework Rubrics,
Scoring Rubrics, and SABER-SF report) are summarized in figure 5.



Figure 5: Relationship between SABER-SF Tools


  1. Answer SABER-SF questionnaire under
  each indicator or policy goal

        2. Use the Framework Rubrics to determine
        the stage of each indicator and policy goal


               3. Use the Scoring Rubrics as a helpful tool to
               validate the stage you have suggested


                       4. Draft SABER-SF report based on findings



Practical example: Policy Goal 1: Policy framework

Assume a context where a country has school feeding mentioned in their Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP)
and in the Education Policy of the country. The government has defined objectives and sectoral responsibilities for
the national school feeding program in the Education Policy, but it does not have targets or milestones mentioned in
any part of the document.

The country does not have any specific national school feeding policy.

Applying SABER-SF tools, refer to the context given above and use the questionnaire under policy goal 1
(policy framework) to answer the following practice questions:

Under Indicator 1.1:

Question 1.1: Is school feeding mentioned in
   a. The published Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) or an equivalent national strategy?
        տ NO           ց        YES



    b. Any published sectoral policy, strategy or law (for example, education sector plan, nutrition strategy, social
        protection policy, etc.)?
        տ NO          ‫܈‬         YES


51 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                      2015


Question 1.2: (If NO on 1.1) Was school feeding discussed during the preparation of the PRSP or the equivalent
national strategy, or a sectoral policy, strategy, or law?

    տ NO                   տ        YES

    տ DON’T KNOW


Question 1.3a: (If YES on 1.1a or b) In the PRSP or the equivalent national strategy or in a sectoral policy, strategy,
or laws where school feeding program is mentioned, has the government defined

‫ ܈‬Objectives
տTargets
տMilestones
‫ ܈‬Sectoral responsibilities


Question 1.3b: (If YES on 1.1 a and b) Are published sectoral policies or strategies aligned with the national-level
poverty reduction strategy or equivalent national strategy?

    տ NO                   տ        YES


Refer to the Framework Rubrics, read through the various options under Indicator 1.1

You will find that for the above mentioned situation, the most appropriate stage for this indicator is Established, which
is described in the Framework Rubrics as follows:

“School feeding included in published national-level poverty reduction strategy or equivalent national policy
(including specifications as to where school feeding will be anchored and who will implement); published sectoral
policies or strategies have clearly defined objectives and sectoral responsibilities”



Under indicator 1.28

1.4. Is there a published national policy on school feeding? (This can also be any nationally recognized policy
document or law that (1) provides evidence of the government’s recognition of school feeding as a strategically
important intervention and (2) encapsulates the government’s policy on school feeding.)

          ց NO
          տ YES
          տ In process of being developed




8
 The rest of questions under this indicator depend on answer of “Y” for Question 1.5, so we skipped them here for the purpose
of this exercise




52 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                               2015


Refer to the Framework Rubrics, read through the various options under Indicator 1.2

You will find that for the above mentioned situation, the most appropriate stage for this indicator is LATENT, which
is described in the Framework Rubrics as follows: “There is recognition of the need for a technical policy related to
school feeding, but one has not yet been developed or published.”

The situation of the country reflects a situation where it is Established under indicator 1.1 and Latent under indicator
1.2.

Refer to the Scoring Rubrics and enter the answers above as described under section 4.3.3 (1 represents Yes or
selected choice). The scoring system gives the same results as above and defines the overall stage for Policy Goal 1
as Emerging.

In the SABER-SF report template, you will list the stage of each indicator with the reasons and contextual
information for why the indicator was scored at a particular stage of development based on the Framework Rubrics.




5   Publication of SABER-SF Report

The SABER-SF report summarizes the assessment results of the SABER-SF exercise. The SABER-SF
report on a country includes contextual country information such as on its education system and health
issues as well as detailed information about the five SABER-SF policy goals. The report specifically
documents the results of the questionnaire regarding the stages of development for the indicators and the
five policy goals in the country. The report helps the country to compare its policy status to other countries’
policy status. It also contributes to research on school feeding issues and is useful for development purposes.

The following section provides details on how to write the SABER-SF report using the report template,
how to validate the report, and how to have it posted on the World Bank SABER’s website.



5.1 How to write the SABER-SF report

The SABER-SF report should be prepared using the Report Template. This section provides some guidance
on how to use the template.

    1. Type the country’s name on the top left corner, add the country’s flag on the upper right corner,
       and add the year the report will be published under the words “SABER Country Report .”
    2. In the header of the second page, type the country’s name on the left-hand side where “country” is
       highlighted and add the year that the report will be published on the upper right-hand side where
       “year” is highlighted. In the Introduction and first two country background sections, please change
       the highlighted word “country” to the name of the country in the report.
    3. The body of the report can be drafted as follows:
            a. Provide background information about the country in the sections titled “COUNTRY in
               Brief” and “Education and Health in COUNTRY.”
            b. Contextualize the section “The Case for School Feeding” based on the country’s unique
               context regarding school feeding and nutrition.

53 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                         2015


              c. For each policy goal section, first change the picture image to correspond with the stage of
                  development for the policy goal and then change the capitalized word “country” to the
                  name of the country in the report. In the body of this section, please describe and explain
                  the policy goals’ and indicators’ stages of development along with references to documents
                  used as evidence for the scores. Please fill out a table that lists the indicator, the stage of
                  development (score), and the score’s justification based on the Framework Rubrics
                  explaining why the country received that score. The score should be an image file, which
                  will be provided.
    4.   At the end, write a conclusion providing a summary of the overall findings and policy
         recommendations.
    5.   In the Appendix, please insert the Framework Rubrics chart that has the indicators’ stages of
         development highlighted and the corresponding policy goal’s overall stage written in the last
         column. (Please see SF Standard Template Rubrics Chart for Report Appendix.xlsx.)
    6.   In the Acknowledgments section, include the names of government officials, donors, main partners,
         and other entities that have participated in executing the SABER-SF exercise and report.
    7.   Cite all references at the end of the report and list all acronyms.
    8.   Finally, on the cover page, summarize the results of each policy goal and add the appropriate image
         for the policy goal’s stage of development. The listed policy goals should be in the following order:
         “(1) Policy Frameworks, (2) Financial Capacity, (3) Institutional Capacity and Coordination, (4)
         Design and Implementation, and (5) Community Roles—Reaching beyond the School.” Save entire
         document as a Microsoft Word document.
    9.   Attach all supporting documents, including completed questionnaire, action plan, relevant policies,
         supporting laws, guidance, manuals, etc., to the SABER-SF report.


5.2 How to clear the report

As a first step, when a national workshop is organized to carry out the SABER-SF exercise, validation of
the findings occurs during the plenary sessions when groups present their results. The stage of development
for each indicator is determined based on the answers provided that match with the SABER-SF Framework
Rubrics, and the stages of development are checked against the Scoring Rubrics (Excel file). The overall
stage of each policy goal is discussed and validated by stakeholders. These conclusions are compiled in the
SABER-SF report template.

Then the draft report is checked for accuracy and cleared by the government (for example, the head of the
school feeding unit, the SF steering committee). The final version with all related supporting documents
and references should be sent to the World Bank, WFP, and PCD team for review, clearance, and
publication. The World Bank SABER team will edit and finalize the report before posting it on the website.



5.3 How to publish the report on the SABER website

After the SABER country report has been verified for data accuracy and cleared by the country for
publication, the report is submitted to the SABER team at the World Bank. For the country report to be
published, the completed questionnaire and data on the stage of development for each indicator and policy

54 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                 2015


goal are prerequisites. Although country reports can be published in various languages, it is ideal for at least
one of the published versions to be in English. It should be noted that the publication of the report on the
SABER website is subject to World Bank procedures.

In the case where a World Bank representative was not present at the SABER-SF workshop or did not
review a draft of the SABER report before its submission to the World Bank, the report will be sent to the
World Bank’s country education team for internal review of accuracy and consistency.

To contribute to a global knowledge base on school feeding policies and to provide evidence for the
indicators’ stages of development, it is important to include references and/or copies of all the documents
(laws, policies, guidelines, etc.) used to answer the SABER-SF questionnaire.



6   Planning Forward—Building on SABER-SF findings

An important part of the SABER-SF exercise is building on the results of the exercise and planning future
policy and institution development. The exercise is usually an eye-opener for many participants and
stakeholders about the country’s strengths and weaknesses regarding school feeding policies and
institutions, and it is an opportunity to plan next steps for policy development using a participatory
approach. Even in situations where a School Feeding Policy or draft of such a policy exists, the SABER-
SF exercise can be used as an opportunity to review them using the SABER-SF framework as a lens.

Sierra Leone: In Sierra Leone, a draft school feeding policy was already in place when planning for the
SABER-SF exercise that was executed on June 10–11, 2014. The SABER-SF workshop was a good
opportunity to present the draft policy to a wide range of participants and to review the policy in light of
the SABER-SF exercise’s conclusions and recommendations.

The SABER-SF workshop is a good opportunity to develop an action plan or road map or to revise existing
plan(s). It is important to take into consideration any existing action plans and/or road maps in the country
that were developed by the government or in coordination with CoE or other organizations to avoid
duplicating efforts. SABER-SF should build upon any previous efforts to draft policies, strengthen existing
systems, or develop road maps.

As suggested in the planning of the workshop’s agenda (section 4.2.2), the second day of the workshop is
dedicated to planning next steps. Each of the policy goal groups (five groups total) can build on identified
gaps and plan activities designed to strengthen an existing national system or to transition from a partner
supported to a nationally owned program. Priority actions should be oriented toward policy development
and implementation, which are the focuses of SABER-SF. The action plan should have an initial time frame.
The action plan may be further developed to include program implementation issues. In this case, additional
studies or assessments may be needed to guide the formulation of the action plan.9


9
 For more guidance on building an action plan, please refer to “Sustainable School Feeding Programmes—A Guidance Note to
Develop a National Sustainability Strategy” (PCD, WFP, and World Bank 2012).


55 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                     2015


After the workshop, the action plan should be technically validated and approved by designated authorities.
It is recommended for the steering committee—where it exists—to monitor the implementation of the
action plan on a regular basis, and where it does not exist to form a steering committee or a task force for
this purpose. A second SABER exercise can be conducted two to three years later to monitor progress.

The engagement of donors and partners in the SABER-SF exercise is vital (such as the World Bank, WFP,
and PCD) because they can offer various types of assistance ranging from technical to financial. This
includes consultancies and advice on developing a national school feeding policy and/or systems based on
best practices. It also includes a wide range of activities such as visiting the WFP CoE in Brazil; providing
technical advice on issues such as targeting and vulnerability assessments; explaining how to use cash or
vouchers in NSFP; linking school feeding programs with local agriculture and economy; using school
feeding as a response mechanism in emergencies; and following up on action plans, evaluations, and
research. In addition, partners such as WFP can assist governments in carrying out government cost analysis
for national school feeding programs, which is a tool to assess the cost of a national school feeding program
that is adapted to the country’s context. The government cost analysis can inform government decision
making regarding cost containment for existing program(s) and calculate the costs of different scale-up
scenarios and different design options. WFP can also help countries carry out an Investment Case Exercise,
which is a cost-benefit analysis of the value added for each dollar invested in school feeding. It is a very
useful advocacy tool because it shows the extent to which school feeding programs are advantageous to a
country’s overall development in the long run based on academic evidence and country-specific data.

Benin: Two weeks after conducting a SABER-SF exercise in March 2014, a government delegation from
Benin with coordination support from WFP traveled to the Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Brazil. Having
conducted the SABER-SF exercise and identified gaps that led to the development of an initial action plan,
the delegation learned from the Brazilian experience of linking school feeding to local agriculture,
decentralization modalities, and Home-Grown School Feeding models. They decided to revise their action
plan to include these good practices.



7   Timeline and Quality Assurance Measures


The SABER-SF exercise requires proper preparation with adequate time and resources. This section covers
the timeline to plan and execute the SABER-SF exercise. It also provides a checklist for quality measures
before, during, and after the workshop.

7.1 Timeline

The process of planning, preparing, and executing the SABER-SF exercise could take from four to eight
weeks, but it will vary from country to country. The diagram below provides an estimated timeline based
on the experiences from the countries where a SABER-SF exercise has already taken place.




56 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                              2015


Figure 6: Timeline for Executing a SABER-SF Exercise




     Planning , dialogue with     Steering committee. task force,     Organizing the workshop:           SABER-SF report preparation,
  stakeholders, and securing of   consultant work, meetings, and    venue, sending out invitations,      approval, and posting on the
              funds                       data collection           and execution of the workshop              SABER website


    Weeks: 1st and 2nd weeks       3rd week/onward                       5th or 6th week              7th or 8th week



7.2. Check list for quality assurance measures

This section provides a checklist to assist you to ensure that quality measures are in place for the various
stages of the SABER-SF exercise.

Preparation stage (before the workshop)

    9 A steering committee or task force is set to plan and execute the
                                                                                     Additional tips:
      exercise.
    9 The steering committee or task force is well acquainted with the           The optimum number
      purpose and the methodology of SABER-SF.                                   of participants in the
    9 Roles are clearly identified (who will lead the process, who will fund     workshop should be
      the event, who will be in charge of logistics, who will collect required   between 30 and 50
      information, who will prepare the SABER-SF report, who will                individuals.
      communicate with other stakeholders, etc.).
    9 Resources needed to execute the exercise are identified (funding           Participants should
      resources, external experts, examples from other countries, etc.).         include government
    9 Funding resources are secured.                                             officials at the decision-
    9 Human resources are secured and list of participants finalized.            making levels from all
    9 Objectives and expected results are clearly set and communicated to all    relevant ministries.
      relevant stakeholders.
    9 Copies of the questionnaire are distributed to all participants before the
      workshop.
    9 Data collection: A person or group of persons are assigned to collect the preliminary relevant
      documents.
    9 The workshop proceedings are defined (facilitation and group session mechanisms, venue logistics,
      and secretariat responsible and others).
    9 Communication is done with all relevant ministries in the country.
    9 Communication is done with all stakeholders in the country including the World Bank, WFP, and
      PCD, other donors, and NGOs.
    9 Venue and facilities are booked. Ensure adequate space for break-out groups.
    9 Microphones and sound system are available in the venue (if needed).
    9 Whenever required, translation needs are discussed and arrangements are made accordingly.
    9 Workshop agenda is validated and printed.



57 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015


    9 Invitations are sent to stakeholders two weeks before the workshop (invitations should be sent from
      the government).
    9 Speakers, facilitators, and moderators are selected.
    9 Assigned person to open and close the workshop with keynote addresses is ready.
    9 Presentations are ready: Presentations should be brief and could cover some of the following topics:
      overview of the education sector in the country, school feeding program in the country and future
      school feeding plans in the country, overview of school feeding in relation to the five policy goals
      in the country, SABER, SABER-SF, workshop rules, and next steps.
    9 Hand-out materials are printed.
    9 Folders for participants are prepared including all required materials for the workshop (agenda,
      framework rubrics, SABER-SF questionnaire, relevant policies, manuals, copies of laws, etc.).
    9 Initial assignment of participants to the five working group is made to save time.
    9 Media packet that will be distributed at the workshop is prepared in advance. This is essential to
      ensure accurate coverage.

During the Workshop

    9 Participation is encouraged. It is preferable to keep the discussions
      focused on the policy level as much as possible.                                Additional tips:
    9 Participants are divided into five groups (when answering the
                                                                                  Remember that
      questionnaire or reviewing the results of the questionnaire prepared
                                                                                  SABER-SF is
      during the data collection).
                                                                                  measuring the policy
    9 Each group has at least one laptop or tablet.
                                                                                  level of school feeding
    9 Background documents are made available.
                                                                                  and not implementation.
    9 Results of each policy goal are discussed objectively.
    9 Scores for each policy goal and indicators are calculated using the         Remember that the
      Scoring Rubrics to complement discussions.                                  scoring system cannot
    9 Results are presented in plenary and validated.                             replace the qualitative
    9 A draft of the SABER-SF country report is prepared using the validated      information you may
      information.                                                                gather during the
    9 The main gaps in the policies are identified.                               workshop, and the
    9 The needs and capacity development areas are identified.                    questionnaire cannot
    9 The priority areas for action are identified.                               cover all the realities
    9 A road map or action map with initial time frame is developed.              and/or the quality
                                                                                  elements of school
After the workshop
                                                                                  feeding policies. The
    9 Debriefing session with the government and task force is conducted.         SABER exercise
    9 The draft SABER-SF country report is reviewed and approved by the           provides a broad
      government.                                                                 overview of school
    9 The final SABER-SF report sent for posting to the World Bank, WFP,          feeding policies and
      and PCD team with all supporting documents and filled questionnaire.        systems in the country.
    9 Task force or steering committee follows up implementation of the
      action plan.



58 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                            2015



References
Bundy, D. A. P., C. Burbano, M. Grosh, A. Gelli, M. Jukes, and L. Drake. 2009. “Rethinking School
Feeding: Social Safety Nets, Child Development, and the Education Sector.” World Food Programme and
World Bank, Washington, DC.

Government of Bolivia. 2014. “Ley No. 622: Ley De Alimentacion Escolar en el Marco de la Soberania
Alimentaria y la Economia Plural.” La Paz, Bolivia.

Government of Sierra Leone. 2013. “The Agenda for Prosperity: Road to Middle Income Status—Sierra
Leone’s     Third     Generation     Poverty      Reduction    Strategy     Paper     (2013–2018).”
http://www.undp.org/content/dam/sierraleone/docs/projectdocuments/povreduction/undp_sle_The%20Ag
enda%20for%20Prosperity%20.pdf.

Republic of Namibia, Ministry of Education. “Namibian School Feeding Program Reference Manual.”
Windhoek, Namibia.

World Bank. 2012. “What Matters Most for School Health and School Feeding: A Framework Paper.”
Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) Working Paper Series No. 3. World Bank,
Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2012/06/18069747/matters-most-school-
health-school-feeding-framework-paper.

World Food Programme. 2013. “State of School Feeding Worldwide 2013.” World Food Programme,
Rome. http://documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/communications/wfp257481.pdf.




59 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                              2015



Annex


1. Questionnaire in English (available in other languages)

2. Framework Rubrics (available in other languages)

3. Contact Details for the SABER Team at the World Bank for any questions or comments
   3.1 Option 1: Please click on the following link to access a form to send to the SABER team at the
        World Bank:
        http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/0,,contentMD
        K:23389538~pagePK:210058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:282386,00.html
   3.2 Option 2: Please send your inquiry to eservice@worldbank.org with “SABER-School Feeding”
        in the subject line.
4. List of Useful Resources




60 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                               2015




                                                          SABER
                             Systems Approach for Better Education Results




                                                                April 2015




         SABER-School Feeding
               Data Collection Instrument




                       With the support of




61 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                   2015


Table of Contents
Background ................................................................................................................................................. 62
Section 1. Policy Framework ...................................................................................................................... 66
   Indicator 1.1: Overarching Policies ......................................................................................................... 66
   Indicator 1.2: School Feeding Policy ....................................................................................................... 68
Section 2. Financial Capacity...................................................................................................................... 70
   Indicator 2.1: Stable Government Funding and Budgeting .................................................................... 70
Section 3. Institutional Capacity and Coordination .................................................................................. 75
   Indicator 3.1: Existence of Sectoral/Multisectoral Steering Committee ................................................ 75
   Indicator 3.2: Management and Accountability Structures.................................................................... 77
   Indicator 3.3: School-Level Management and Accountability Structures .............................................. 80
Section 4. Design and Implementation ..................................................................................................... 81
   Indicator 4.1: Functional Monitoring and Evaluation System ................................................................ 83
   Indicator 4.2: Planned Targeting Criteria and Target Groups ................................................................. 86
   Indicator 4.3: Food Modalities and Food Basket .................................................................................... 88
   Indicator 4.4: Procurement and Logistical Arrangements ...................................................................... 90
Section 5. Community Roles—Reaching beyond the School .................................................................... 94
   Indicator 5.1: Community’s Roles ........................................................................................................... 94
Annex Glossary of Terminologies .............................................................................................................. 97




62 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                    2015


Background

The 2008 global food, fuel, and financial crises have given new prominence to school feeding as a potential
safety net and social support measure that helps keep children in school. School feeding programs provide
an explicit or implicit transfer to households and can increase school attendance, cognition, and
educational achievement, particularly if supported by complementary actions such as deworming and
food fortification. In many cases these programs have a strong gender dimension, especially when they
target girls’ education, and they may also be used to specifically benefit the poorest and most vulnerable
children. Well-designed school feeding programs can provide nutritional benefits and should complement
and not compete with nutrition programs for younger children, which remain a clear priority for targeting
malnutrition overall. Such programs will help countries achieve the Education for All goals.

What Is the Purpose of This Initiative?

The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) for School Feeding is part of a larger exercise
by the World Bank that aims to benchmark all of the education subsystems. Geared toward improving the
advice and operational support offered by the World Bank to its partner countries, SABER seeks to provide
standards of good practice against which countries can assess themselves. The expectation is that such a
resource will facilitate comparative policy analysis, identify the key areas to focus investment, and assist
in disseminating good practice.

As a high-level, general assessment, the overall objective of this initiative is to help countries identify
strengths and weaknesses regarding school feeding systems and develop evidence-based roadmaps of
policy development to improve their school feeding programs.

What Is the Purpose of This Questionnaire?

The school feeding framework and questionnaire are drawn from the joint World Bank and World Food
Programme publication Rethinking School Feeding10 and the standards therein. These standards have now
been streamlined as part of the international school feeding dialogue.

Policy makers, educational leaders, and researchers will have access to the data collected using the
questionnaire. This will enable users to make their own diagnoses about the state of school feeding
policies in their countries and make informed decisions to promote school feeding. The data collected will
be key to discussions on how to improve school feeding policies and programs, and therefore your
contributions are critical to this process and your participation is very much appreciated.




10   Bundy et al. (2009).




63 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


Who Is Leading This Initiative?

The System Approach for Better Education Results for School Feeding (SABER) is part of a larger exercise
by the Education Global Practice, which was formerly the Human Development Network.

The SABER–School Feeding (SABER-SF) system was developed in collaboration with the World Food
Programme (WFP) and Partnership for Child Development (PCD) and other partners, including UNICEF,
WHO, Save the Children, and academic institutions.

WFP has adopted SABER-SF as a tool to systematically assess progress in the transition to national
ownership in all its school feeding operations. In line with its 2013 Revised School Feeding Policy, SABER-
SF results will be mainstreamed into the preparation of WFP school feeding projects from 2015.

Will Your Responses Be Kept Confidential?

Yes. Individually identifiable responses or data will not be reported.




Claudia Maria Costin              Amit Dar                        Luis Benveniste
Senior Director                   Director                        Practice Manager

Education Global Practice         Education Global Practice       Education Global Practice




64 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015


Contact Information of Respondent(s)

Country: ______________________

Date: ______________________

Name of main focal point in country: ______________________

Name of the main coordinating body responding: ______________________

Please write down the Name, Institutional Affiliation, Job Title, and E-mail Address of the people who
are answering this questionnaire.

 Name                      Institution                Job Title                 E-mail Address




65 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


Instructions

    1. Please begin by reading the introductory information.

    2. Answer every question. At the end of this survey, there is a section to list any questions for which
       you could not determine an answer. If you absolutely cannot answer a question, leave it blank
       and then make a note of it at the end of the questionnaire. Please also use the space at the end
       of each section or of the questionnaire to clarify any answers or provide any additional
       information you think will assist the SABER-SF team in analyzing the data.

    3. Please provide all references for the laws, policies, guidelines, and other relevant documents used
       to complete the questionnaire.




66 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                2015


SECTION 1: POLICY FRAMEWORK
Overarching Policies for School Feeding—Sound Alignment with the National
Policy


INDICATOR 1.1: Overarching Policies

 1.1. Is school feeding mentioned in

 c. The published Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) or an equivalent national strategy?
 ‫ ܆‬No         ‫ ܆‬Yes

 d. Any published sectoral policy, strategy, or law (such as education sector plan, nutrition strategy,
    social protection policy, etc.)?

 ‫ ܆‬No          ‫ ܆‬Yes

(If YES to 1.1a or/and 1.1b please attach a copy of the PRSP, strategy, sectoral policy, or any relevant
documents or provide web links if documents are online, and list references for the documents in the box
below.)




1.2. (If NO to 1.1a and b) Was school feeding discussed during the preparation of the PRSP or the
equivalent national strategy, or a sectoral policy, strategy, or law?

‫ ܆‬No ‫ ܆‬Yes ‫ ܆‬Do not know




67 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                               2015


1.3a. (If YES to 1.1a or b) In the PRSP, the equivalent national strategy, or in a sectoral policy, strategy,
or laws where the school feeding program is mentioned, has the government defined*: (check all
applicable)

‫ ܆‬Objectives
‫ ܆‬Targets
‫ ܆‬Milestones
‫ ܆‬Sectoral responsibilities


*In this context, objectives are specific results to be achived within a given time frame, and available resources while
targets are well-defined levels of achievement for each objective that the government sets out to accomplish in a
given period. Milestones are well-defined and significant steps toward achieving a goal or target. Sectoral
responsibilities are duties and major activities that are assigned to each ministry or relevant body. Refer to the
glossary at the end of the questionnaire and SABER-SF manual for further explanations and examples.


1.3b. (If YES to 1.1a and b) Are published sectoral policies or strategies aligned with the national-level
poverty reduction strategy or equivalent national strategy?

‫ ܆‬No            ‫ ܆‬Yes



Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 1.1 to 1.3.




68 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                 2015


INDICATOR 1.2: School Feeding Policy

1.4. Is there a published national policy on school feeding? (This can also be any nationally recognized
policy document or law that (1) provides evidence of the government’s recognition of school feeding as a
strategically important intervention and (2) encapsulates the government’s policy on school feeding.)

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes
‫ ܆‬In process of being developed*

*Do not answer the rest of the questions under this indicator in the case that ‘’No’’ or ‘’In process of being developed’’
is selected.


(If YES, please attach a copy of this policy and any other relevant documents and provide references for
them in the box below.)




1.5. (If YES to 1.4) Which sectors were involved* in developing the policy? (check all applicable)

       ‫ ܆‬Education
       ‫ ܆‬Health
       ‫ ܆‬Agriculture
       ‫ ܆‬Social affairs/social welfare/social development
       ‫܆‬
               Other (specify): _______________________
       ‫܆‬
               Other (specify): _______________________


*Involvement in developing the policy means engaging in the process of its development from the early stages, which
is beyond just approving the final draft. Refer to the SABER-SF manual for further explanation.




69 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                              2015


1.6. (If YES to 1.4) Does the policy include the following: (check all applicable)

                                                     YES            NO
       Objectives                                    ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       Rationale                                     ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       Scope (beneficiary groups)                    ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       Design, implementation                        ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       Funding mechanisms                            ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       Links to local production and                 ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       sourcing or links with agriculture
       Institutional arrangements                    ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
       and/or coordination
       Community roles                               ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬


1.7. (If YES to 1.4) Has a situation analysis* of needs been used to inform the policy?

‫ ܆‬No            ‫ ܆‬Yes

*An analysis of the prevailing situation in a given country or region provides a comprehensive analysis of the nature,
causes, and extent of the problems affecting school-age children; the nutritional needs of school-age children and
challenges to their full development; and description of the current status, resources, and capacity in the country for
implementing school feeding programs that correspond to the identified gaps.

(If YES, please attach copies of relevant documents, write down a brief description of the situation analysis
report, and provide references for the documents in the box below.)




1.8. (If YES to 1.4) Is the national school feeding policy aligned with the national poverty reduction
strategy and relevant sectoral policies and strategies?

‫ ܆‬No            ‫ ܆‬Yes

Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 1.4 to 1.8.




70 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                        2015


SECTION 2: FINANCIAL CAPACITY

Governance of the National School Feeding Program

INDICATOR 2.1: Stable Government Funding and Budgeting

2.1. Is school feeding included in the national planning process and funded by the government*?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

*Government funding could be through central, regional, or local governments’ budgets.


2.2. (If YES to 2.1) Is there a budget line* for school feeding in the central government’s budget?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

*A commitment line where a budget is solely allocated to school feeding, and usually the amount is revised on an
annual basis.

2.3a. (If YES to 2.1) What is the approximate government's budget allocation for school feeding in local
currency?

Central government:                      Amount: _____________________    (year:_______ )
Regional, district, and local governments:     Amount: ____________________     (year:_______ )
Local currency: ___________________

2.3b. What is the approximate budget allocation for all school feeding programs in the country in U.S.
dollars? (Please consider all school feeding programs existing in the country, whether managed by the
government or not, and all funding sources, domestic and external.)

Amount: _____________________              (year:_______ )

2.3c. What percentage of the total school feeding budget allocation came from the different funding
 sources that year in U.S. dollars?*
‫܆‬Central government                        Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Regional, district, and local governments Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Private sector                            Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Local NGOs                                Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Community                                 Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Sector-wide funding                       Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬WFP                                       Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Other external donors                     Percentage: ------------  Amount: $______________
‫܆‬Other, please specify                      Percentage: ------------ Amount: $______________

 *Check all applicable even if you do not know the amount or percentage.




71 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                     2015


2.3d. If there are any donors funding school feeding programs, please list the names of the donors in
the box below.




2.3e. How many private sector entities are contributing to the national school feeding program?

‫܆‬   None
‫܆‬   1–2
‫܆‬   3–5
‫܆‬   More than 5

2.3f. (If YES to 2.3e) How does the private sector contribute to the national school feeding program?
(choose all applicable)

‫ ܆‬Provision of in-kind contributions
‫ ܆‬Provision of pro-bono services (transportation, packing, etc.)
‫ ܆‬Provision of cash funds

2.3g. Is there a mechanism* in the government budgeting process (central, regional, or local) to accept
funding from the private sector for the national school feeding program?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

*Mechanism: System in place to accept cash donations from the private sector into the central, regional,
or local budget of school feeding and procedures to record these contributions in government ledgers.

2.4a. (If YES to 2.1) Are funds from the government allocated to operate a national school feeding
program (a school feeding operation managed by central, regional, or local government or authorities)?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.4b. (If YES to 2.4a) What is the allocated budget per child or per year for the national school feeding
program, if any? (please indicate the currency used)

Amount:                 Currency: _____________________           (year:       )

(If there are differences across regions or education levels, please use the box below or space at the end of
this section to provide details.)




72 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                      2015


2.5a. (If YES to 2.4a): Is the national budget (at the central level) allocated for school feeding enough to
cover all the expenses of running the program in line with national policies and needs?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.5b. (If NO to 2.5a), please explain:




2.6a. Does each ministry (other than the Ministry of Education) involved in the program have a budget
allocated to school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes


2.6b. (If YES to 2.6a), please list the ministries in the box below.




2.7. Do regions and/or districts have a budget line for school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.8a. (If YES to 2.7): Is the budget allocated at the regional and/or district level for school feeding enough
to cover all the expenses of running the national program in line with national policies and needs?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.8b. (If NO to 2.8a), please explain in the box below.




73 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                          2015


2.9. Do regions or districts have budget plans* for school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

*A budget plan is a planning tool to determine needs and the corresponding resources required. It is not a
commitment.

2.10. Do schools have a budget line for school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.11a. (If YES to 2.10): Is the budget allocated at the school level for school feeding enough to cover all
the expenses of running the national program in line with national policies and needs?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.11b. (If NO to 2.11a), please explain in the box below.




2.12. Do schools have budget plans for school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.13. (If YES to 2.7 or/and 2.10) Do implementers* have the capacity (technical capacity and enabling
processes) to plan and budget as well as request resources from the central level as needed?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

*Implementers are any entity that is responsible for carrying out one or more of the school feeding functions, for
example, purchasing food. Depending on the modality in the country, this could be the Ministry of Education, local
municipalities, schools, community members or cooks, NGOs, etc.

2.14. Are school feeding funds currently being disbursed to the implementers in a timely and effective
manner?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

2.15. (If YES to 2.14) How are funds disbursed? Please identify any existing mechanisms in place to
enable effective disbursement of funds to the implementation level.




74 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                            2015


2.16. (If NO to 2.14)

    d. How are funds disbursed? Please identify any perceived obstacles to this process.




    e. Please identify any ongoing dialogue to strengthen mechanisms for funds disbursement.




Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 2.1–2.16.




75 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


SECTION 3: INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITY AND COORDINATION

School Feeding Coordination: Strong Partnerships and Intersectoral
Coordination

INDICATOR 3.1: Existence of Sectoral or Multisectoral Steering Committee

3.1a. Is there a formal national steering committee in place:

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

3.1b. (If YES to 3.1a) What is the mandate of the steering committee (choose all relevant answers):

‫ ܆‬Coordinating the implementation of a National School Feeding Policy
‫ ܆‬Formulating a National School Feeding Policy
‫ ܆‬Coordinating the implementation of school feeding program at the national level without a
    National School Feeding Policy


3.1c. (If YES to 3.1a) What is the name of this body?

3.1d. (If YES to 3.1a) How often does this body meet? Does it have a clear work plan and objectives? (If
YES, please attach copies of work plan and objectives and provide references for the documents below.)




3.2. (If YES to 3.1a) Please identify which sectors are part of this steering committee (such as Education,
Health, Agriculture, Social Protection, Local Government, Water, etc.).

(check all applicable)

‫ ܆‬Education
‫ ܆‬Health
‫ ܆‬Agriculture
‫ ܆‬Social affairs, social welfare, or social development
‫ ܆‬Other (specify):




76 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                 2015




3.3a. (If YES to 3.1a) Does the steering committee involve partners or members that are not affiliated
with the government (such as NGOs, UN organizations, civil society, private sector, research institutes,
etc.)?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

3.3b. (If YES to 3.3a), please list the names of the partners or members in the box below.




3.4a. Has the Ministry of Agriculture been involved in connecting the school feeding program(s) with
national agricultural production?
‫ ܆‬No          ‫ ܆‬Yes

3.4b. (If YES to 3.4a), please describe in the box below.




3.5a. Is school feeding discussed in any national-level coordination body (technical working group,
larger steering committee, or coordinating body or the like) that deals with school health and nutrition,
food security, or nutrition?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

3.5b. (If YES to 3.5a) What is the name of this body?

Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 3.1–3.5.




77 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015




INDICATOR 3.2: Management and Accountability Structures

3.6a. Is there a specific ministry or institution with the mandate of managing and implementing the
school feeding program(s)?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes



3.6b. (If YES to 3.6a), Please specify which ministry or institution has this mandate:

‫܆‬   Ministry of Education
‫܆‬   Ministry of Health
‫܆‬   Ministry of Agriculture
‫܆‬   Other (specify): _________________


3.7a. Is there a specific unit at the national level in charge of the overall management of school feeding
within the lead institution and responsible for coordination between the national and the regional or
local levels?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes


3.7b. (If YES to 3.7a) Does the school feeding unit has a clear mandate?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

If YES, please attach a copy of the mandate and provide the reference to the mandate in the box below.




78 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015


3.8. (If YES to 3.7a) Does the responsible unit in charge of managing school feeding have a sufficient
amount of staff, given the responsibilities that the unit has been given?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes



3.9 How many people work in the national unit responsible for school feeding?

____________________________



3.10 How many of them are fully dedicated to school feeding (if any)?

 ____________________________



3.11. Are there coordination mechanisms in place between government (national, regional, or school
level) stakeholders?

‫܆‬   Formal coordination mechanisms are in place and functioning in most cases
‫܆‬   Formal coordination mechanisms are in place but not fully functioning
‫܆‬   Informal coordination mechanisms
‫܆‬   No coordination mechanisms




3.12. (If formal coordination mechanisms are in place in Question 3.11) Please give a brief description in
the box below of how these coordination mechanisms function, and more specifically, a description of
the national unit’s mandate for ensuring this coordination process.




79 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                2015


3.13. Is there any pre- or in-service training program in place to train staff on school feeding program
management and implementation? (check all applicable)

‫ ܆‬Yes, trainings provided to staff at the national level
‫ ܆‬Yes, trainings provided to staff at the regional or district level
‫ ܆‬No


3.14. Do regional or district offices have: (check all applicable)

‫ ܆‬Sufficient staff to fulfill assigned responsibilities
‫ ܆‬Sufficient resources to fulfill assigned responsibilities
‫ ܆‬None


Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 3.6–3.14.




80 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


INDICATOR 3.3: School-Level Management and Accountability Structures

3.15. Do schools have a mechanism to manage school feeding, based on national guidance (such as
national implementation guidelines, a manual, or a school feeding decree)?
‫ ܆‬No          ‫ ܆‬Yes

3.16. (If YES to 3.15) Are these mechanisms in place in:

‫܆‬   Some schools (1% to 50%)
‫܆‬   Most schools (51% to 90%)
‫܆‬   All schools (91% to 100%)
‫܆‬   None (0%)


3.17. Is there any pre- or in-service training program in place to train relevant staff at the school level
on school feeding program management and implementation?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 3.15–3.17.




81 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                 2015


SECTION 4: DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION

Quality Assurance of Programming and Targeting, Modalities, and Procurement
Design, Ensuring Design That Is Both Needs-Based and Cost-Effective


Introduction Questions
4.1. Is there a national school feeding program:* a school feeding operation managed by the
government (central, regional, or local)?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes



*For the purpose of this questionnaire, national school feeding programs are school feeding programs that
are operated and managed by the government (central, regional, or local), and funding can be from the
government or from nongovernmental sources. A country can have mixed programs, where part of the
school feeding program can be operated and managed by various levels of government, and other part(s)
is/are operated and managed by international or national NGOs and organizations. In this case, please
provide answers based on the national school feeding programs that are operated by the government only
(central, regional, or local).


Æ (If No to 4.1), please move to question 4.3, and questions under indicator 4.1. You do not need to
answer questions related to indicators 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4.




4.2a. (If YES to 4.1), How many students benefit from the national school feeding program? Please
provide this information for the past three years:

School year: _________          Total: _____      ____

School year: _________          Total: _____      ____

School year: _________          Total: _____      ____




82 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                 2015


4.2b. (If YES to 4.1) Please provide below the breakdown by school level for the last year for which data
are available.

                                       Number of beneficiaries from          Beneficiaries as a percentage of
                                       national school feeding program       students enrolled in this level

 Pre-primary school:

 Primary school

 (grades:______________)

 Secondary school

 (grades:______________)

 Other (please specify)

School year: _________



4.3. How many students benefit from school feeding programs implemented by partners (including
WFP)? Please provide this information for the past three years:

School year: _________          Total: _____      ____

School year: _________          Total: _____      ____

School year: _________          Total: _____      ____



4.4. (If YES to 4.1), What is the total number of provinces or districts (or equivalent subnational
administrative divisions) covered by national school feeding program?

School year: _________          Total covered: _____     /out of _____________________



Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 4.1–4.4.




83 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                               2015


INDICATOR 4.1: Functional Monitoring and Evaluation System

4.5. Is there a government monitoring and evaluation (M&E) plan or strategy for school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

If YES, please attach copies of the M&E plan or strategy and provide the reference of the M&E
plan/strategy in the box below.




4.6a. (If YES to 4.5) Please identify which of the following components are included in the M&E plan or
strategy:

                                                       NO          YES        DON’T KNOW
Data collection tools                                   ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Data collection process                                 ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Data analysis                                           ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Systematic reporting of data analysis                   ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Program indicators are developed                        ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
M&E guidelines                                          ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Systematic impact evaluation                            ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Program baseline report                                 ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬
Budget for M&E                                          ‫܆‬            ‫܆‬             ‫܆‬

4.6b. Please briefly describe in the box below any information regarding the quality of the M&E plan or
strategy components listed above.




84 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                              2015


4.7. (If YES to 4.5) Is this M&E system integrated into a national monitoring or education management
information system?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.8. (If YES to 4.5) Are data collected and progress reports on school feeding produced by the
government:

a. At national level
‫ ܆‬Intermittently       ‫ ܆‬Regularly


b. At regional level
‫ ܆‬Intermittently       ‫ ܆‬Regularly


c. At school level
‫ ܆‬Intermittently       ‫ ܆‬Regularly


4.9a. (If YES to 4.8) Are the M&E data used to refine and update programs or components of programs?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.9b. (If YES to 4.9a), Please indicate which program components have been reviewed based on M&E
data.

 ‫ ܆‬Targeting or beneficiary selection
 ‫ ܆‬Food modalities (such as breakfast, lunch, snack, take-home rations), food basket, or menu design
 ‫ ܆‬Procurement and logistics arrangements
 ‫ ܆‬Other:
 Please describe an example:




85 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                    2015


4.10a. Have there been any baseline and impact evaluations carried out, or are any planned?

‫܆‬   No
‫܆‬   Yes, being planned
‫܆‬   Yes, in progress
‫܆‬   Yes, completed

If YES, please attach copies of the baseline or impact evaluation and provide references for the evaluations
in the box below.




Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 4.6–4.10.




86 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                             2015


INDICATOR 4.2: Planned Targeting Criteria and Target Groups

(To Be Answered Only if YES to Question 4.1)

4.11. Has a situation analysis* assessing the needs for school feeding and context of implementation
been conducted?

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes (please indicate year of last update:__________)
‫ ܆‬In process
*An analysis of the prevailing situation in a given country or region provides a comprehensive analysis of the nature
and extent of the problems affecting school-age children and their causes including the nutritional needs of school-
age children and challenges to their full development, and it describes the current status, resources, and capacity in
the country for implementing school feeding programs that correspond to the identified gaps.

4.12. Is the national school feeding program universal or targeted?

‫ ܆‬Universal*
‫ ܆‬Targeted
*Universal coverage means every student in every public primary school in the country is a beneficiary of the school
feeding program.

4.13a. (If it is targeted), Does the national program have established targeting criteria and methodology?

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes
‫ ܆‬In process of being developed


4.13b. (If YES to 4.13a) Please explain the targeting criteria and methodology in the box below.




4.14. (If YES to 4.11 and 4.13a) Do the targeting criteria and methodology correspond to the: (check all
applicable)

‫ ܆‬Objectives of the School Feeding Policy
‫ ܆‬Needs identified in the situation analysis


4.15. (If YES to 4.13a) When deciding the targeting criteria, has cost been taken into consideration?
‫ ܆‬No            ‫ ܆‬Yes




87 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                    2015


4.16. Has the program secured the resources to respond to the criteria and methodology of a targeted
or universal school feeding program?

‫ ܆‬No or only partially
‫ ܆‬Yes, in most instances
‫ ܆‬Yes, nationwide

4.17a. Has the program’s actual cost per child per year been calculated?
‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes
‫ ܆‬Being calculated for the first time

4.17b. (If YES to 4.17a) What is the program’s actual cost per child per year (please indicate the currency
used and provide information for the past two years)?
(If there are differences across regions or education levels, please used the box below to provide details.)


 Currency (for example, U.S. dollar, CFA): __________

 Amount: _______________ (Year:_______________)

 Amount: _______________ (Year:_______________)




4.18. (If YES to 4.13a) Is M&E information used to refine and update targeting and coverage on a periodic
basis?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 4.12–4.18.




88 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                              2015


INDICATOR 4.3: Food Modalities and Food Basket

(To Be Answered Only if YES to Question 4.1)

4.19. Are there national standards on food modalities and the food basket or menus for school feeding?

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes
‫ ܆‬In process of being developed

If YES, please attach copies of the national standards and any other relevant documents and list their
references and other related details in the box below.




4.20. (If YES to 4.19) Do these standards correspond to:

‫ ܆‬The objectives of the program or policy
‫ ܆‬Nutritional content requirements (for example, recommended daily intakes) and the duration of the
   school day
‫ ܆‬Local habits and tastes
‫ ܆‬The availability of local food
‫ ܆‬Food safety (according to WHO guidelines)

4.21a. Are these standards generally known at the school level?

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes, partially
‫ ܆‬Yes, fully

4.21b. Are these standards generally implemented at the school level?

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes, partially
‫ ܆‬Yes, fully

4.22. Is the M&E information used to update food modalities and the food basket or menus on a
periodic basis?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes




89 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                 2015


4.23a. Is nutrition education part of the national school feeding program?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.23b. (If YES to 4.23a) Please explain briefly in the box below the population targeted by the nutrition
education and what it covers.




Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 4.19–4.23.




90 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015


INDICATOR 4.4: Procurement and Logistical Arrangements

(To Be Answered Only if YES to Question 4.1)

 4.24. Are there national standards for procurement and logistics?

‫ ܆‬No
‫ ܆‬Yes
‫ ܆‬In process of being developed

If YES, please attach copies of the national standards and any other relevant documents and list their
references and other related details in the box below.




4.25. (If YES to 4.24), Are the national standards based on procuring food as locally as possible?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.26. (If YES to 4.24), Do the national standards take into account the costs?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes


4.27. (If YES to 4.24), Do the national standards take into account the capacities of implementing
parties?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.28. (If YES to 4.24), Do the national standards take into account the production capacity in the
country?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.29a. (If YES to 4.24), Do the national standards include measures to ensure the stability of food
supply?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes




91 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                    2015


4.29b. Is an analysis of food requirements and supply options for the school feeding programs done
regularly? (For example, has the percentage of food demanded by the program that can be sourced locally
been established, and is it monitored?)

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes



4.29c. (If YES to 4.29a and 4.29b), Please explain in the box below the mechanisms for monitoring food
requirements and supply and ensuring stability of food supply.




4.30a (If YES to 4.24), Do the national standards take into account food quality norms and food quality
control mechanisms?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes



4.30b. (If YES to 4.24), Is there a national body in charge of controlling and certifying food quality?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes


4.30c. (If YES to 30b), What is the name of that body?
________________________________________________



4.31. (If YES to 4.24), Are the guidelines governing the procurement process available to the public
(transparent)?
‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes



4.32. (If YES to 4.24), Is the M&E information used to refine and update procurement and logistics
arrangements?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes




92 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                   2015


4.33a. Have there been discussions on procurement modalities for school feeding that can be more
locally adopted, including the possibility of linking procurement with agriculture-related activities (that
is, local-level support to small-scale farmers)?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.33b. (If YES), please describe in the box below.




4.34a. Are there service provision models that could potentially create jobs and profit-making
opportunities for community members (such as in processing, cooking, etc.)?

‫ ܆‬No           ‫ ܆‬Yes

4.34b. (If YES to 4.34a), please describe in the box below.




4.35a. What percentage of the total food requirements of the school feeding program is currently being:
‫ ܆‬Produced locally (within national borders)
   Percentage: ________________% (Year: ____________)

‫ ܆‬Imported from foreign sources (outside of national borders)
 Percentage: ________________% (Year: ____________)

4.35b. From the locally produced food, what is the percentage sourced from small-scale farmer
associations, community groups, or local businesses?
   Percentage: ________________% (Year: ____________)

4.35c. Please explain in the box below.




93 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                            2015


4.36. Are there complementary programs with budgets that provide capacity building for small-holder
farmers and the community for the following?

                                 Yes            No           Not
                                                           Applicable
 Production                      ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
 Storage                         ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
 Food processing                 ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
 Preparation                     ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬
 Marketing                       ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬              ‫܆‬


Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 4.24–4.36.




94 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                  2015


SECTION 5: COMMUNITY ROLES—REACHING BEYOND THE SCHOOL

Community Participation and Accountability: Strong Community Participation
and Ownership (Teachers, Parents, Children)

INDICATOR 5.1: Community’s Roles

5.1a. Are the roles and responsibilities of the community through school feeding management
committees clearly defined in a policy (for example, in the national school feeding policy or other policy
document, law, or guidelines)?
‫ ܆‬No         ‫ ܆‬Yes

5.1b. (If YES to 5.1a), please indicate below in which documents (please mention the name and the date
of release of this document).




5.2a. Are there school feeding management committees?
‫ ܆‬No          ‫ ܆‬Yes

5.2b. Please check who is involved in the school feeding management committee:
‫ ܆‬Teachers
‫ ܆‬Parents
‫ ܆‬Community members
‫ ܆‬Others: ___________________________________________

5.3. (If YES to 5.1a) What are the main roles assigned to the community, through school feeding
management committees or associations:
(check all applicable)

‫܆‬   Designing or sharing in designing of the school feeding program
‫܆‬   Implementing the school feeding program (cooking, distributing, purchasing, etc.)
‫܆‬   Managing the school feeding program
‫܆‬   Providing feedback about the school feeding program
‫܆‬   Monitoring the school feeding program

Holding school feeding programs accountable at:
‫ ܆‬Local level or school level
‫ ܆‬Regional level
‫ ܆‬National level
‫ ܆‬Other roles (please specify): _________________________________________________


95 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                               2015


Please describe the other community’s roles and responsibilities in the box below.




5.4. If there are systems and mechanisms in place that enable the community to hold the school feeding
program accountable at national, regional, and/or local levels, please describe them.




5.5a. Are there any trainings in place for school feeding management committees?
‫ ܆‬No          ‫ ܆‬Yes

5.5b. (If YES to 5.5a), please indicate below details of this training (frequency, which organization
conducts it, and main topics of training).




96 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                 2015


5.6. Please elaborate on the following:
a. How do communities work with the school feeding programs?




b. What are the main constraints facing community involvement?




Please use the box below for additional comments regarding questions 5.1–5.6.




97 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                            2015


                                  Annex Glossary of Terminologies

 Terminology                      Definition

                                                      Policy Goal 1




 Objectives                       Specific results to be achived within a given timeframe and available resources.

 Target                           A well-defined level of achievement for each objective that the government sets out to
                                  accomplish in a given period of time. For example, the government can set a target for
                                  the national school feeding program to reach 100 percent of primary school children in
                                  five years.

 Milestone                        A well-defined and significant step toward achieving a goal or target. For example, a
                                  milestone for the above mentioned target is to increase the national budget for national
                                  school feeding by 20 percent .

 Sectoral responsibilities        Duties and major activities that are assigned to each ministry or relevant body. For
                                  example, the Ministry of Education has the mandate of managing the national school
                                  feeding program.

 Situation analysis               An analysis of the prevailing situation in a given country or region: It provides a
                                  comprehensive analysis of the nature, causes, and extent of the problems affecting
                                  school-age children; the nutritional needs of school-age children and the challenges to
                                  their full development; and a description of the current status, resources, and capacity
                                  in the country for implementing school feeding programs that correspond to the
                                  identified gaps.



                                                      Policy Goal 2




 Budget or budget plans           A financial plan used to estimate revenues and expenditures for a specific period. A
                                  budget plan is a planning tool to determine needs and the corresponding resources
                                  required, it is not a commitment.



 Budget line                      A certain line in the budget that is allocated to a specific activity.




 School feeding has budget line   A commitment line where the budget line is solely allocated to school feeding expenses,
                                  and usually the amount is revised on an annual basis.




98 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                         2015


 Budget (budget allocation)        The amount of funding designated to each expenditure item or line, and a limit that is
                                   not to be exceeded.




 Assigned budget allocated for     Funds in the budget allocated to school feeding–related activities in the ministries
 each ministry involved in the     involved with the school feeding program.
 school feeding program
                                   For example, the Ministry of Health has annual funds for one of their representatives to
                                   conduct regular checks on school kitchens or meals.

 Mechanism in the government       A system is in place to accept cash donations from private sector into the central,
 budgeting process (central or     regional, or local budget for school feeding with procedures to record these contributions
 local) to accept funds from the   in governmental accounts.
 private sector for the national
 school feeding program

 Implementers                      Any entity that is responsible for carrying out one or more of the school feeding
                                   functions, such as purchasing food. Depending on the modality in the country, this could
                                   be the Ministry of Education, local municipalities, schools, community members or cooks,
                                   NGOs, or others.




                                                      Policy Goal 4




 National School Feeding           For the purpose of this questionnaire, national school feeding programs are school
 Program                           feeding programs that are operated and managed by the government (central, regional,
                                   or local), while funding can be from the government or nongovernmental groups. A
                                   country can have mixed programs, where part of the school feeding program can be
                                   operated and managed by the government (central, regional, or local) and other part(s)
                                   is/are operated and managed by international or national NGOs and organizations. In this
                                   case, please provide answers based on the national school feeding programs operated
                                   by the government only (central, regional, or local).

 Universal coverage (for school    Every student in every public primary school in the country is a beneficiary of the school
 feeding)                          feeding program.




99 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                                                       2015




                                             Systems Approach for Better Education Results: School Feeding Policy Framework


     POLICY                                                                                                            STAGE
                             INDICATOR
     LEVER                                                          Latent                          Emerging                         Established                         Advanced
  Policy Goal 1: Policy Frameworks

                                                                                                                                                                School feeding is included in a
                                                                                                                                                                published national-level
                                                                                                                                                                poverty reduction strategy or
                                                                                                                                                                equivalent national policy
                      National-level poverty
                                                                                                                              School feeding is included in a   (including specifications as to
                      reduction strategy or
                                                         There is recognition of school                                       published national-level          where school feeding will be
                      equivalent national strategy as
                                                         feeding as an education and/or    School feeding is discussed by     poverty reduction strategy or     anchored and who will
                      well as sectoral policies and
                                                         social protection intervention,   members and partners during        equivalent national policy        implement and accompanied
                      strategies (education sector
                                                         but school feeding is not yet     preparation of national-level      (including specifications as to   by targets and/or milestones
                      plan, nutrition policy, social
                                                         included in the published         poverty reduction strategy,        where school feeding will be      set by the government);
                      protection policy) identify
                                                         national-level poverty            equivalent national policy, or     anchored and who will             published sectoral policies or
                      school feeding as an education
                                                         reduction strategy, equivalent    sectoral policies and strategies   implement); published sectoral    strategies have clearly defined
                      and/or social protection
                                                         national policy, or sectoral      but not yet published              policies or strategies have       objectives and sectoral
                      intervention, clearly defining
                                                         policies and strategies                                              clearly defined objectives and    responsibilities, including what
                      objectives and sectoral
                                                                                                                              sectoral responsibilities         school feeding can and cannot
                      responsibilities
                                                                                                                                                                achieve, and are aligned with
  Overarching
                                                                                                                                                                the national-level poverty
  policies for
                                                                                                                                                                reduction strategy or
  school feeding:
                                                                                                                                                                equivalent national strategy
  sound alignment
  with the national
  policy                                                                                                                                                        A technical policy related to
                                                                                                                                                                school feeding is published,
                                                                                                                                                                outlining the objectives,
                      An evidence-based technical
                                                                                                                                                                rationale, scope, design,
                      policy related to school feeding
                                                                                                                                                                funding, and sustainability of
                      outlines the objectives,                                                                                A technical policy related to
                                                                                                                                                                the program and
                      rationale, scope, design, and                                                                           school feeding is published,
                                                                                                                                                                comprehensively covering the
                      funding and sustainability of      There is recognition of the                                          outlining the objectives,
                                                                                           A technical policy and situation                                     four other policy goals with a
                      the program and                    need for a technical policy                                          rationale, scope, design,
                                                                                           analysis is under development                                        strategy for local production
                      comprehensively addresses all      related to school feeding, but                                       funding, and sustainability of
                                                                                           by the relevant sectors that                                         and sourcing, including links
                      four other policy goals            one has not yet been                                                 the program and covering
                                                                                           address school feeding                                               with agriculture development
                      (institutional capacity and        developed or published                                               some aspects of all four other
                                                                                                                                                                and small-holder farmers;
                      coordination, financial                                                                                 policy goals, including links
                                                                                                                                                                policy is informed by a
                      capacity, design and                                                                                    with agriculture development
                                                                                                                                                                situation analysis of needs and
                      implementation, and
                                                                                                                                                                aligned with national poverty
                      community participation)
                                                                                                                                                                reduction strategies and
                                                                                                                                                                relevant sectoral policies and
                                                                                                                                                                strategies




40 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                                                    2015




  Policy Goal 2: Financial Capacity

                                                                                                                                                             School feeding is included in
                                                                                                                                                             the national planning process
                                                                                                                                                             and is fully funded through a
                                                         There is recognition of the
                                                                                                                             School feeding is included in   national budget line consistent
                                                         need to include school feeding
                                                                                            School feeding is included in    the national planning process   with the school feeding policy
                                                         in the national planning
                                                                                            the national planning process,   and is fully funded through a   and situation analysis including
                                                         process, but this has not yet
                    National budget line(s) and                                             and national funding is stable   national budget line; all       options for engaging with the
  Governance of                                          happened; the government is
                    funding are allocated to school                                         through a budget line but        ministries involved in the      private sector; budget lines
  the national                                           fully reliant on external funds
                    feeding; funds are disbursed to                                         unable to cover all needs;       program implementation have     and plans also exist at regional
  school feeding                                         and does not have provision in
                    the implementation levels                                               there is no budget line at       a budget line or funds          and school levels, sufficient to
  program: stable                                        the national budget to allocate
                    (national, district, and/or local)                                      regional and school levels;      allocated; budget lines also    cover all the expenses of
  funding and                                            resources to school feeding;
                    in a timely and effective                                               existing school feeding funds    exist at regional and school    running the program; school
  budgeting                                              there is recognition of the need
                    manner                                                                  are disbursed to the             levels; school feeding funds    feeding funds are disbursed to
                                                         for mechanisms for disbursing
                                                                                            implementation levels            are disbursed to the            the implementation levels in a
                                                         funds to the implementation
                                                                                            intermittently                   implementation levels in a      timely and effective manner,
                                                         levels, but these are not yet in
                                                                                                                             timely and effective manner     and implementers have the
                                                         place
                                                                                                                                                             capacity to plan and budget as
                                                                                                                                                             well as request resources from
                                                                                                                                                             the central level




41 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                                                          2015




  Policy Goal 3: Institutional Capacity and Coordination

                                                                                                                                                                Multisectoral steering
                                                                                                                                                                committee from at least three
                                                                                                                                                                sectors (for example,
                                                                                                                                                                education, social protection,
                                                                                                                                                                agriculture, health, local
                                                                                                                              Multisectoral steering
                                                                                                                                                                government, and water)
  School feeding                                                                                                              committee from at least two
                                                                                                                                                                coordinates implementation of
  coordination:         Multisectoral steering                                              Sectoral steering committee       sectors (such as education,
                                                           Any multisectoral steering                                                                           a national school feeding
  strong                committee coordinates                                               coordinates implementation of     social protection, agriculture,
                                                           committee coordination efforts                                                                       policy; this government-led
  partnerships and      implementation of a national                                        a national school feeding         health, local government,
                                                           are currently nonsystematic                                                                          committee provides
  intersector           school feeding policy                                               policy                            water) coordinates
                                                                                                                                                                comprehensive coordination
  coordination                                                                                                                implementation of a national
                                                                                                                                                                (across international agencies,
                                                                                                                              school feeding policy
                                                                                                                                                                NGOs, the private sector, and
                                                                                                                                                                local business
                                                                                                                                                                representatives) and is part of
                                                                                                                                                                a wider committee on school
                                                                                                                                                                health and nutrition



                                                                                                                                                                A fully staffed school feeding
                                                                                            A school feeding unit exists at   A fully staffed school feeding    unit exists at the national
                                                                                            the national level, but it has    unit with a clear mandate         level, based on an
                                                           A specific school feeding unit   limited resources and limited     exists at the national level,     assessment of staffing and
                        National school feeding
                                                           does not yet exist at the        staff numbers and lacks a         based on an assessment of         resources needs, with a clear
                        management unit and
                                                           national level; coordination     clear mandate; coordination       staffing and resources needs;     mandate and pre- and in-
                        accountability structures are in
  Management                                               between the national, regional   mechanisms between the            coordination mechanisms           service training; coordination
                        place, coordinating with
  and                                                      or local (if applicable), and    national, regional or local (if   between the national, regional    mechanisms between the
                        school-level structures
  accountability                                           school levels is lacking         applicable), and school levels    or local (if applicable), and     national, regional or local (if
  structures,                                                                               are in place, but they are not    school levels are in place and    applicable), and school levels
  including staffing:                                                                       fully functioning                 functioning in most instances     are in place and fully
  strong                                                                                                                                                        functioning
  institutional
  frameworks for
  implementation

                                                           Mechanisms for managing          National guidance on required                                       All schools have a mechanism
                                                                                                                              Most schools have a
                        School-level management and        school feeding at the school     mechanisms for managing                                             to manage school feeding,
                                                                                                                              mechanism to manage school
                        accountability structures are in   level are not uniform, and       school feeding is available at                                      based on national guidance,
                                                                                                                              feeding, based on national
                        place                              national guidance on this is     the school level but not yet                                        with pre- and in-service
                                                                                                                              guidance
                                                           lacking                          implemented fully                                                   training for relevant staff




42 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                                                                2015




  Policy Goal 4: Design and Implementation

                                                                                                                                                                          The M&E plan for school
                                                                                                                                                                          feeding is integrated into
                                                                                                                                                                          national monitoring or
                                                                                                                                     The M&E plan for school              information management
                       A functional monitoring and           The importance of M&E is           A government M&E plan exists         feeding is integrated into           systems, and data collection
                       evaluation (M&E) system is in         recognized, but government         for school feeding with              national monitoring or               and reporting occur recurrently
                       place as part of the structure of     systems are not yet in place for   intermittent data collection and     information management               at national, regional, and
                       the lead institution and used for     M&E of school feeding              reporting occurring, especially      systems, and data collection         school levels; analyzed
                       implementation and feedback           implementation                     at the national level                and reporting occur recurrently      information is shared and used
                                                                                                                                     at national and regional levels      to refine and update programs;
                                                                                                                                                                          a baseline is carried out, and
                                                                                                                                                                          program evaluations occur
                                                                                                                                                                          periodically



                                                                                                                                                                          Targeting criteria and a
  Quality assurance                                                                                                                                                       targeting methodology exist
                                                             The need for targeting is
  of programming                                                                                Targeting criteria and a             Targeting criteria and a             and are implemented
                       Program design identifies             recognized, but a situation
  and targeting,                                                                                targeting methodology are            targeting methodology exist          corresponding to the national
                       appropriate target groups and         analysis has not yet been
  modalities, and                                                                               being developed corresponding        and are implemented                  school feeding policy and
                       targeting criteria corresponding      undertaken that assesses
  procurement                                                                                   to the national school feeding       corresponding to the national        situation analysis (including
                       to the national school feeding        school feeding needs and
  design, ensuring                                                                              policy; a situation analysis         school feeding policy and a          costings for various targeting
                       policy and the situation              neither targeting criteria nor
  design that is                                                                                assessing needs is still             situation analysis assessing         and designs); M&E information
                       analysis                              has a targeting methodology
  both needs-based                                                                              incomplete                           needs                                is used to refine and update
                                                             been established as yet
  and cost-effective                                                                                                                                                      targeting and coverage on a
                                                                                                                                                                          periodic basis




                                                                                                                                                                          National standards on food
                                                                                                National standards on food                                                modalities and the food basket
                                                                                                                                     National standards on food
                                                                                                modalities and the food basket                                            have been developed and
                       Food modalities and the food                                                                                  modalities and the food basket
                                                                                                have been developed and                                                   correspond to objectives, local
                       basket correspond to the              There is recognition of the                                             have been developed and
                                                                                                correspond to two or more of                                              habits and tastes, availability of
                       objectives, local habits and          need for national standards for                                         correspond to objectives, local
                                                                                                the following: objectives, local                                          local food, food safety
                       tastes, availability of local food,   food modalities and the food                                            habits and tastes, availability of
                                                                                                habits and tastes, availability of                                        (according to WHO guidelines),
                       food safety (according to WHO         basket, but these do not exist                                          local food, food safety
                                                                                                local food, food safety                                                   and nutrition content
                       guidelines), and nutrition            yet                                                                     (according to WHO guidelines),
                                                                                                (according to WHO guidelines),                                            requirements; M&E information
                       content requirements                                                                                          and nutrition content
                                                                                                and nutrition content                                                     is used to refine and update
                                                                                                                                     requirements
                                                                                                requirements                                                              food modalities and food
                                                                                                                                                                          basket on a periodic basis




43 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                                                     2015




                                                                                                                                                                National standards on
                                                                                        National standards on                                                   procurement and logistics
                                                                                                                            National standards on
                                                                                        procurement and logistics                                               arrangements have been
                  Procurement and logistics                                                                                 procurement and logistics
                                                                                        arrangements have been                                                  developed and are based on
                  arrangements are based on                                                                                 arrangements have been
                                                                                        developed and are based on                                              procuring as locally as
                  procuring as locally as             There is recognition of the                                           developed and are based on
                                                                                        three or more of the following:                                         possible, taking into account
                  possible, taking into account       need for national standards for                                       procuring as locally as
                                                                                        procuring as locally as                                                 the costs, capacities of
                  the costs, capacities of            procurement and logistics                                             possible, taking into account
                                                                                        possible, taking into account                                           implementing parties,
                  implementing parties,               arrangements, but these do not                                        the costs, capacities of
                                                                                        the costs, capacities of                                                production capacity in the
                  production capacity in the          exist yet                                                             implementing parties,
                                                                                        implementing parties,                                                   country, quality of the food, and
                  country, quality of the food, and                                                                         production capacity in the
                                                                                        production capacity in the                                              stability of the pipeline; M&E
                  stability of the pipeline                                                                                 country, quality of the food, and
                                                                                        country, quality of the food, and                                       information is used to refine
                                                                                                                            stability of the pipeline
                                                                                        stability of the pipeline                                               and update procurement and
                                                                                                                                                                logistics arrangements




44 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                                                                                                                 2015




  Policy Goal 5: Community Roles: Reaching beyond the School

                                                                                                                                                            The school feeding
                                                                                                                                                            management committee
  Community                                                                                                               The school feeding                comprises representatives of
                                                                                          A school feeding management
  participation and                                     Systems and accountability                                        management committee              teachers, parents, and
                      Community participates in                                           committee exists, but parent
  accountability:                                       mechanisms are not yet in                                         comprises representatives of      community members and has
                      school feeding program design,                                      and community member
  strong community                                      place for consultation with                                       teachers, parents, and            clearly defined responsibilities
                      implementation, management                                          participation could be
  participation and                                     parents and community                                             community members, and            and periodic training;
                      and evaluation and contributes                                      strengthened and awareness
  ownership                                             members on the design,                                            communities have                  accountability mechanisms are
                      resources (in-kind, cash, or as                                     on the opportunity to monitor
  (teachers,                                            monitoring, and feedback of the                                   accountability mechanisms to      in place by which communities
                      labor)                                                              and feedback on the school
  parents, and                                          school feeding program                                            hold school feeding programs      can hold school feeding
                                                                                          feeding program is lacking
  children)                                                                                                               accountable at the school level   programs accountable at the
                                                                                                                                                            school, regional, and national
                                                                                                                                                            levels




45 | P a g e
SABER-SF Manual                                                                         2015



List of Useful Resources
    1. Rethinking School Feeding
       https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/2634/48742.pdf?sequence=1
    2. What Matters Most for School Health and School Feeding: A Framework Paper
       http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/SHN/Frame
       work_SABER-School_Health.pdf
    3. State of School Feeding Worldwide 2013
       http://www.wfp.org/content/state-school-feeding-worldwide-2013




46 | P a g e
