 TOBACCO TAXATION IN
 THE EUROPEAN
MODELING THE LONG
 UNION
TERM HEALTH AND
 An Overview




COST IMPACTS OF
REDUCING SMOKING
PREVALENCE
THROUGH TOBACCO
TAXATION IN         Annerie Bouw
                EUROPEAN COMMISSION




UKRAINE
2
                                          Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




Contents

                4
Acknowledgments		
         4
Abstract		
1. 	                                    5
        Beginning of the European Union		
2. 	                                                     6
        Why Harmonize Excise Duties on Tobacco Products?		
                                                          6
2.1. 	 Functioning of the Internal Market and Competition		
                                                         7
2.2. 	 Contributing to a High Level of Health Protection		
                                          8
2.3. 	 Ensuring Revenue for Member States		
3. 	                                                        9
        Current Excise Duties on Tobacco Products in the EU		
                                9
3.1. 	 Tobacco Market in the EU		
3.2. 	 Tobacco Taxation Policy in the EU and Decision Procedure		10
                                                   10
3.3. 	 How Are Excise Duties Harmonized in the EU?		
                                         11
3.3.1. 	 General Rules for Excise Duties		
                      11
3.3.2 	 Tax Structure		
                       12
3.3.3. 	 Minimum Rates		
4. 	                    14
        Lessons Learned		
5. 	               17
        Conclusion		


Figures
Figure 1. Tax Burden On Cigarettes, In % Of The Weighted Average Price	                       7
Figure 2. Releases For Consumption Of Cigarettes 2002-2015, In 1000 Pieces	                   7
Figure 3. Total Revenue From Excise Duties On Cigarettes, Millions Of Euros	                  8
Figure 4. Average Revenue From Excise Duties On Cigarettes, Euros Per 1000 Cigarettes	        9
Figure 5. Structures Of Excise Duties On Cigarettes, By Percentage Of Retail Selling Price	   12
Figure 6. Example Of A Tax Structure Of A Package Of Cigarettes Of 3 Euros	                   13
Figure 7. Example Of The Tax Floor On A Package Of Cigarettes Costing 3 Euros	                13
Figure 8. Romania, Excise Duty Per 1000 Cigarettes, Euros	                                    15
Figure 9. Revenue Excise Duties On Cigarettes, Million Euros	                                 15
Figure 10. Croatia, Excise Duty Per 1000 Cigarettes, Euros	                                   16
Figure 11. Revenue Excise Duties On Cigarettes, Million Euros	                                16




                                                                                                  3
    Acknowledgments

    I would like to express my gratitude to Thomas Carroll for providing
    comments and Aurimas Vasylis for support with the statistical data.

    The information and views set out in this publication are those of the author
    and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the European Union.
    Neither the European Union institutions and bodies nor any person acting on
    their behalf may be held responsible for the use which may be made of the
    information contained therein.

    Support for the printing of this report was provided by the World Bank’s
    Global Tobacco Program, co-financed by the Bill and Melinda Gates
    Foundation and the Bloomberg Foundation.

    European Commission, Brussels, April 2017




    Abstract

    The European Union has a long experience in tobacco tax harmonization,
    which provides useful lessons learned. In the European Union, tobacco tax
    harmonization took place in stages, and currently all Member States have
    agreed upon definitions, tax base, and minimum excise duty rates for all
    product categories of manufactured tobacco. Tobacco tax harmonization
    pursues several different objectives, among which some might appear
    contradictory at first sight. This is the case in the European Union, where
    ensuring collection of revenues and ensuring a high level of health protection
    are, among others, objectives of tobacco tax harmonization. Reaching the
    objective to ensure a high level of health protection implies a declining
    consumption and thus declining revenues. It therefore seems impossible to
    reach both objectives with the same legal provisions. However, experience in
    the European Union proves otherwise. Lower tobacco consumption and the
    decrease in revenue this would otherwise generate have been compensated
    by increased rates, thereby reaching both objectives.




4
                                                     Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




Tobacco Taxation in the European Union1

The first efforts to harmonize tobacco taxation among European Member
States started as early as in the 1970s. With over 40 years of experience, the
European Union has the longest experience in tobacco tax harmonization
in the world. Over four decades, these harmonization provisions have been
enhanced, expanded and improved. This section describes the beginning and
objectives of tobacco tax harmonization in the European Union (hereafter:
EU). The focus will thereafter be on the current provisions applicable to
manufactured tobacco products in the EU and its Member States.



1. Beginning of the European Union

In 2017 the EU celebrates its 60th birthday. In 1957 six countries signed a
treaty and created the European Economic Community, launching a process
that has given rise to the EU as we know it today. 2 During the following years,
the foundation of the EU was established and strengthened. The freedom of
movement of goods, people, services, and money within the borders of the
EU is considered as the concrete outcome of this cooperation. To achieve a
properly functioning single market, new treaties were signed, and legislation
was adopted and improved. Among others, the Schengen agreement was
signed to allow people to travel freely in the Schengen area, regardless of
their nationality.3 With the treaty of Maastricht, the idea to develop a single
currency was formalized, and the name “European Union” replaced European
Community.4 More countries joined; on 1 July 2013, with the accession of
Croatia, the EU encompassed a total of 28 Member States with a population
of 510 million people. Becoming an EU Member State is a lengthy process.
First the conditions for membership need to be fulfilled, and all EU legislation
must be implemented. There are currently five candidate countries: Albania,
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Turkey.
In addition, the EU has association agreements with countries that are in the
process of bringing their legislation in line with the EU acquis.




1. By Annerie Bouw, European Commission, April 2017. The content of this paper does not reflect the official opinion of
the European Union. Responsibility for the information and views expressed in this paper lies entirely with the author.
Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
2. Treaty Establishing the European Economic Community, Rome Treaty, 25 March 1957
Parties: Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Luxemburg and the Netherlands
3. Convention Implementing the Schengen Agreement of 14 June 1985 between the Governments of the States of the
Benelux Economic Union, the Federal Republic of Germany and the French Republic, on the Gradual Abolition of Checks at
their Common Borders (Schengen Implementation Agreement), 19 June 1990
4. Treaty on European Union (Consolidated Version), Treaty of Maastricht , 7 February 1992, Official Journal of the European
Communities C 325/5; 24 December 2002

                                                                                                                         5
2. Why Harmonize Excise Duties on Tobacco Products?

In order to ensure the functioning of the internal market, a certain degree
of harmonization of tax policies was considered necessary, including excise
duties applied on manufactured tobacco.5 National legislation discriminating
against foreign products was not compatible with the freedom of movement
of goods, one of the requirements for the functioning of the internal
market. Only excise duties on energy products, alcoholic beverages, and
manufactured tobacco products are harmonized in the EU. The first legal
act in the area of tobacco taxation was adopted in 1972.6 At the time, the
establishment of an economic union was the main priority. The objective
of tax harmonization was therefore to create a framework which would
not distort competition or hinder the free movement of goods within the
internal market. The legislation harmonizing the taxes on consumption of
manufactured tobacco has been amended several times since. The damaging
effects of smoking were acknowledged by including the objective to protect
the health of the citizens of the EU in the recitals of the legal act.7 Member
States also agreed that the harmonized taxation should assure them of the
collection of revenue of excise duties. Although some of these objectives may
seem to be contradictory, the paragraphs below describe the objectives and
the effects of many years of tobacco tax harmonization in the EU, including
the current trends.



2.1. Functioning of the Internal Market and
Competition

A proper functioning internal market implies the presence of competition,
requiring the free setting of prices. Therefore it was agreed that importers
or manufacturers of tobacco products should not be restricted in setting a
maximum retail selling price.8 This has resulted in different price levels across
the EU. However, one should not forget that the geographical locations
and economic situations of Member States also vary, as therefore does the
affordability of products. The current legislation does not interfere in the
prices of manufactured tobacco directly. However, depending on its level,
taxation can have a major indirect influence on price. In particular in the
EU, where tax burdens on cigarettes range from 70 to 85 percent, taxation
5. Article 99 of the Treaty Establishing the European Community (Consolidated Version), Rome Treaty, 25 March 1957
6. Directive 72/464/EEC, 19 December 1972 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of
manufactured tobacco
7. Recital 7 of Council Directive 2002/10/EC of 12 February 2002 amending Directive 92/79/EEC and 95/59/EC as regards
the structure and rates of excise duty applies on manufactured tobacco
8. Article 15 of Council Directive 2011/64/EU of 21 June 2011 on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to
manufactured tobacco, PbEU 176/24




6
                                     Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




has a major indirect effect on prices. In line with the objectives of avoiding
distortion of competition and ensuring a high level of health protection, it
was decided that the tax burden on manufactured tobacco should be similar
in each Member State. As shown in Figure 1 below, despite varying prices,
a degree of convergence of tax burdens on cigarettes has been achieved
across the EU.

Figure 1. Tax burden cigarettes, in % of the Weighted Average Price




SOURCE:   European Commission 2016



2.2. Contributing to a high level of health protection

The consumption of cigarettes has been declining over the years. However,
smoking and its consequences remain a major burden on the health of
citizens and health care systems in the EU. The decline is also reflected in the
amount of cigarettes released for consumption between 2002 and 2015, as
shown in Figure 2 below. Consumption has declined from almost 800 billion
pieces in 2002 to just below 500 billion pieces in 2015.

Figure 2. Releases for consumption of cigarettes 2002-2015,
in 1000 pieces




SOURCE:   European Commission 2016
                                                                                      7
It is worth noting that concerns have been expressed about consumers’
switching to other tobacco products, such as fine-cut tobacco for the rolling
of cigarettes, which have remained cheaper than manufactured cigarettes
due to a lower taxation level. This phenomenon is also called “tax-induced”
substitution and is monitored at EU level. In 2010 the EU stated its desire
to bring the minimum tax requirements for fine-cut tobacco closer to the
minimum levels applied to cigarettes, to take better account of the degree
of competition between the products, which are seen as equally harmful
to health.9 Gradual increases in the minimum tax requirements for fine-cut
tobacco took place in 2013 and 2015, and further increases are foreseen for
2018 and 2020. Despite these efforts, an increase in the consumption of fine-
cut tobacco was indeed observed from 2002 to 2012, although the market
seems to have stabilized between 2012 and 2015. Moreover, fine-cut tobacco
still represents a comparatively small portion of the market (about 20 percent
last year). In preparation for a future review of the legislation, the European
Commission has included tax-induced substitution on the list of subjects to
look into as part of a possible next revision.10



2.3. Ensuring revenue for Member States

The objective of ensuring revenue from excise duties applied to
manufactured tobacco may seem to be contradictory to the objective
mentioned above of protecting the health of citizens. This is partly true.
However, it does seem possible to reach both objectives. As shown in Figure
3, the total revenue of excise duties on cigarettes was more or less stable
between 2008 and 2015.

Figure 3. Total Revenue from Excise Duties on Cigarettes,
Millions of Euros




SOURCE:   European Commission 2016

9. Council Directive 2011/64/EU of 21 June 2011 on the structure and rates of excise duty applied to manufactured
tobacco, PbEU 176/24
10. Inception Impact Assessment on the possible revision of Directive 2011/64/EU on the rates and structure of excise duty
applied on manufactured tobacco, 16 June 2016


8
                                                       Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




Stable revenues with declining consumption can only be explained in one
way: an increase in rates must have taken place, in order to maintain the
same level of revenue. This has indeed been the case, as shown in Figure
4 below. The average tax revenue per 1000 cigarettes has been increasing
over the years. In other words, the lower consumption and the decrease
in revenue this would otherwise generate have been compensated by
increased rates.

Figure 4. Average Revenue from Excise Duties on Cigarettes,
Euros per 1000 Cigarettes




SOURCE:    European Commission 2016


3. Current excise duties on tobacco products in the EU

3.1. Tobacco market in the EU

According to the latest available figures, during 2015, 493 billion cigarette
sticks were released for consumption, equivalent to almost 25 billion
packs a year.11 Moreover, although it represents a much smaller market
share, an estimated 88 000 tons of smoking tobacco were also released
for consumption during 2015. Smoking tobacco mainly includes fine-cut
tobacco used for hand rolling of cigarettes. The revenue generated from
excise duties on cigarettes and smoking tobacco was €75 billion and €9
billion, respectively, in 2015. This revenue is collected by Member States and
goes entirely to their national budgets.



11. Assuming a pack of cigarette contains 20 pieces.




                                                                                                        9
3.2. Tobacco taxation policy in the EU and decision
procedure

Legal acts in the EU, also called Directives, are adopted by the Council of
the EU. The Council is composed of Government ministers from each EU
Member State. The decision-making procedure in the Council begins once a
proposal from the European Commission is tabled. The Commission has the
right of initiative and may table a proposal to amend existing legislation or
to adopt new legislation. Most legal acts are adopted if a qualified majority
of Member States in the Council agrees. However, Member States consider
that some matters are too sensitive, and for legislative acts in these areas
the Council must make decisions by unanimity.12 Harmonization of indirect
taxation, such as tobacco taxation, is an example of this. One advantage of
this decision-making procedure is that any adopted or amended act will have
the full support of all Member States, as no member can be overruled. The
disadvantage is that, in practice, it can be very difficult to find a compromise
agreement with so many diverging views and differences between the
Member States.



3.3. How are excise duties harmonized in the EU?

At the time the first act affecting the taxes on the consumption on tobacco
products was adopted, it was considered too ambitious to immediately
seek the same tax base, structure, and rate in all countries. The European
Economic Community, as the predecessor of the EU was called at that time,
decided that harmonization should take place in stages.13 During the first
stage, only the structure and tax base were harmonized. During the second
phase, Member States agreed upon the different categories of manufactured
tobacco products and the tax structure for each category. The adoption of
minimum excise duty levels for each category of tobacco products took place
during the third stage, in order to achieve a greater convergence between the
tax levels applied in the Member States.




12. Article 113 of Consolidated version of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, 13 December 2007,
2008/C 115/01.
13. Directive 72/464/EEC, 19 December 1972 on taxes other than turnover taxes which affect the consumption of
manufactured tobacco.




10
                                                   Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




3.3.1. General rules for excise duties

Without legislation governing the collection of tax and the enforcement
activities of the competent authorities in the Member States, it would
be impossible to put an effective tax system in place. The general rules
applicable to all excise goods such as energy products, alcoholic beverages,
and manufactured tobacco, are also harmonized in the EU and laid down in
a separate legal act.14 This general excise duty directive contains provisions
about the production, storage, and movement of excise goods. Until the
excise duty is paid, a system called the Excise Movement and Control System
(EMCS) monitors the movement of alcohol, tobacco, and energy products in
the EU. In addition, the time and place where excise duties are due and who is
liable to pay the excise duty are included in this directive.



3.3.2 Tax structure

As mentioned above, Member States agreed in the early 1970s that the tax
structure should be harmonized to eliminate factors that are likely to hinder
free movement and distort competition. Already in the first legal act affecting
the taxes on consumption of tobacco products, it was required that the
excise duty for cigarettes should consist of two components, also known
as the “mixed structure.” This mixed structure was at the time a compromise
between southern Member States (themselves producers of raw tobacco),
which favored an ad valorem system, and northern Member States (not
producers of raw tobacco), which preferred a specific excise duty. The current
legal act, Council Directive 2011/64/EU (hereafter: tobacco excise duty
directive), requires that the excise duty on cigarettes must consist of:

   •	 A specific component of between 7.5 percent and 76.5 percent 		
		    of the total tax burden (TTB) - expressed as a fixed amount per 1000 	
		    cigarettes;
   •	 An ad valorem component - expressed as a percentage of the 		
		    maximum retail selling price.




14. Council Directive 2008/118/EC of 16 December 2008 concerning the general arrangements for excise duty and
repealing Directive 92/12/EEC.




                                                                                                                11
As shown in Figure 5, the percentage of each component varies from country
to country. However, in each Member State, a specific component, ad
valorem component, and value added tax are applied to cigarettes.

Figure 5. Structures of Excise Duties on Cigarettes, by Percentage of
Retail Selling Price




3.3.3. Minimum rates
To achieve a greater approximation of rates, the EU Member States decided
to introduce minimum rates in 1992, in order assist in establishing the
internal market. The tobacco excise duty directive requires Member States to
levy a minimum overall excise duty on cigarettes.


Product Category                      Minimum Rate
Cigarettes                            At least €90 per 1000 cigarettes
                                      and
                                      At least 60% of the weighted
                                      average retail selling price



Member States that apply an excise duty of €115 or more, however, do not
need to comply with the 60 percent criterion above.

Figure 6 shows how a Member State could comply with these minimum
requirements.




12
                                  Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




Figure 6. Example of a Tax                 Figure 7. Example of the
Structure for a Package of                 Tax Floor on a Package of
Cigarettes Costing 3 Euros                 Cigarettes Costing 3 Euros




The fact that the minimum tax consists of an ad valorem component,
which is related to the price, could be an incentive to market products at a
low(er) price since it would lead to a lower ad valorem tax. This could in turn
undermine tobacco control policies and cause erosion of the tax base. This
weakness could be compensated by a higher specific component of the tax.
However, the tobacco excise duty directive foresees yet another mechanism
to overcome this problem. The Member States also have the possibility to set
a tax floor which applies regardless of the price of a product. Figure 7 shows
the effect of such a tax floor.

Unlike in the example in Figure 6, there is no possibility to reduce the ad
valorem component of the tax. If a product had a lower price, the tax burden
would increase, because the tax floor is expressed in a fixed amount per unit,
while with the mixed system a lower amount of ad valorem tax would be due.

The tobacco excise duty directive also lays down minimum excise duty rates
for manufactured tobacco products other than cigarettes. The structure
for taxing these products is slightly different (and simpler) than that used
for cigarettes. Member States can choose between applying a specific
component or an ad valorem component, or if they wish, they may apply a
mixture of the two. Minimum rates are set out for three separate categories.




                                                                                   13
 Product Category                                         Minimum Rate
 Fine-cut smoking tobacco                                 46% of the weighted average retail selling price
                                                          Or
                                                          €54 per kilogram

 Cigars and Cigarillos                                    5% of the retail selling price
                                                          Or
                                                          €12 per 1000 or per kilogram

 Other smoking tobaccos                                   20% of the retail selling price
                                                          Or
                                                          €22 per kilogram
Note: The minimum rates for fine-cut smoking tobacco will gradually be increased
up to 50% and 60 Euro per kilogram in 2020.15



4. Lessons learned

One of the lessons learned relates to the decision-making procedure in the
EU and reaching agreement on the level of the minimum rates. Experience
in the EU in the area of excise duties has shown that agreeing on relatively
high minimum rates with transitional periods for some Member States
gives better results than agreeing on lower minimum rates with the aim
of constantly revising them over short periods of time. Although in the
first situation not all members reach the minimum at the beginning of the
process, having a deadline in a legal act obliging them to do so has proven
to be a strong incentive to start with increases even before the transitional
period ends. In contrast, in the second situation, negotiations to increase
minima could well prove difficult, with the result that the “old” legislation
and rates would remain in place. For example, in both the areas of energy
taxation and alcohol taxation, no agreement on new minima has been
reached despite several attempts to amend the legislation.16 Obviously,
Member States in such a situation are still free to decide individually to
increase rates above the minimum. However, greater divergence between
the highest and lowest rates is more likely to occur, and an agreement on
new minima would be preferable.




15. According to Article 14 of Directive 2011/64/EU.
16. COM (2006) 486, Proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 92/84/EEC on the approximation of the rates of
excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages.
COM (2011) 169, Proposal for a Council Directive amending Directive 2003/96/EC restructuring the Community framework
for the taxation of energy products and electricity.




14
                                                                                     Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




                               In the tobacco excise duty directive, an increase in the minimum rates for
                               cigarettes from €64 to €90 per 1000 pieces was foreseen on 1 January 2014.
                               Of the 28 Member States, nine were granted a transitional period until 31
                               December 2017.17 However, even though this period has not ended, four out
                               of nine Member States have already reached the minima. The remaining five
                               are very close and seem to be up to speed to comply before the end of this
                               year. A long-term tobacco tax policy, including gradual increases, seems to
                               be the success factor to align rates to the EU minima in new Member States.
                               Figures 8 - 11 show the developments of rates and revenues in Romania and
                               Croatia, two of the nine Member States with a transitional period.


Figure 8. Romania, Excise Duty per 1000                                       Figure 9. Revenue from Excise Duties on
Cigarettes, Euros 	                                                           Cigarettes, Million Euros




SOURCE:   European Commission 2016                                            SOURCE:    European Commission 2016



                               	           Romania successfully doubled its rates and revenues and has reached 	
                               	           the minimum rates already.




                               17. Bulgaria, Estonia, Greece, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and Croatia.




                                                                                                                                      15
Figure 10. Croatia, Excise Duty per 1000                Figure 11. Revenue from Excise Duties on
Cigarettes, Euro                                        Cigarettes, Million Euros




SOURCE:   European Commission 2016                      SOURCE:   European Commission 2016

Although Croatia’s experience began much more recently, the situation
appears similar; both rates and revenues have increased.

These experiences are in line with the overall developments in the EU,
namely: increase or stable revenues from excise duties on cigarettes, and
declines in consumption which are achieved by increasing rates resulting in a
higher average excise duty collected per 1000 cigarettes.




16
                                  Tobacco Taxation in the European Union: An Overview




5. Conclusion

The experience of the EU shows that both the establishment of economic
and political cooperation and the harmonization of tobacco taxation are
lengthy processes that require improvements and updates over time.
Both processes took place in stages in the EU. Finding agreements among
members of a cooperative group is sometimes challenging, and it has
proven worthwhile to think ahead and aim to agree upon legislation that
is as “future-proof” as possible. Currently, the definitions, the tax base, and
the structure of tobacco taxes on consumption are harmonized within the
EU. Member States have to respect minimum overall excise duty rates for
all product categories of manufactured tobacco. The experience of the EU
also confirms that different – and perhaps at first glance contradictory -
objectives can be reached with harmonization of tobacco taxation. During
the first stage of harmonization of tobacco taxation in the EU, the objective
was to create a framework which ensured the proper functioning of the
internal market. Distortion of competition and hindering the free movement
of goods had therefore to be avoided. To achieve this, it was decided
that the tax burden on manufactured tobacco should be similar in each
Member State, which also supports the objective of ensuring a high level
of health protection. Another objective of the harmonized tobacco tax was
to ensure the collection of revenues for the Member States. Experiences in
the EU have proven that it is possible to achieve these different objectives:
a properly functioning internal market, a declining tobacco consumption
trend, and stable revenues. The lower consumption has been compensated
by increased rates. Achieving these objectives is also within reach of new
Member States, where establishing a long-term tax policy with gradual
increases to reach the EU requirements has been a success factor in aligning
their rates to the EU minima.




                                                                                   17
18
19
