                                AUGUST 2016




Utilizing World Bank partial guarantees
in support of sovereign or
sub – sovereign
commercial debt
financings
    Disclaimer

    This document (the “Document”) is being provided by Rothschild & C ie (“Rothschild”) to the World
    Bank and its shareholders, on a non-reliance basis. By receipt of this information, the recipient
    agrees that Rothschild shall have no liability for any misstatement or omission or fact or any
    opinion expressed herein, nor for the consequences of any reliance upon any statement,
    conclusion or opinion contained herein.
    This Document does not constitute an audit or a due diligence review and should not be construed
    as such. No representation or warranty, express or implied, is or will be made and no responsibility
    or liability is or will be accepted by Rothschild or by any of its partners, officers, employees or
    affiliates as to or in relation to the accuracy of completeness of the information forming the basis
    of this Document or for any errors, inaccuracies or omissions in this Document resulting from
    inaccurate or incomplete information used in preparing this Document.
    Nothing in this Document shall be taken as constituting the giving of investment advice and this
    Document is not intended to provide, and must not be taken as, the basis of any decision and
    should not be considered as a recommendation by Rothschild.




1
    Glossary

    ADB       Asian Development Bank
    AUM       Assets under management
    CDS       Credit Default Swap
    DPF/DPO   Development Policy Financing/ Development Policy Operation
    EIB       European Investment Bank
    EM        Emerging Market
    ETF       Exchange Traded Funds
    EU        European Union
    IBRD      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
    IDA       International Development Association
    IFC       International Finance Corporation
    IPF       Investment Project Financing
    IMF       International Monetary Fund
    IFI       International Financial Institutions
    JLM       Joint Lead Manager
    MDB       Multilateral Development Banks
    ODA       Official development assistance
    PBG       Policy-Based Guarantee
    SDG       Sustainable development goals
    SOE       State Owned Entity
    S&P       Standard & Poor’s
    WB        World Bank
    WBG       World Bank Group




2
    Contents

    1. Executive Summary                                                                        6
    1.1 Introduction                                                                            6
    1.2 Ghana partially-guaranteed bond issue                                                   6
    1.3 Cyclicality of market access for EM issuers                                             6
    1.4 Context on the Ghana credit at the time of issuance                                     7
    1.5 Strategic transaction for Ghana which yielded significant benefits                      8
    1.6 Feedback from investors and other counterparties                                        8
    1.7 Benefits and considerations for issuers in general                                      9
    1.8 Further considerations on format and approach to marketing                             10
    1.9 Conclusions                                                                            10
    2. Introduction                                                                            13
    2.1 Purpose of the Study                                                                   13
    3. General market context for partial guarantees                                           14
    3.1 Accessing financial markets for Emerging Market borrowers                              14
    3.2 Types of emerging markets investors                                                    16
    3.3 Emerging Markets facing ever-increasing financing needs                                18
    3.4 Multilateral Development Banks providing innovative financings to expand their balance-
        sheets                                                                                  20
    4. Evaluation of the Ghana 2030 transaction issued in October 2015                         22
    4.1 Context on the Ghana credit at the time of issuance                                    22
    4.2 Key features of the Ghana 2030 bond partial guarantee                                  24
    4.3 Strategic transaction for Ghana which yielded significant benefits                     24
    5. Investment rationale for investors                                                      27
    5.1 Underlying quality of the credit is the key determining investment factor              27
    5.2 Impact of index exclusion                                                              28
    5.3 Sales process and pricing of the instrument                                            29
    6. Credit rating approach                                                                  31
    7. Benefits and additional considerations of the partial guarantee for sovereigns and
       sub-sovereigns                                                                     34
    7.1 Benefits of using a partial guarantee                                                  34
    7.2 Additional considerations in using a partial guarantee                                 35
    8. Further considerations on format and approach to marketing                              36
    8.1 Opportunity to publicize the Development Policy Operation (DPO)                        36
    8.2 Application of the partial guarantee in different market environments                  36




3
    8.3 Limited benefits of alternative formats perceived at this stage of the product’s development
                                                                                                  38
    9. Recommendations for future issuances                                                      40
    9.1 Considerations on potential structure adaptations to build a robust investor base        40
    9.2 Choice of issuer                                                                         42
    9.3 Address investors’ concerns on the impact of a restructuring on the partial-guarantee    43
    9.4 Further explore new routes to expand the volume of deals and educate the investor base
                                                                                              44
    9.5 Moving towards index eligibility                                                         46
    9.6 Continue work with rating agencies                                                       46
    10. Conclusions                                                                              47




    Appendices
    A.   Ghana 2030 issuance - Termsheet                                                         50
    B.   Overview of WB Guarantee Program                                                        51
    C.   Past WB partially-guaranteed public bonds                                               53




4
    Illustrations


    List of charts
    Chart 1. Ghana 2030 investors breakdown by geography and type                             8
    Chart 2. Portfolio debt flows (USD bn)                                                   15
    Chart 3. Table of selected issuances as of June   13th   2016                            16
    Chart 4. Dedicated EM Hedge Funds (in %)                                                 18
    Chart 5. Total EM Sovereign debt stock by foreign currency rating category (USD bn)      19
    Chart 6B. Evolution of Ghana Sovereign bond yields (in %)                                23
    Chart 7. Evolution of Cedi exchange rate vs. USD (in USD per cedi)                       26
    Chart 8. Ghana 2030 investors breakdown by geography and type                            26
    Chart 9. Ghana 2030 theoretical pricing decomposition analysis                           30
    Chart 11. Fitch Expected recovery based on standalone recovery rate and share of guaranteed
        issuance (in %)                                                                       33
    Chart 12. Theoretical yield range of partially-guaranteed bond (in % depending on the
        guarantee percentage)                                                                37
    Chart 13. Theoretical gross spread savings vs. uncovered bond (in % depending on the
        guarantee percentage)                                                                38
    Chart 14. Comparison of different guarantee structures                                   41
    Chart 15. Credit Default Swaps benchmarks by rating level (in basis points)              42




5
                           1. Executive Summary

    1.1       Introduction

    Rothschild has conducted this study for the World Bank (“WB”) to assess the feasibility and
    attractiveness for sovereigns and sub-sovereigns to access public bond markets for their fiscal
    and infrastructure needs with the support of a WB partial guarantee. This report summarizes the
    findings and presents our recommendations following a three-month assignment.
    Our report is based on the combination of:
             In-house theoretical analysis regarding potential alternative structuring and pricing of
              partially-guaranteed instruments
             Market-based analysis relying on Ghana 2030 feedback, meetings with key fixed income
              investors, banks, interactions with rating agencies and index teams
             We met with over 25 leading EM investors in Europe and in the US along with the 3
              leading credit rating agencies and a leading index provider


    1.2       Ghana partially-guaranteed bond issue
    In October 2016, Ghana issued a USD 1 billion 144A/Reg S registered international bond due
    2030 (“Ghana 2030 bond”), which was partially-guaranteed by the International Development
    Association (‘IDA’) arm of the WB. This credit support also represented the reintroduction by the
    WB of the application of partial guarantees to public bonds.
          Issuer:                 The Republic of Ghana
          Size:                   USD 1 billion, of which USD 400 million guaranteed by IDA
          Date of issuance:       October 14th 2015
          Issuers’ rating:        Moody’s: B3 (Negative Outlook), Fitch: B (Negative Outlook)
          Notes’ rating:          Moody’s: B1, Fitch: BB- (two notch uplift)
          Format:                 144A / Reg S
          Structure:              Senior unsecured, benefiting from the Partial Guarantee
          Tenor:                  15 years, amortizing 3 equal instalments in years 13, 14 and 15
          Use of proceeds:        Refinancing of existing debt



    1.3       Cyclicality of market access for EM issuers
    Financing for Emerging Markets has been increasingly disintermediated. Since the 2008 financial
    crisis, global banks have been forced to reduce their cross-border positions, reversing their large
    expansion in the period 2000-2008. Improved economic indicators in EM economies and low
    yields in advanced economies have attracted a wider range of investors to emerging financial
    markets during the last decade. This phenomenon has contributed to the increasing importance
    of EM debt for investors and the creation of specialized investment vehicles to facilitate
    investment in EM debt markets. The total funding pool for EM bonds stands at ca. USD1 trillion




6
    under management, which represents the largest pool of capital available for emerging markets
    risk.1
    However, market volatility is pronounced in EM markets, partly due to the macro-financial volatility
    of issuers. This is also due to the structure of the EM investor base which is impacted by the
    activities of a small group of market leaders and forced divestments by index-tracking funds.
    Volatility in portfolio flows mean countries risk being unable to access debt capital markets at
    certain times. Secondary market yields skyrocket when capital outflows are significant, in part due
    to limited liquidity. Especially lower rated EM Sovereigns are only able to issue during specific
    periods, referred to as market windows. They are therefore much more impacted by external
    shocks and may not have control over the timing of their issuances. Not all debt issuances
    occurring in capital markets are successful and not all are oversubscribed.
    Due to market windows, even for Sovereigns with similar macro characteristics and credit ratings,
    the amount raised, its cost and the success of the issuance can be significantly different
    depending on when the issue is made. Some issuers may even have to pull back issuances after
    a roadshow due to lack of demand. For example, over the second half of 2015 and early 2016,
    significant capital outflows prevented most EM issuers from accessing markets. A number of
    issuers had to pull back from the market or rescale their target issue size.

    1.4          Context on the Ghana credit at the time of issuance
    Given this negative market backdrop and a challenging credit story, Ghana did not have access
    to the international bond market on a standalone basis in October 2015. Despite the on-track IMF
    program, the drop in oil and commodity prices, as well as the Cedi instability, were having a
    negative impact.
        Evolution of Ghana and Other EM Sovereign bond yields (in %)   Evolution of Oil Price (in US$)




        Evolution of Cedi exchange rate vs. USD (in USD per cedi)      Evolution of Ghana Sovereign bond yields (in %)




        Source; Bloomberg




    1
        IMF, April 2015, https://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2015/01/pdf/c3.pdf




7
    On the other hand, in the context of the IMF program, the refinancing of expensive short-term
    borrowings was critical to reduce further fiscal impact. Ghana had USD100m of its IDA allocation
    left at the WB which it could borrow as USD100m or use as a USD400m guarantee given the way
    guarantees are booked. This leverage benefit, amongst others, led the Government of Ghana to
    request IDA to provide a Policy-Based Guarantee (‘PBG’) as credit enhancement to enable
    market access in these difficult conditions.

    1.5       Strategic transaction for Ghana which yielded significant benefits
    The WB and the Government initiated a macroeconomic reform operation titled First
    Macroeconomic Stability for Competitiveness and Growth which was structured to include a
    USD400m guarantee to enable the raising of up to USD1bn in the international bond markets.
    The WB’s macroeconomic reform program and presence of the WB team during roadshow
    meetings alongside the government of Ghana underlined the support Ghana had received from
    the international community and communicated the merits of its homegrown reform program.
    The transaction milestones included the following:
       i.     First PBG supported bond issuance in the market in 14 years
       ii.    Longest Eurobond tenor of 15 years first achieved by a Sub-Saharan African Sovereign
              (except South Africa)
      iii.    Reducing yields by 150-200bps compared to a theoretical uncovered 15Y Eurobond
              (theoretical because Ghana did not have standalone access)
      iv.     100% oversubscribed order book with a diversified investor base compared to standalone
              bonds
    Furthermore, c. 15% of the final order book went to new investors that helped expand the investor
    base.
    The proceeds of the issue were used by Ghana to refinance short-term domestic debt (90 days
    to 2 years) coming up for refinancing bearing a nominal interest rate of 25%, at a time when there
    was no market access. Cedi has also experienced considerable stability since the Ghana 2030
    issuance.


    1.6       Feedback from investors and other counterparties
     Chart 1. Ghana 2030 investors breakdown by geography and type
                                                                               Insurance
                                                                    Other      & Pension
                                 Other   Europe                      9%          6%
                                  1%      8%                                               Banks
                                                                                            7%




                                                   UK
                                                  30%



                 US
                61%



                                                                       Funds
                                                                        78%



    Source Joint Lead Managers

    Feedback from the investor meetings can be summarized as follows:
     Investment rationale for investors: Investors choosing to invest in the Eurobond underlined the
      importance of WB support as a necessary credit enhancement to make them comfortable with
      the offering. Investors firstly assessed Ghana’s standalone creditworthiness, which they




8
       considered as the key investment driver. Being convinced by the credit was a necessary
       condition for investment without being a sufficient one, and the partial guarantee was
       instrumental in the final decision to invest. Discussions focused on the country’s growt h story,
       its ongoing fiscal consolidation, WB macroeconomic stability program, the involvement of
       bilateral organizations and the on-track IMF program. Investors benefited from the Bank’s
       independent opinion on the country and were able to rely on a set of prior actions as part of
       the WB and IMF reform program helping to lay a foundation for positive medium and long-term
       prospects. Investors perceived the guarantee as a signal of the WB’s faith in the credit and
       economic fundamentals of the country.
     Impact of JPM EM bond index exclusion: Exclusion from the index was seen as limiting liquidity
      and trading on the secondary market. Despite such limitations, the issue still managed to
      benefit from 100% oversubscription from a large investor base, indicating the advantage of
      WB partial guarantees. Contrary to expectations, over the first six months following the
      transaction, analysis shows that trading was higher than on other Ghana bonds – probably
      due to the size and timing of the partially-guaranteed issuance. However, some investors
      expressed concern that the trading could further decrease over time without index inclusion.
     Credit ratings: Fitch and Moody’s are the only two rating agencies that give a rating uplift to
      partially-guaranteed sovereign transactions. Standard & Poor’s has taken the view that the
      lack of a standard sovereign bankruptcy code would prevent them from assigning value to
      partial guarantees. Fitch and Moody’s both provided two notch uplifts to the transaction, rating
      it B1 / BB- vs. standalone sovereign rating of Ghana which was B3 / B. While investors also
      performed their own internal analysis, they paid close attention to the rationale of rating
      agencies underpinning the rating uplift.
     Sales process and pricing of the instrument: Investors’ view of the condition of Ghana’s public
      finances and its need for a large issuance within a short timeframe introduced additional
      challenges in the issuance process. Investors also needed further explanation to understand
      features regarding the triggers of the guarantee, the implications of various restructuring
      scenarios and key differences with previous guaranteed structures on the market.
       Nonetheless, Ghana was able to achieve spread savings of c. 150-200 bps vs where a
       theoretical standalone bond may have priced. While many of the challenges were as a result
       of relatively new structure and challenging market environment, more such issuances could
       provide opportunities to improve the understanding of investors and potentially gain additional
       pricing benefits.

    1.7     Benefits and considerations for issuers in general
    The benefits and considerations surrounding partially-guaranteed bonds can be summarized as
    follows:
     Benefits                                   Considerations
                                                 Signaling effect of requiring support by IFIs: Some
       Demonstrate international support,        market participants may perceive the use of a
        bridge the knowledge gap                  guarantee as a sign of weakness. However,
                                                  investors also take comfort that the role of IFIs
       Enhancing access to international         improve the credibility of the issuance
        capital markets                           underpinned by a reform program.
                                                 Opportunity cost of the guarantee when replacing
       Extend maturities                         concessional loans with low price and long tenor:
                                                  There is a trade-off to be made between the
       Reduced funding costs                     quantum of financing and external benefits
                                                  obtained through the use of guarantees vs. low
       Increasing the investor base
                                                  cost of concessional WB loans




9
                                                 Risking cannibalization of investor bases between
        Tightening of yields for existing
                                                  Sovereigns and its SOEs may come up as a
         instruments
                                                  concern in instances where the sovereign’s
                                                  investor base lacks depth and the partially-
        Increasing available funding for
                                                  guaranteed SOE instrument is priced widely vs
         private projects
                                                  the sovereign
                                                 Risk of yield curve distortion for Eurobonds: It is
                                                  essential for an issuer to develop a non-
                                                  guaranteed yield curve to support and optimize
                                                  the pricing of its future instruments. This needs to
                                                  be weighed against the benefits of a partial
                                                  guarantee




     1.8     Further considerations on format and approach to marketing
     In light of the Ghana experience as well as the above mentioned benefits and considerations, a
     number of practical recommendations can be drawn.
      Investors are keen to find out more about WB involvement on the ground while building their
       credit view of the Issuer. Roadshows present an opportunity to publicize the DPF or IPF
       accompanying the guarantee. In the marketing of future transactions, there would be merit in
       highlighting more strongly the prior actions or undertakings by the issuer that form the basis of
       the underlying WB operation. An even greater focus on objectives, ambition, detailed planning
       of reforms and follow-up implications of the WB’s involvement should be explored.
      Application of the partial guarantee in different markets: The partial guarantee can be
       optimized on a case-by-case basis depending on several factors such as issuer
       characteristics, type of investor targeted (for example public bond, syndicated loan, private
       placement or other) and the general debt market conditions. Analysis should thus be
       undertaken so as to optimize pricing, maturity and guarantee terms, and to adapt the product
       to the relevant market environment. The impact of the guarantee differs depending on the
       issuer as well. B-rated countries benefit from a significant pricing impact, improved maturity
       and facilitated market access. With lower uncovered yields, BB-rated countries have an impact
       framed around the messaging of the WB support and potentially reaching investment-grade.
      Other placement formats: Private placements (as opposed to public placements) allow a more
       flexible and confidential process, as well as raising smaller quanta of debt compared to
       international public bond issuances. In the Emerging Markets space, private placements are
       currently not favored by real money investors, essentially due to their lack of liquidity. Loan
       formats (whether syndicated or private) interestingly provide flexibility in the structure
       conception and privacy as to final terms for the borrower. However, there are few institutional
       investors (apart from infrastructure funds, some commercial banks and some insurance
       companies) who have the possibility of investing in partially-guaranteed loans, which limits the
       investor base.



     1.9     Conclusions


     The Ghana 2030 bond benefiting from an IDA partial guarantee set a strong precedent and
     opened the way for other select Sovereigns, quasi-sovereigns and SOEs to access capital
     markets in a challenging environment.




10
     In the third quarter of 2015, while a number of issuers had to pull or scale back issuances, Ghana
     was able to raise USD1 billion under turbulent market conditions. Despite being impacted by
     negative market sentiment and a challenging credit story, Ghana nonetheless achieved 150-200
     bps in spread savings. Demonstrating its homegrown reform program and the support of
     international organizations enabled market access when there was none.



     1.9.1      Types of issuers which could benefit from a partial guarantee
     Based on the Ghana experience and taking into account the recommendations discussed in this
     report, we believe partially-guaranteed bond issuances can be impactful for selected types of
     issuers, which exhibit one or more of the following characteristics:
      Countries with limited concessional funding allocation but on the path towards sector reforms
       and development of investment programs by crowding-in private sector;
      Issuers which may benefit from accessing a completely new investor base (for example
       investment-grade, inaugural issuances in a different currency);
      Complicated credit story involving some form of turnaround or reform with the assistance of
       WB or other international organizations;
      New issuers without previous market experience either in the sovereign or sub-sovereign
       space;
      Access problems (volume and/or tenor) which would benefit from demonstrating support from
       the international community.

     1.9.2      Recommendations to optimize and scale-up the product
     Looking forward, based on discussions with the various stakeholders including member countries,
     investors, rating agencies, banks and JPM EMB index provider, our key recommendations for
     further developing the product and maximizing its impact can be summarized as follows:
      Keeping a broadly stable structure would ensure continuity and facilitate the emergence of an
       asset class: Maintaining the existing rolling guarantee structure seems to be the optimal way
       to accustom the public bond market investors to the instrument. The level of guarantee should
       be adapted to the rating level targeted for the issue for successful execution.
        Expand volume of deals and continue education of the investor base: Building a pipeline of
         circa USD5 billion per annum in volume would help in establishing this product as a new asset
         class with investors. Educating investment banks and investors about the partially-guaranteed
         bond structure is critical to extracting the best value from the WB guarantee. Attracting a solid
         base of new investors can be facilitated by the identification of a pool of cornerstone anchor
         investors to support future deals. Another idea may be the creation of a fund of institutional
         investors for partially-guaranteed transactions.
      Addressing investors’ concerns on the impact of a restructuring on the partial-guarantee: Given
       the consent requirements of the WB in the event of a restructuring, it would as a minimum
       measure, be useful to clarify how the institution would react in standard restructuring scenarios.
       Further work should be pursued with legal counsels in order to assess what can be added to
       the guarantee agreement or the prospectus, so as to limit uncertainty on this point.
        Moving towards index eligibility: Focusing the attention of investors on a stable structure can
         guide the market towards inclusion of the product in standard indices. In particular, an inclusion
         in the JPM’s Emerging Markets index would make the product more attractive. A short-term
         objective should therefore be to build a significant volume of issuances in time for the next
         JPMorgan EMBI index annual meeting.
        Continue work with rating agencies: Past experience and discussions with Moody’s and Fitch
         Ratings have led to the conclusion that reaching a two-notch uplift is possible with a 40%




11
     guarantee for a B-rated issuer. The next step is therefore to determine how alternative
     structures would be rated depending on credit standings and Sovereign / SOE, especially with
     regards to private transactions for which there is less need for standardization. The support of
     agencies will be key to facilitate the instrument’s further deployment.




12
                               2. Introduction

     2.1          Purpose of the Study

     Rothschild has conducted a study for the World Bank (“WB”) to assess the feasibility and
     attractiveness for sovereigns and sub-sovereigns to access public bond markets for their fiscal
     and infrastructure needs with the support of a WB partial guarantee. This report summarizes the
     findings and presents our recommendations following a three-month assignment.
     In the context of the current disintermediation of Emerging Market financing, growing development
     finance needs and to achieve further leveraging of WB resources, the WB has reintroduced as a
     new product the application of partial guarantees 2 to public bonds3. The first instance of this was
     through the guarantee support it provided the USD1 billion Ghana 2030 public bond. Following
     up on the Ghana issuance in October 2015, this report looks at the application of partial
     guarantees for sovereigns and sub-sovereigns / SOEs to access commercial finance on a senior
     unsecured basis and assesses the potential to build this as a new asset class, based on analysis
     and market feedback. It does not look at other forms of WB guarantees such as Loan Guarantees
     and Payment Guarantees, which have been widely used and are well-established in project
     finance transactions.
     Our report is based on the combination of:
                In-house theoretical analysis regarding potential alternative structuring and pricing of
                 partially-guaranteed instruments;
                Market-based analysis relying on Ghana 2030 feedback, meetings with key fixed income
                 investors, banks, interactions with rating agencies and index teams.
     Together with the WB Financial Solutions Team, we met with over 25 leading fixed income
     investors with varied investment philosophies. Our research also brought us to analyze rating
     methodologies and organize specific meetings with the three major rating agencies’ sovereign
     teams. Finally, we also met the JPMorgan index team.
     This report relies on candid feedback from opinion-leader market participants and provides
     perspectives on future transactions.




     2
         Please refer to Annex D for an overview of WB guarantees and types of guarantees available
     3
         Please refer to Annex E for earlier examples of WB partial guarantees applied to public bonds issued by sovereigns or
         quasi-sovereigns




13
                             3. General market context for partial
                                guarantees

     3.1       Accessing financial markets for Emerging Market4 borrowers
     About debt capital markets
     Capital markets are financial markets where participants can buy and sell medium and long-term
     debt or equity-backed securities. These securities are listed and tradable, unlike most regular
     bank loans. Such borrowings are generally subject to fewer constraints and covenants on issuers
     than lending from banks. Sovereigns and corporates have found financing costs to be lower and
     maturities longer in debt capital markets rather than with bank borrowing. Together with the
     increasing impact of Basel II / III regulations on bank balance sheet availability for long tenors,
     capital markets have experienced significant growth over recent years.
     Financing for Emerging Markets has also been increasingly disintermediated. Since the 2008
     financial crisis, global banks have been forced to reduce their cross-border positions, reversing
     their large expansion in the 2000-2008 period. This trend has been reinforced in recent years both
     for Sovereign and corporate issuers. Capital markets today are the primary source of external
     funding for emerging market (‘EM’) sovereigns, although there are significant degrees of
     access/investor following for different sovereigns driven by regional, economic and other factors.
     The bank loan market for sovereign financings is limited and capital markets are usually favored
     when the sovereign has access to it.
     Corporate EM borrowers continue to rely heavily on bank lending, however, both in foreign and
     local currencies. While there could be other factors for this, such as reliance on relationship
     banking, smaller deal sizes and lack of publicly rated issuers, their access to capital markets is
     nonetheless more limited, with constraining high yield covenants for a majority of EM issuers rated
     below the Investment-grade category. Corporates’ yield curves are closely linked to that of the
     corresponding Sovereign.
     Cyclicality of EM access to capital markets and concept of market windows
     In capital markets, there is a clear distinction between investment-grade and sub-investment-
     grade issuers. Market makers for sub-investment-grade sovereigns consist of highly selective and
     specialized investors focusing exclusively on Emerging Market credits. Unlike Investment-grade
     Sovereigns, EM entities (most of which are rated sub-investment-grade) are only able to issue
     during specific periods which are limited in time because of volatility, and with a limited amount of
     available funding. These periods are referred to as market windows.
     Due to significant volatility in portfolio inflows or outflows, such countries risk being unable to
     access debt capital markets at certain times. Secondary market yields skyrocket when capital
     outflows are significant, in part due to the limited liquidity of EM sovereign bonds. For example,
     over the second half of 2015, significant capital outflows prevented most EM issuers from
     accessing markets. EM Sovereigns are therefore much more impacted by external shocks and
     may not have control over the timing of their issuances.


     4
        Emerging markets should meet one of the following two criteria: (i) Low-lower-middle, or upper-middle income
     economy as defined by WB (WB’s main classification criterion ⇒GNI per capita) or (ii) Low investable market
     capitalization relative to most recent GDP figures. In contrast, developed markets should meet both of the following
     conditions: (i) GNI per capita exceeds the WB’s upper middle income threshold for at least three consecutive years and
     (ii) Investable market capitalization to GDP in the top 25 percent of the emerging market universe for three consecutive
     years




14
       Chart 2. Portfolio debt flows (USD bn)
       40


       30


       20


       10


        0


      -10


      -20


      -30
            Apr-14          Aug-14              Dec-14      Apr-15      Aug-15          Dec-15          Apr-16

                     Emerging Asia          Latin America   Emerging Europe      Africa & Middle East
      Source National Sources, Bloomberg, IIF


     Not all debt issuances occurring in capital markets are successful and not all are oversubscribed.
     Due to market windows, even for Sovereigns with similar macro characteristics and credit ratings,
     the amount raised, its cost and the success of the issuance can be significantly different
     depending on its timing. Some issuers may even have to pull back issuances after a roadshow,
     due to lack of demand. As an example, in 2015, Iraq and Angola organized roadshows without
     eventually deciding to go to the market. Another example is Cameroon, which was the seventh
     African issuer in 2015 and had to significantly reduce the size of its issuance compared to its
     market announcement. It also ended up issuing with a higher coupon than expected. Overall,
     accessing capital markets in non-Investment-grade EM regions remains challenging compared to
     the ease of access for Investment-grade credits.
     See Chart 2.
     Financial deepening in Emerging Markets
     Financial depth is defined as the size of financial markets relative to economic activity. Financial
     markets in EM economies have generally deepened over the past decade. However, the depth
     of their financial markets typically still remains limited compared to advanced economies. Despite
     an increasing number of dedicated investment vehicles by insurance companies, and the growth
     of markets for international corporate EM debt and interest rate derivatives, the depth of funding
     remains limited.
     Types of emerging markets debt
     EM debt instruments are issued by three types of issuers: i) Sovereigns, ii) quasi-sovereigns (also
     called State Owned Enterprises or SOEs), and iii) financial or non-financial corporate issuers.
     This debt can be structured as external or domestic debt.
     The rationale for investing in EM is usually a mix of (i) promising local economic indicators and
     especially strong growth prospects, (ii) undervalued exchange rates and (iii) attractive yields.




15
     Historically, investors were primarily interested in external debt of sovereign and quasi-sovereign
     issuers to reduce exchange rate risks for themselves. With the maturing of economies, appetite
     for local currency domestic debt increased..
     Issuances of bonds by quasi-Sovereigns/SOEs to support the funding of specific projects are
     included in the EM space; these instruments are used for refinancings or to finance existing and
     new infrastructure – to that extent being significantly different from project bonds. The pool of
     investors interested in SOE debt is partly the same as for Sovereign, although some infrastructure
     investors may also be interested.
     The number of corporate issuances increases after the creation of a yield curve by the Sovereign.
     Corporates are able to benefit from the yield curve created by the Sovereign as a basis for their
     own and reduce financing costs by accessing a larger pool of investors.


        Chart 3. Table of selected issuances as of June 13th 2016
                                                                                              Yield as of
                                                        Amount                   Yield at
     Issuer                       Date of                                                     June 2016
                                             Maturity   issued   Issue Price   issuance in
     (S&P/Moody’s/Fitch)         issuance                                                    (mid-YTM) in
                                                          (m)                       %
                                                                                                  %

     Africa

     Ghana                         Oct-15    Oct-30     $1 000      100,0         10,8           10,4
     (B-/B3/B)                     Sep-14    Jan-26     $1 000       99,2         8,1            10,7
                                   Aug-13    Aug-23     $1 000       99,2         7,9            10,8

     Côte d'Ivoire                 Mar-15    Mar-28     $1 000       98,0          6,4           6,9
     (NR/Ba3/B+)                   Jul-14    Jul-24      $750        98,1          5,4           6,4

     Zambia                        Jul-15    Jul-27     $1 250       97,3          9,0           11,4
     (B/B3/B)                      Apr-14    Apr-24     $1 000       99,2          8,5           11,4
                                   Sep-12    Sep-22      $750        98,1          5,4           10,4

     Latin America

     Venezuela                     Oct-11    Oct-26     $3 000       95,0         11,8           29,4
     (CCC/Caa3/CCC)                Aug-11    Aug-31     $4 200      100,0         12,0           28,4
                                   Aug-10    Aug-22     $3 000      100,0         12,8           32,9
                                   Oct-09    Oct-19     $2 496      140,0         7,8            42,9

     Europe

     Serbia                        Dec-13    Dec-18     $1 000       98,9          5,9           3,0
     (BB-/B1/BB-)                  Feb-13    Feb-20     $1 500       98,4          4,9           3,9
                                   Nov-12    Nov-17      $750        99,1          5,3           2,4

     Croatia                       Nov-13    Jan-24     $1 750       98,5          6,0           4,6
     (BB/Ba2/BB)                   Apr-13    Apr-23     $1 500       99,1          5,5           4,4
                                   Apr-12    Apr-17     $1 500       99,5          6,3           2,0


     Source Bloomberg, S&P, Moody’s, Fitch


     3.2         Types of emerging markets investors
     Improved economic indicators in EM economies and low yields in advanced economies have
     attracted a wider range of investors to emerging financial markets during the last decade. This
     phenomenon has contributed to the increasing importance of EM debt for investors and the
     creation of specialized investment vehicles to facilitate investment in EM debt markets.




16
     Overview of EM investors
     As previously mentioned, Emerging Market investors are influenced by the opinion of ca. 40
     market leaders which have the largest impact on secondary market trading levels. Typical buyers
     of EM public and private bonds can be divided into two main categories of investors:
          i)        real money accounts5, including asset managers, fund managers, institutional
                    investors and infrastructure investors, and
          ii)       hedge funds6.
     The total funding pool for EM bonds stands at ca. USD1 trillion under management, which
     represents the largest pool of capital available for emerging markets risk.7 Despite recent
     stagnation, the share of global funds and hedge funds investing in EM products has increased
     over the last decade.

     Specific investment requirements
     There is a broad range of investors in EM debt as described above, and based on their specific
     investment objectives, they would be able to/interested in buying a particular security depending
     on its yield, rating, geography and type of issuer. Overall, EM investors usually require
     instruments to be listed and rated, in particular to increase liquidity and disclosure requirements.
     Specific investors such as hedge funds are usually looking for high yielding issuances and are
     therefore willing to trade part of their requirements to gain higher return. For example, some may
     be interested in private placements, despite lower liquidity, to gain higher yield.

     Managing EM investment funds and reaching a stable investor base
     Within real money, there are several types of mutual funds8, each of them inducing specific
     investment behavior and strategies. Broadening the investor base for a Sovereign issuer is crucial
     to benefit from a wide demand on issuances. However, not all investors are similar in their
     investment profile. Buy and hold investors can be supportive in difficult times for the issuer. Short-
     term investors can buy significant portions of debt, but will not remain in the credit in difficult times.
     In recent years, Exchange Traded Funds (ETF) launched by fund managers to satisfy retail
     investor demand for EM risk have increased significantly. These securities track the evolution of
     a specific metric and replicate its behavior. For specific EM trackers, tracking indexes is a
     standard practice. As a result, fund managers have little ability to decide on their allocation of
     funds outside the index in question. Specifically, when instruments are removed from indexes, or
     should the rating go to the sub-Investment-grade area, depending on the ETF’s mandate,
     automatic divestment can be triggered. This can spread uncertainty and volatility among the
     investor base in EM credits.




     5
       A "Real Money Account" is an account managed by a money manager that has funds to buy securities at their full value.
     Real money does not borrow or leverage to buy the securities but has the actual cash required to buy the securities.
     6
       Hedge funds are alternative investments using pooled funds that may use a number of different strategies in order to
     earn active return for their investors. Hedge funds may be aggressively managed or make use of derivatives and leverage
     in both domestic and international markets with the goal of generating high returns (either in an absolute sense or over a
     specified market benchmark).
     7
       IMF, April 2015, https://www.imf.org/External/Pubs/FT/GFSR/2015/01/pdf/c3.pdf
     8
       A mutual fund is an investment vehicle that is made up of a pool of funds collected from many investors for the purpose
     of investing in securities such as stocks, bonds, money market instruments and similar assets




17
        Chart 4. Dedicated EM Hedge Funds (in %)



                          Number of dedicated EM
                          HF
                          in % of total HF




                                                                            AUM of dedicated EM
                                                                            HF
                                                                            in % of AUM




     Source IMF April 2014, How do changes in the investor base and financial deepening affect EM economies?



     Given the automaticity of investments of ETFs and the amount they represent in the total
     Emerging Market debt pool, managing the non-ETF investor base is crucial to avoid fleeing of
     investors during difficult times. Ensuring communications with them, especially real money
     investors, should create a trusting relationship.
     It is recommended that EM issuers adopt a differentiated approach to have a diversified investor
     base. Institutional investors and asset managers with a long-term perspective on the country
     should become trusted partners. Infrastructure investors should be approached with long-term
     plans. Hedge funds, on the other hand, should be considered for initial issuances, during the
     building of a yield curve for the country.
     Widening the investor base to stabilize secondary market performance and improve
     access to markets
     Through the broadening of the investor base, issuers are able to build a strong relationship with
     key investors who know the credit and will support its growth over the long run. Such knowledge
     reduces volatility of the secondary market curve, since these investors will then have the
     confidence to take long-only positions.
     Furthermore, this could facilitate return to capital markets with a wider pool of potential buyers,
     irrespective of negative short-term news. With a sustained access to markets, a sovereign can
     build a more precise and comprehensive yield curve over time, reducing its financing costs in the
     process.
     Identified means of expanding an investor base include specific non-deal roadshows, informal
     discussions with key accounts, ongoing discussion with existing investors and at the time of
     transactions, a roadshow targeted to a wide range of investors (different locations, investment
     styles, and so forth).

     3.3        Emerging Markets facing ever-increasing financing needs
     Emerging markets are currently facing unprecedented financing needs to sustain global
     development. There is a clear call for further financing for Sovereigns, State Owned Entities as
     well as for infrastructure projects. Sustained growth in emerging markets and developing
     economies requires long-term, reliable capital to finance productive investment. Such growth of




18
     financing requirements make alternative funding sources necessary, ranging from capital markets
     to project financing, microcredit and specific financing instruments – project bonds, green bonds,
     etc.
     Key figures regarding EM financing needs and upcoming financing challenges
     In 2016, Emerging Market Sovereigns are expected to borrow an equivalent of USD1.2 trillion
     from long-term commercial sources – of which 51.4% is to refinance maturing long-term debt9.
     The total debt stock is therefore expected to reach USD6.8 trillion by 2016 a 9.4% year-on-year
     increase. This represents over USD500bn of additional funding needs for Sovereigns for 2016
     alone. Furthermore, global needs for infrastructure funding in the next 15 years are estimated at
     USD57 trillion10.

          Chart 5. Total EM Sovereign debt stock by foreign currency rating category (USD bn)




     Source S&P - Emerging Markets Sovereign Debt Report 2016




     Source S&P - Emerging Markets Sovereign Debt Report 2016


     After a period of growth in EM issuances, volumes started plateauing in 2014 / 2015. As a
     consequence of subdued growth expectations due to falling prices of commodities and in
     combination with increasing interest rates in the US, the Eurobond market for EM countries was
     hit by net outflows of EM capital and an increase in yields. Due to these fragile market conditions,
     the availability of long-term financing became more constrained, which has had a particularly
     negative impact on developing economies lacking reliable access to international bond markets.
     Low-rated Sovereigns are now facing challenging market access conditions. Therefore, there is
     a growing need to enhance market access as well as diversify sources of funding, in particular by
     requesting Multilateral Development Banks support (‘MDBs’).
     At the same time, fiscal space has been eroded by the global financial crisis and the direct lending
     capacity of MDBs remains constrained while regulation and capital requirements on commercial
     and investment banks’ balance sheets have been increasingly lim iting available resources. This
     heightens the importance of the official sector’s catalytic role in mobilizing long-term financing
     from the private sector by drawing on its ability to reduce and share risk.




     9
         Standard & Poor’s, Emerging Markets Sovereign Debt Report 2016: Borrowing Is Pointing Up This Year, Feb 2016
     10
          McKinsey Global Institute




19
     3.4        Multilateral Development Banks providing innovative financings to
                expand their balance-sheets
     International Financial Institutions11 (‘IFIs’), and MDBs within IFIs, have been adopting innovative
     ways to expand the use of their balance sheets to match the increasing financing needs and to
     facilitate market access of borrowers within their available lending capacity. They are also
     committed to financing the United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals (‘SDG’s), which
     demand ambition in using the “billions” of dollars in current flows of Official Developmen t
     Assistance (‘ODA’) and all available resources to attract, leverage and mobilize “trillions” in
     investments of all kinds – public and private, national and global. In this context, leveraging and
     crowding-in private sector financing has been a key theme for the IFIs and MDBs. Specifically,
     we understand that the WB is keen on remaining at the forefront of innovative financing products.
     Structuring partial guarantees to support Sovereign, sub-Sovereign and SOE transactions with
     innovative features may allow the WB to pursue new routes to support development.
     MDBs expand their balance-sheets
     MDBs have been looking for innovative means to leverage their balance sheet in order to finance
     development programs together with policy advice and technical support in the field. Among these
     instruments are special grants and loans, guarantees, risk-sharing vehicles, equity investments
     or policy-based aid programs.
     The WB Group’s “margins for maneuver” initiative is leveraging IBRD’s balance sheet and IDA is
     discussing ways to leverage its capital for non-concessional loans. IFC is also expanding its Asset
     Management Company and syndications platforms to mobilize more third party capital. In
     addition, the WBG is hosting the Global Infrastructure Facility, which will support greater
     collaboration in preparing and structuring complex infrastructure projects to attract long-term
     financing from private investors.
     In Asia, the Asian Development Bank (‘ADB’) combined its balance sheet with the Asian
     Development Fund, which boosted ADB’s total annual lending and grant approvals to as high as
     USD20 billion, 50% higher than the previous level.
     In Europe, the European Investment Bank (‘EIB’) blended concessional and non-concessional
     resources into risk-sharing projects, and thus reached an acceptable level of creditworthiness for
     private investors. EIB project bonds have been designed to address large EU infrastructure
     financing needs in the aftermath of the financial crisis. Project bond issues had become more
     difficult to achieve since 2007 / 2008 as monoline insurers which used to guarantee project bonds
     (“monoline wraps”) have been far less active. The EIB and the European Commission have
     sought to fill this credit enhancement funding gap through the “Project Bond Initiative”. T he EIB
     provides credit enhancement to increase the credit rating of eligible projects and thus attract
     institutional investors back into project bonds. This credit enhancement is structured around a
     subordinated instrument (both funded and unfunded) subscribed by the EIB to support senior
     project bonds and enhance their recovery prospects.
     MDBs mobilize commercial financing
     MDBs need to optimize the use of their balance sheets to address development financing
     challenges. This can be obtained by (i) further leveraging their balance sheet, (ii) attracting private
     funding at the country / project level (iii) judicious use of concessional financing – such as new
     areas or high-risk environments to create a demonstration effect and build track-record to allow
     crowding-in private investments or (iv) mitigating risk of existing exposure (via syndication,
     reinsurance etc.) to increase room for new instruments. The former would include capitalization
     and rating implications which are not discussed in this report. The latter can be obtained by
     reducing the risk of the underlying credit, both quantitatively and qualitatively. Providing partial

     11
       International financial institutions (IFIs) are institutions that provide financial support (via grants and loans) for economic
     and social development activities in developing countries




20
     guarantees to mobilize private capital constitutes an efficient means of increasing the quantum of
     available financing for MDBs’ clients while reducing their cost of financing.
     Overall, for every dollar invested by MDBs’ shareholders, new initiatives are able to commit 2 to
     5 dollars in further financing every year through the leveraging of MDB balance sheets while
     retaining AAA ratings. If USD1 in MDB financing leverages 4 to USD10 in additional financing,
     additional private investments can continue to increase, as indicated, by a fourfold in increase in
     private sector investments in the last 15 years.12




     12
          “From Billions to Trillions : MDB Contributions to Financing for Development”, Jul 2015, WB




21
                          4. Evaluation of the Ghana 2030
                             transaction issued in October 2015

     4.1       Context on the Ghana credit at the time of issuance
     In October 2015, Ghana issued a USD 1 billion 144A/Reg S registered international bond due
     2030 (“Ghana 2030 bond”), which was partially-guaranteed by the International Development
     Association (‘IDA’) arm of the WB. Leading up to the issuance, the country was going through
     significant economic turmoil. Year 2015 was its fourth consecutive year of economic slowdown.
     The main cause was the end of the super commodity cycle which resulted in falling commodity
     prices such as oil or gold, and a deep domestic energy crisis.
     Chart 6 A. Evolution of Oil Price (in US$)




     Ghana had entered an IMF Extended Credit Facility Program in April 2015. The program had
     been requested on August 8th 2014 from the IMF in the wake of domestic economic difficulties
     and entailed a USD918m credit facility. The disbursement of funds was structured around eight
     reviews over the course of three years.
     Nonetheless, market perception of Ghana’s creditworthiness and ability to access markets had
     significantly deteriorated by this time. Investors expressed concerns regarding indebtedness
     levels and debt sustainability, and questioned the ongoing fiscal adjustments. In particular, it was
     pointed out that Ghana’s credit story was historically reliant on commodities and the increase of
     energy production.
     Prior to the issuance, in September 2015, the first review of the IMF program was published. Key
     conclusions were:
              Performance criteria had been met, except for one requirement;
              Most structural benchmarks were put in place after some delays;
              Further efforts on fiscal adjustments were required in order to meet fiscal consolidation
               objectives for 2015.
     Despite the satisfactory completion of the review, market perception of the credit remained
     negative, which led to further widening of secondary trading yields for Ghana’s Eurobonds. At the




22
     time of issuance, outstanding bonds were trading at 8.2% for Ghana 2017, 10.6% for Ghana 2023
     and at 10.8% for Ghana 2026.


      Chart 6B. Evolution of Ghana Sovereign bond yields (in %)
         11%
                                                                                              10.59%
                                                                                              10.56.%




          8%                                                                                  8.20%




          5%
           Jan-15                  Apr-15                   Jul-15                   Oct-15


     Source Bloomberg
                                Ghana 2017         Ghana 2023        Ghana 2026

     Furthermore, EM Sovereign bond market conditions were particularly unstable at the time. The
     general macroeconomic context in most emerging economies was bleak. Several key countries
     were facing substantial domestic imbalances, lower growth and pressure on exchange rates.
     China’s plummeting equity markets and reduced growth contributed to further destabilization in
     the global markets. At the same time, a long-awaited hike in Fed rates increased uncertainty and
     volatility. As a result, fewer credits considered issuing, and issuers choosing not to delay their
     transaction were considered as requiring an immediate inflow of foreign hard currency.


      “The pricing benefit was material for Ghana since, at the time, Gh ana would have issued at a
      yield of 13.5 to 14%.” An Investor



     Chart 6 C. Evolution of Ghana and Other EM Sovereign bond yields (in %)




23
     Given this negative market context, Ghana would not have had access to the international
     bond market on a standalone basis. On the other hand, the refinancing of expensive short-term
     borrowings was critical to reduce further fiscal impact. Therefore, the Government of Ghana
     requested IDA to provide a Policy-Based Guarantee (‘PBG’) as credit enhancement to enable
     market access in these difficult conditions. Ghana had USD100m of its IDA allocation left at the
     WB which it had the option of using as a USD400m guarantee. The WB and the Government
     initiated a macroeconomic reform for the country through a development policy operation “First
     Macroeconomic Stability for Competitiveness and Growth”, which included a USD400m
     guarantee to enable the raising of up to USD1bn in the international bond markets. The WB’s
     macroeconomic reform program and presence of the WB team during roadshow meetings
     alongside the government of Ghana underlined the support it had received from the international
     community and communicated the merits of its homegrown reform program.

     4.2                 Key features of the Ghana 2030 bond partial guarantee
     The guarantee for Ghana was structured as a rolling guarantee for up to USD400m. This entailed
     that the guarantee could be used to pay for any missed scheduled debt service (coupon or
     principal) payments should the need for it occur. In the absence of non-payments, the guarantee
     would roll over to the following scheduled payment dates.

                   500
                   450
                         $400 million rolling
                   400      IDA garantee
                   350
     USD million




                   300
                                      No default
                   250
                                                           No default
                   200
                                                                               No default
                   150
                   100
                    50
                     -
                           1      2       3        4   5       6        7     8   9         10   11     12   13   14   15
                                                                            Years
                                           Guaranteed Coupon                 Coupon              Principal

     Like all other WB Guarantees, the Government entered into an Indemnity Agreement, whereby
     the Government would indemnify the WB / IDA in the event the WB makes payments under the
     Guarantee. Unlike previous transactions partially-guaranteed by the WB at the end of the 1990s
     / early 2000s, the guarantee is not re-instateable. In other words, after a payment by IDA, should
     the government pay IDA back through the Indemnity Agreement, the available amount for future
     guaranteed payments would still be reduced by the used amount.
     Should the government default on the Eurobond, even if investors decided to accelerate the
     security to demand payment of the full principal, the guarantee itself cannot be accelerated and
     would pay out, up to the guaranteed amount, as per the original payment schedule as long as the
     Ghana 2030 bond is outstanding. Any changes to the terms, such as for restructuring of the bond,
     would be subject to WB consent.

     4.3                 Strategic transaction for Ghana which yielded significant benefits
     The USD 1billion proceeds from the Ghana 2030 bond enabled to refinance short-term domestic
     debt (90 days to 2 years) coming up for refinancing bearing a nominal interest rate of 25%, at a
     time when there was no international market access.




24
     The long-term nature of the bond smoothed out the debt maturity profile without increasing the
     total debt stock. It also contributed to reducing interest payments, in an environment of high
     domestic rates prevailing at the time, resulting in interest savings.
     The country was able to extend its funding curve on international markets and further diversify its
     pool of investors.



      “The partial guarantee allowed to have market access at a time when there was none and
      facilitated a reduction in cost. Furthermore, it allowed reaching a $1bn deal while most people
      assumed only $500m could be raised on the markets.” An Investor


     The transaction milestones included the following:
        i.    First PBG bond issuance in the market in 14 years;
       ii.    Longest Eurobond tenor of 15 years first achieved by a Sub-Saharan African Sovereign
              (except South Africa);
       iii.   Reducing yields by 150-200bps compared to a theoretical uncovered 15-year Eurobond
              (based on theoretical comparison);
      iv.     100% oversubscribed order book with a diversified investor base compared to standalone
              bonds.
     Furthermore, c. 15% of final order book went to new investors that helped expand the investor
     base.

     Cedi has also experienced considerable stability since the Ghana 2030 issuance (see Chart 7).

       “The choice for Ghana in terms of available financing unfortunately has been limited, and was
       limited at that time. The access to the sovereign bond market was always part of the financing
       plan. IMF
     [insert  The comment]
                   timing may   not have
                              stressed     been
                                        that eventhe best to
                                                   though    optimize
                                                           the timing ofinterest expense
                                                                          the bond may notgiven
                                                                                             havethe global
                                                                                                   been  the
       market
     best,  the developments,
                government had    noitoption
                                 but   was certainly consistent
                                             since going         with the debt
                                                         to the domestic         management
                                                                            market            strategy
                                                                                   was far more        that
                                                                                                 expensive.
       had been designed under the program. At the time, of course, domestic debt was considerably
       more expensive for Ghana. So we are confident with the pursuit of the fiscal adjustment effort
       in the course of this year and beyond that Ghana will indeed be successful in containing its
       debt.”
      IMF Director of African Department, Madam Antoinette Sayeh




25
      Chart 7. Evolution of Cedi exchange rate vs. USD (in USD per cedi)
     0,33



     0,30



     0,27



     0,24



     0,21
        Jan-15                        Apr-15             Jun-15           Sep-15              Dec-15


     Source Bloomberg as of 31/12/2015




      Chart 8. Ghana 2030 investors breakdown by geography and type
                                                                              Insurance
                                                                  Other       & Pension
                                  Other   Europe                                   6%
                                   1%                              9%
                                           8%                                             Banks
                                                                                           7%




                                                    UK
                                                   30%



             US
            61%



                                                                     Funds
                                                                      78%


     Source Joint Lead Managers




26
                        5. Investment rationale for investors

     5.1     Underlying quality of the credit is the key determining investment
             factor
     The deal’s success partly comes from the marketing effort. In total, Ghana and the WB team met
     circa. 55 different investors on the roadshow, including key London and US fund managers.
     Discussions focused on the country’s growth story, its ongoing fiscal consol idation, WB
     macroeconomic stability program, the involvement of bilateral organizations and the on-track IMF
     program.
     To decide whether to invest in the partially-guaranteed issuance, the majority of investors first
     assessed Ghana’s standalone creditworthiness. They considered it as the key investment driver
     despite the existence of a partial guarantee. Being convinced by the credit was a necessary
     condition for investment without being a sufficient one.
     The transaction was conditional upon Ghana using proceeds to refinance debt and therefore not
     increasing the total stock of debt. However, the market remained concerned about total
     indebtedness which had been rapidly increasing in preceding years. Questions about debt
     sustainability played a crucial role in potential investors’ appetite for the credit.
     After reviewing the underlying creditworthiness, investors proceeded to assess the impact of the
     guarantee. Investors choosing to invest in the issuance underlined the importance of WB support
     as a necessary credit enhancement to make them comfortable with the offering.
       “Governance is a big issue in EM countries which the guarantee addresses.” An Investor


     5.1.1     Institutional support from the WB critical


     The involvement of the WB in preparing the transaction was decisive. In particular, the roadshow
     was smoother and marked by greater transparency compared to previous issuances. Investors
     benefited from the WB’s independent opinion on the country and were able to rely on a set of
     prior actions as part of the WB and IMF reform program helping to lay a foundation for positive
     medium and long-term prospects. Investors perceived the guarantee as a signal of the WB’s faith
     in the credit and economic fundamentals of the country.


       “Ghana has significantly improved on the communications front between the roadshows. It is
       very positive to see support from the WB for these countries and having the WB at roadshows
       has a significant impact.” An Investor


     The signaling effect of having senior WB staff alongside the issuer during the roadshow was also
     critical. The staff helped the government explain the rationale for the WB’s involvement and why
     the WB’s approval of a PBG could be seen as a sign of strength. Overall, increased WB staff
     involvement facilitated the understanding by investors of the partially-guaranteed structure.




27
     5.2        Impact of index exclusion


          “Inclusion in indexes is governed by country rules based in part (i) on the country’s WB status
          and (ii) investment rules allowing replication of the structure to ensure issuances are
          comparable. Deciding this will require feedback from investors.” JPMorgan Index Team



     Investors follow two main indexes in the EM asset class: JPMorgan’s EMBI index and Barclays’
     EM Aggregate. These benchmarks are made through independent analysis and are based on
     strict eligibility rules such as a minimum face value of USD500mn for JPM’s EMBI, as well as
     secondary market trading liquidity criteria. The Ghana 2030 bond was included in Barclays’ index
     but not in JPM’s EMBI, which is the most widely followed by fund managers. The rationale was
     that its partial guarantee structure did not meet the existing index eligibility rules, which explicitly
     prohibit partially-guaranteed transactions.

          “The lack of index inclusion in JPMorgan index could be a major issue, since investors are
          inclined not to invest outside of index because of transparency of information and the difficulty
          to track pricing.” An Investor


     Index exclusion was highlighted by many investors as a negative factor prior to and after the
     transaction. Indeed, a significant portion of funds under management can only be invested in
     bonds included in the EMBI JPMorgan index. The JPMorgan EMBI family covers over USD600bn
     assets-under-management, of which USD250bn are in the global diversified index13. Many
     portfolio managers are under scrutiny by their clients regarding decisions to invest in bonds
     outside the relevant indices. The result was a reduced pool of available funds for partially-
     guaranteed transactions, notwithstanding the quality of the credit.
     Exclusion from the index was seen as limiting liquidity and trading on the secondary market.
     Despite such limitations, the issue still managed to benefit from 100 % oversubscription from a
     large investor base, indicating the advantage of WB partial guarantees. Contrary to expectations,
     over the first six months following the transaction, analysis shows that trading was higher than on
     other Ghana bonds – probably due to the size and timing of the partially-guaranteed issuance.
     However, some investors expressed concern that the trading could further decrease over time
     without index inclusion.
     Nevertheless, some investors are able to invest in non-index bonds, provided they receive a
     premium for the perceived lack of liquidity. This premium is a function of issuer credit as well as
     market conditions. In the case of the Ghana 2030 bond, a 45 bps premium was estimated to have
     been added to compensate the index non-inclusion. It is expected to be lower in better markets.

          “Seeing a significant number of PBG bonds outstanding would create a new asset class and
          would bring index investors to rethink their position and to participate in further deals” An Investor




     Creating a new asset class through a large number of issuances could facilitate index inclusion,
     as we shall discuss in later chapters of this report.




     13
       JPMorgan EMBI Global Diversified Index significantly represents EM smaller issuers, including Ghana, within
     government issuers




28
     5.3       Sales process and pricing of the instrument
     5.3.1       Challenges in the bond sales process
     Considering the innovative structure of the guarantee, Ghana’s macroeconomic situation,
     challenging market environment and a tight timeframe, the sales process required significant
     effort by the Government and the WB to explain the credit and structure to the JLMs and
     subsequently to final investors. Investors’ knowledge of the poor condition of Ghana’s public
     finances and its need for a large issuance within a short timeframe introduced additional
     challenges in the issuance process. Investors needed further explanation to understand features
     regarding the triggers of the guarantee, the implications of various restructuring scenarios and
     key differences with previous guaranteed structures on the market.
     A specific feature of the bond is that any restructuring is subject to the consent of the WB14. Many
     investors sought clear guidance from the JLMs and the WB on what exact steps would be taken
     by the WB in a restructuring scenario. Such guidance was sought to adopt a firm view on the
     various outcomes, their probability and the resulting expected recovery.
     Finally, questions were asked regarding the impact of the WB’s potential preferred creditor status
     on the guaranteed Eurobond, compared to Ghana’s standalone bonds. Implications of a cross -
     default or non-payment on other WB loans had to be clearly explained to the investors.
     While many of these challenges were as a result of relatively new structure and challenging
     market environment, more such issuances could provide opportunities to improve the
     understanding of investors and potentially gain additional pricing benefits.

          “We are receiving a number of calls by investors regretting not having participated in the
          transaction” JLM




     5.3.2       Some potential for improvement in pricing
     Prior to the Ghana 2030 bond launch, there was no analysis provided by JLMs to investors
     regarding the theoretical pricing of the guarantee. Investors had little guidance as to the
     methodologies to use and had no recent precedents to which they could refer. This may have
     partly been due to the various marketing directives in place which prohibited the banks from
     discussing valuation methodologies with the investors.
     When assessing the price range for the transaction, JLMs benefited from limited pricing feedback
     from investors. This reduced the ability for JLMs to strategically announce the IPTs15 range. Due
     to the difficult market conditions prevailing at the time and the large size of the transaction
     (USD500 million - USD 1billion) the issuer was looking to print by a certain date, only limited
     tightening of the IPT was possible.
     When analyzing the final pricing based on trading of outstanding Eurobonds at the time, a non-
     guaranteed similar Ghana transaction was estimated to have required a yield of c. 12.30-12.75%.
     Such calculations lead to a 150 to 200 basis points saving thanks to the partial guarantee. This
     amount is net of the significant new issue and illiquidity premiums, which were due to poor market
     conditions and lack of index-inclusion respectively.



     14
        Ghana 2030 issuance prospectus , page 120: « Any modification of any provision of, or any action in respect of, these
     Conditions or the Agency Agreement in respect of the Notes may be made or taken if approved by a Single Series Ordinary
     Resolution, a Single Series Extraordinary Resolution or a Single Series Written Resolution […] so long as the IDA
     Guarantee remains in effect and has not otherwise been terminated in accordance with the terms of the Deed of
     Guarantee, require the prior written consent of the Guarantor.»
     15
        Initial Price Talks, giving indications of the price range considered when launching the transaction




29
        Chart 9. Ghana 2030 theoretical pricing decomposition analysis


                                  Pricing decomposition

                              1
                                            T-Bond base rate 14 years: 220 bps


                              2
                                     Spread over T-Bond of the 2026 Eurobond: 870 bps

                              3
                                             40 bps spread for curve extension

                              4
                                           Estimated new issue premium: 100 bps

                              5
                                            No index inclusion premium: 45 bps




                                         Theoretical yield of vanilla bond = 12.75%




                                      Impact of the guarantee on pricing: 150 – 200 bps




                                                    Final yield of 10.75%


     Source Joint lead managers


     The final pricing can be explained by two main factors:
     First, in such volatile market conditions, issuers who chose to issue and hence accept significant
     New Issue Premiums (‘NIP’) were considered as having few alternative sources of financing.
     Despite the use of proceeds being earmarked to refinance expensive domestic debt, investors
     had the perception Ghana needed new money at all costs. Ghana’s need and determination to
     access the markets at the chosen time, when global markets were down, allowed the investors to
     adopt an aggressive pricing approach, limiting the issuer’s negotiating power.
     Second, investors’ limited understanding of the pricing mechanism did not help. Without formal,
     agreed methodology to frame discussions, the full theoretical price-benefit range of the guarantee
     was partly eroded by the high new issue premium and an element of value discounting.
     However, the level of oversubscription and post-deal feedback from several investors indicates
     strong preference for WB guaranteed issuances for the right kind of issuers. Disseminating
     features of the Ghana 2030 guarantee structure and having more such issuances can improve
     the understanding of investors and better reflect the value proposition of WB guarantees.




30
                               6. Credit rating approach                                   16




     Moody’s and Fitch both decided to gr ant a two-notch uplift to the Ghana 2030 bond versus the
     issuer’s standalone credit rating, rating it B1/BB - vs. B3/B for Ghana sovereign. However,
     investors active in the EM bond markets also rely on their own rating scale, thus limiting the impact
     of the rating agencies’ final uplift decisions. Overall, close attention was paid to the rating
     rationale.
     Moody’s methodology for credit substitution through third-party guarantees relies on several
     core principles. Firstly, credit documentation should indicate that the guarantee is irrevocable and
     unconditional. Secondly, the guarantee must ensure full and timely payment of the underlying
     obligation. Finally, the guarantee must be enforceable against the guarantor under a suitable
     jurisdiction (typically New York or London), and the term of the guarantee should extend to the
     length of the underlying risk being mitigated.
     Moody’s assessment of the credit rating is influenced by debt structure and credit quality of the
     issuer, credit quality of the guarantor and whether both principal and coupons are guaranteed.
     However, it is neither influenced by maturity (as long as it is market standard), nor by amortization
     structure, or acceleration provisions of the Guarantee.
     The agency’s approach relies upon a blended expected loss ratio. In the case of Ghana, there
     was a perceived 40% AAA risk and a 60% B3 expected loss. This is adjusted for the 4-year
     Expected Loss Table for Sovereigns, showing the amount of investment not recovered, estimated
     in the range of 40 to 45%. The lower the naked rating of the country, the wider is the impact of
     the guarantee on rating. In this case, the reduction of expected losses by 40% was consistent
     with two notches of uplift from B3 to B1.


     Fitch methodology16 also granted a two-notch upgrade to the guaranteed bond. Its approach
     was similar to that of Moody’s. Their rating methodology also relied on a blended expected loss
     ratio, as well as on the historical recovery of Sovereigns. Analysis estimated that on a standalone
     basis, Ghana’s expected recovery would amount to 31-50%. The rating committee thus concluded
     that the 40% guarantee, leading to a 71-90% recovery bracket, was consistent with two-notch
     uplift.
     When assessing the impact of the WB partial guarantee on the bond’s rating, two key metrics
     were assessed: recovery rate and ability of the guarantee to provide liquidity in a non-payment
     event. In the case of the Ghana 2030 bond, one notch improvement was obtained for each
     criterion. The liquidity criterion was improved through the rolling guarantee and with a specific
     emphasis for B-rated countries. Regarding the liquidity criteria, BB-rated issuers may not be
     regarded as favorably with regards to liquidity support.
     The recovery rate of partially-guaranteed bonds is assessed based on the following table (Chart
     11). Based on standard Sovereign recovery rates, the impact of a 40% guarantee is at the high
     end of one notch on the RR4 factor. The lack of accelerability of the guarantee has a limited
     impact on the rating enhancement. Overall, keeping broadly unchanged characteristics will allow
     maximum enhancement under Fitch’s methodology. The percentage of guarantee as well as
     consideration of the rolling feature is assessed on a case by case basis, in particular with regards
     to the rating of the issuer. Moreover, an amortizing guarantee limited to a fixed percentage of
     outstanding bond notional, which would not impact Fitch’s rating uplift, can be explored as an
     alternative guarantee structure.


     16
          These rating rationales reflect our understanding of rating agencies’ approach




31
     In summary, rating agency methodologies are adaptable to different guarantee structures and
     amongst other analysis, rely principally on Expected Loss Tables for the final rating. The main
     rationale for the uplift relies on the irrevocable and unconditional nature of the guarantee. The
     rolling guarantee feature helped increase expected recovery ratios.


     Standard & Poor’s (‘S&P’)16 did not rate the instrument as its methodology does not grant any
     rating uplift to partially-guaranteed sovereign instruments following the Ecuador default17, during
     which investors holding partially-guaranteed bonds did not receive much more than investors
     holding non-guaranteed bonds. Indeed, the Sovereign took into account what was received under
     the guarantee when making its allocation between bondholders.18 Despite the unconditional and
     permanent feature of the Ghana partially-guaranteed structure, S&P was not prepared to change
     its approach to partial guarantees, mainly due to lack of a bankruptcy code for sovereigns, which
     in their opinion left uncertainty regarding the amount of final recoveries and value of the
     guarantee. This view is specific to S&P and the other two rating agencies continue to see value
     in partial credit support for sovereigns and assign such transactions rating uplifts as per their
     published methodology.




     17
          Although the structure of Ecuador’s issuance has limited comparability with Ghana’s structure , especially due to the
           existence of a collateral
     18
          S&P Methodology (Rating Partially-guaranteed Sovereign Debt, May 2013)




32
       Chart 11. Fitch Expected recovery based on standalone recovery rate and share of guaranteed issuance (in %)




     Source Fitch



33
                        7. Benefits and additional
                           considerations of the partial
                           guarantee for sovereigns and sub-
                           sovereigns

       “We issued our fourth sovereign bond, which was over -subscribed by $1 billion. The 15-year
       tenor of the bond is the first by any Sub-Saharan African country besides South Africa. With
       that, our target is to shift away from short-term debt instruments when financing the capital
       budget. Instead we will target long-term development projects. This has brought with it the
       capacity to refinance short-term debts and upcoming sovereign bond debts, as well as the
       remaining principal of the Eurobond that will mature in 2017.” Seth Terkper, Minister of Finance,
       Ghana




     7.1       Benefits of using a partial guarantee
     Using a partial guarantee provides several benefits to the borrower. Among them are: enhanced
     access to debt markets, an improved debt profile, a reduced cost of financing and an increased
     investor base. Below are the key benefits that were identified throughout the process.
      Demonstrate international support, bridge the knowledge gap: The WB development policy or
        investment project financing operation in the country, as well as independent views from a
        reputable institution like the WB infuse confidence around the borrower’s ability to perform and
        reform in difficult times.
      Enhance access to international capital markets: Benefiting from a partial guarantee can
        facilitate access to complex and volatile markets by reassuring investors. By underlining the
        WB’s involvement with the issuer at different levels of government, endorsing the reform
        program as well as providing actual credit support, the partial guarantee strengthens the
        perceived credit quality of the borrower.
      Extend maturities: Benefiting from the support of the implicit AAA WB rating and from its
        attractive funding curve on long maturities allows the issuer to increase the tenor of its
        borrowings at an attractive cost.
      Reduce funding costs: The borrower reduces its funding costs due to the blended pricing
        advantage of the WB guarantee. The cost for the guarantee priced by the WB is sufficiently
        low to enable an attractive pricing benefit for the borrower.
      Increase the investor base: Through the two-notch improvement of the rating and in certain
        cases through reduced financing risks, the borrower is able to attract new investors which are
        not already invested in standalone debt of the credit, especially in the context of an uncertain
        external environment.




34
      Tightening of yields for existing instruments: The accompanying reform program can provide
           a recovery path for the issuer, further improving general prospects on the credit. Such a
           positive signaling effect, combined with yield savings obtained on the guaranteed instrument,
           entails a global tightening of the yield curve.
      Increase available funding for private projects: A WB-guaranteed issuance increases credit
           available for the private sector through reduced domestic government issuance 19. This
           reduces pressure on funding costs in a challenging external environment.



     7.2         Additional considerations in using a partial guarantee
     When deciding whether to opt for a partially-guaranteed instrument, a series of considerations
     can be identified.
      Signaling effect of requiring support by IFIs: Requesting institutions to support the issuer by
           guaranteeing a debt instrument can be perceived by some market participants as a sign of
           financial weakness. However, investors also take the comfort that the role of IFIs improve the
           credibility of the issuance when underpinned by a reform program.
      Opportunity cost of the guarantee when replacing concessional loans: Borrowers face a higher
           cost of funding when replacing allocated concessional loans by guarantees to be used on
           privately funded instruments. On the other hand, MDBs such as WB also incentivizes countries
           to use guarantee instruments, where appropriate, to crowd-in private investments and growth.
           There is a trade-off to be made between the external benefits and larger quantum of financing
           obtained through the use of guarantees, and concessional cost of WB loans.
      Risking cannibalization of investor bases between Sovereigns and its SOEs: When using the
           guarantee for an SOE rated lower than the Sovereign by rating agencies (which is usually the
           case), benefiting from a rating uplift through a partial guarantee can lead Sovereign investors
           to shift to SOE issuers to obtain higher yields. If the Sovereign’s investor base lacks sufficient
           depth and the SOE bond is priced wider than the sovereign despite the partial guarantee, there
           may be a risk of cannibalization.
      Risk of yield curve distortion for Eurobonds: Adding guaranteed issuances to an existing non-
           guaranteed yield curve can complicate the pricing of future non-guaranteed instruments.
           Indeed, it is essential for an issuer to develop a non-guaranteed yield curve to support and
           optimize the pricing of its future instruments. Nevertheless, this risk needs to be weighed
           against the benefits of the partial guarantee, such as gaining market access, extending tenors
           and positive messaging. In addition, the partiality of the guarantee coverage does not
           significantly change the essence of the instrument.




     19
          When domestic government debt is replaced by external debt




35
                         8. Further considerations on format
                            and approach to marketing

     8.1     Opportunity to publicize the Development Policy Operation (DPO)


       “Such a structure going forward could be interesting for inaugural issuances, to get the ball
       rolling for countries to get known by markets; it could also push a credible story of reform for an
       EM country. The key question on a case-by-case basis is: Will the policy prescriptions change
       the fundamentals of the country and be mandatory in their impleme ntation?”
       An Investor



     The WB’s presence alongside the issuer during the roadshow was strongly appreciated. Such
     institutional support strengthens the credit story and gives an independent take on the issuer.
     In the marketing of future transactions, there would be a merit in further highlighting the PBG prior
     actions completed by the issuer and included in the underlying WB Development Policy
     Operation. All prior action and future indicators are expected to be in the Program Document.
     Depending on when the marketing starts, the Program Document is expected to already be in the
     public domain, which will make it easier during the roadshow to be explicit about its content. An
     even greater focus on objectives, ambition, detailed planning of reforms and follow-up implications
     of the WB’s involvement should be explored.
     Indeed, the PBG follows agreement with client Governments on required reforms and supports
     the Government’s own efforts to improve the fundamentals and long -term prospects of its
     economy. As a whole, the credit’s long-term quality is improved. Roadshows are the opportunity
     to remind investors about the potential transformational impact of the WB’s support.

     8.2     Application of the partial guarantee in different market
             environments
     The partial guarantee can be optimized on a case-by-case basis depending on several factors
     such as issuer characteristics, investor type (for example public bond, syndicated loan, private
     placement or other) and the general debt market conditions. Analysis should thus be undertaken
     so as to optimize pricing, maturity and guarantee terms, and adapt the product to the relevant
     market environment.
     The impact of the guarantee differs depending on the issuer as well. The cost benefit analysis of
     a partially-guaranteed bond would be different for different market environments, depending on
     secondary market trading levels of the issuer’s standalone bonds, which would form the b asis for
     pricing the partially-guaranteed issuance.
     The analysis below assumes a 15-year partially-guaranteed bond (40%) and an IBRD 15-year
     yield of 3.0%. It is gross of any new issue, non-index eligibility premium as well as of the guarantee
     fee (30 - 40bps) which may reduce the net spread saving benefits.




36
     The range of potential savings is driven by the guaranteed cash flows. The closer in time the
     guaranteed cash flows, the lower the spread savings –leading us to conclude with a range rather
     than a precise number.
     Therefore, the impact of the guarantee differs depending on the market environment and how it
     prices the sovereign’s standalone credit. B-rated countries with higher yields benefit from a
     significant pricing impact, improved maturity and facilitated market access. With lower uncovered
     yields, BB-rated countries have an impact framed around the messaging of the WB support.
     This can also be interpreted as the partial guarantee performing the role of an insurance policy,
     yielding greater cost benefits at times when the markets are pricing EM credit more widely than
     usual.


           Chart 12. Theoretical yield range of partially-guaranteed bond (in % depending on the
           guarantee percentage)


                              12.00%

                              11.00%
       YTM of uncvered bond




                              10.00%

                              9.00%

                              8.00%

                              7.00%

                              6.00%

                              5.00%

                                   4.00%      5.00%    6.00%     7.00%    8.00%     9.00%    10.00%   11.00%
                                       Theoretical yield of 40% guaranteed bond (based on DCF methodology)




37
            Chart 13. Theoretical gross spread savings vs. uncovered bond (in % depending on
            the guarantee percentage)


                              12.00%

                              11.00%
       YTM of uncvered bond




                              10.00%

                              9.00%

                              8.00%

                              7.00%

                              6.00%

                              5.00%

                                       -           50bps      100bps      150bps      200bps     250bps      300bps
                                           Theoretical yield of 40% guaranteed bond (based on DCF methodology)


     8.3                         Limited benefits of alternative formats perceived at this stage of the
                                 product’s development
     8.3.1                        Private placements and loan formats
     Private placements allow a more flexible and confidential process, as well as raising smaller
     quanta of debt compared to international public bond issuances. In the Emerging Markets space,
     private placements are currently not favored by real money investors, essentially due to their lack
     of liquidity. Private placements into banks have a series of precedents, usually sized up to
     USD300m. However, increasing regulation has reduced the pool of potential funding and
     increased costs for issuers.


           “When pricing a private placement, borrowers with access to the market will need a 150 bps
           premium over secondary. The guarantee would be valued separately through a 100bps
           reduction in spread for loans. The sizing sweet spot is a USD 50 to 100m ticket covering less
           than 50% of the total issuance.” An Investor


     Adding a partial guarantee to private placements does not seem to significantly increase
     traditional asset managers’ interest in the structure. Indeed, most have portfolio constraints on
     private placements, which the partial guarantee does not solve. It shall be noted however that a
     number of hedge funds showed significant interest in the product, assuming they are able to hold
     a large enough portion of the issuance. Insurance companies and pension funds could also be
     good candidates for private placements in high-rated emerging markets, as these investors do
     not require liquidity, as they are usually buy-and-hold investors.


           “We could be interested in engaging up to five other investors to structure a private placement
           for a 7-year amortizing structure”. An Investor




38
     A syndicated loan market exists for projects and corporates meeting certain general criteria but
     not for sovereign financing. Creating additional capital market PBG instruments could help the
     development of syndicated loans for EM sovereigns in the future.
     Loan formats, whether syndicated or private, provide flexibility in the structure conception and
     privacy as to final terms for the borrower. Compared to bond formats, loans can accommodate
     smaller amounts of funding, shorter maturities and certainty on pricing. However, there are few
     institutional investors, apart from infrastructure funds, some commercial banks and some
     insurance companies, that have the appetite of investing in partially-guaranteed loans, which
     limits the depth of the investor base.
     The buyers of PBG-backed sovereign loans at banks would be niche EM or structured finance
     proprietary trading desks of investment banks which would enter into bilateral negotiations with
     an issuer and underwrite tailor-made loans. PBG issuance in the loan format to date has been
     placed into investment banks, primarily into their structured credit trading desks with high levels
     of guarantee support in the 60-80% range with 5 to 7 years average tenors, reflecting cash flow
     cover in excess of 45%. As bank balance sheets are becoming more expensive due to regulation,
     these desks are also seeing their limits reduced or for some exiting the market.
     It is also important to note that the privacy component of loans can result in opacity in the
     subsequent tranching or repackaging of the partially-guaranteed loan. Such repackaging can be
     the split into a “Guarantor” highly-rated tranche and an uncovered tranche by the intermediary
     bank. The former can be sold to an international institutional investor, while the latter can be sold
     to, for example, local banks. Such repackaged loan structures carry two main disadvantages: (i)
     they only value the quantitative aspects of the partial guarantee, i.e. the pricing benefit of a AAA
     guarantor, and not the qualitative aspects of the underlying program and support provided by the
     WB, and (ii) they create significant leeway for intermediaries to structure undisclosed
     remuneration in connection with the repackaging, to the detriment of the borrower.
     Taking each of the preceding considerations into account, we recommend the bilateral loan format
     benefiting from high guarantee percentages should be addressed with caution at this stage.




39
                        9. Recommendations for future
                           issuances

     9.1     Considerations on potential structure adaptations to build a robust
             investor base
     9.1.1     Keeping a broadly stable legal structure to ensure continuity and
               facilitate the emergence of an asset class
     The structure adopted for the Ghana 2030 issuance could potentially be modified for further
     issuances in the future, both for Sovereigns and SOEs. However, we believe that adopting a
     broadly similar structure and adjusting the percentage of rolling guarantee features constitutes
     the best option, based on extensive market feedback. We also appreciate there may be an
     occasional need for customization to optimize execution (for example to achieve requisite rating
     uplift).
      Investors: It is important for investors to be able to compare new issuances with past
        issuances, with regards to terms and conditions as well as pricing. A stable and well-known
        structure can help build a robust investor-base and a new asset class.
      Rating agencies: A 40% partial-guarantee is usually close to the lower boundary required to
        obtain two-notch uplift. Rating agencies further underlined that shifting the percentage for a B-
        rated issuer upwards by a few percentage points would not significantly impact the rating uplift.
      Index providers: Potential index inclusion can be envisaged in the future on the basis of (i)
        similar structures creating an identifiable asset class and (ii) a guarantee level which does not
        change the essence of the instrument. Indeed, there is little difference between the secondary
        market direction of standard non-guaranteed bonds and the Ghana 2030 bond since the
        guarantee only covers 17% of cash flows (40% of notional).
     Therefore, adopting a similar structure seems an optimal take, as a general principle for upcoming
     issuances.


       “The simpler the structure, the better. It's already not easy to make an investment decision; we
       do not need additional complexity. We see no issue with the current structure. Moreover, the
       more you issue, the better the pricing, since people need to get used to the structure.”
       An Investor




     9.1.2     Optimizing guarantee percentage
     While maintaining the existing structure seems to be the optimal way to accustom investors to the
     instrument, changing the percentage of guarantee depending on the issuer and the tenor can be
     considered.
     A 40% standard level of partial guarantee could be favored especially for public bond instruments,
     in order to benefit from the optimal rating uplift (for B-rated issuer) and the replicability of the
     structure. However, a case-by-case analysis could determine alternate structures for higher-rated
     issuers and SOEs, which would best suit the borrower and the investors. A set number of
     parameters should be kept flexible in order to adapt to issuers’ characteristics and to address




40
     investors’ risk appetite on the specific credit. For example, specific infrastructure funds or
     insurance companies could require a minimum rating for an instrument, which can be obtained
     by selectively increasing the level of the guarantee support.
     The level of guarantee should be adapted to the rating level of the country. The lower rated the
     country, the most impactful the guarantee.
     Exploring an amortizing guarantee by fixing the guarantee amount as a percentage of outstanding
     notional (as opposed to original notional as in the case of Ghana 2030 bond) can be considered
     to reduce the costs of the guarantee for issuers.

       Chart 14. Comparison of different guarantee structures
       Ghana 2030 guarantee structure                    Structure with amortizing guarantee notional




     9.1.3     Guarantee type
     Various features of the structuring of the guarantee have significant impact on its pricing. In
     particular, the rolling coupon feature slightly increased the total guarantee fee payable by the
     issuer by c. 14% (3.5 bps per annum) in the case of the Ghana PBG. This entails, however, a
     much larger pricing benefit. Indeed, the increase in pricing benefit thanks to the rolling feature for
     a country with a 10% 10-year yield stands at over 150 to 200 basis points. For a USD1bn
     issuance, savings are therefore larger than USD12m per year, which underlines the cost-benefit
     advantage of this feature. Moreover, for Fitch, the rating upgrade due to this feature is one notch,
     further underlining the need for such a feature.

     9.1.4     Other structuring thoughts
     The combination of (i) a standard instrument recognized by markets and benefiting from the
     institutional support of the WB to address financing needs, and (ii) a series of alternative tailor-
     made formats to respond to client / investor needs, will enable the WB to address a range of
     financing needs. This will also maintain flexibility for financial innovation to address specific needs
     as they may arise.
     Specifically, green bonds or alternative structures for SOEs linked to specific projects can be
     recognized by markets as fulfilling the WB’s mission to enhance development and address climate
     change. These alternative financings would be in line with the WB’s objective of introducing
     innovative financing mechanisms to its development operations.
     A difference in structuring between IBRD and IDA-supported instruments can also be
     accommodated to respond to significant differences between countries in the portfolio.




41
     9.2              Choice of issuer
     The investors’ feedback regarding potential issuers leads to the ide ntification of three main types
     of relevant issuers (whether sovereigns or SOEs).
           (i)          Cross-over credits: Countries within the BB / BB+ area would reach the Investment-
                        grade category with a two-notch upgrade, thus enabling Investment-grade investors
                        to take part in the transaction. Among these investors are insurance companies and
                        other buy-and-hold institutional investors which have the capacity to invest in very
                        long-term tenors at highly attractive rates. This could be particularly relevant for SOEs
                        with long life infrastructure assets. The partial guarantee would therefore act as a
                        strong catalyst for these ‘premium’ private investors with lending capacity closer to
                        that which IFIs can provide their clients compared to pure EM investors. The pricing
                        benefit of the guarantee would however be more limited in absolute basis points in
                        the case of higher-rated issuers, as illustrated below.
           (ii)         Issuers within the B category: Thanks to the 40% guarantee, a two-notch uplift would
                        bring B or B+ credits within the BB-category, which may help these issuers lengthen
                        maturity and support some pricing benefit. As these issuers tend to be highly exposed
                        to the volatility in international capital markets, the partial guarantee could be used to
                        diversify their investor base by either bringing additional bond investors or by
                        selectively accessing loan markets with increasing tenors.
           (iii)        Issuers deprived of market access: Sovereigns without significant bond market
                        presence or with negative market perception would be good candidates. Countries
                        with high yield indicating market challenges could benefit as well, to the extent they
                        fulfill WB eligibility requirements and are participating in a WB Development Policy
                        Operation. Adding a guarantee support to their financing would facilitate market
                        access and improve market perception of existing issuances, if any. At the time of the
                        investor meetings, such country names highlighted by investors were: Iraq, Zambia,
                        Nigeria, Ghana, Ecuador, Mongolia, etc.


       Chart 15. Credit Default Swaps benchmarks by rating level (in basis points)
        2,000


        1,500


        1,000


           500


                  0




     Source Standard & Poors as of 29/04/2016




42
     Infrastructure owning SOEs:
     SOEs that own critical infrastructure assets seem particularly well-suited to WB partial
     guarantees. It is important to specify that WB policy-based guarantees (as in Ghana 2030) cannot
     be applicable to SOEs. However, WB project-based guarantees in the context of Investment
     Project Financing (‘IPF’) can be used and are ideally placed for this purpose. WB involvement
     would provide a layer of oversight as well as credibility for SOEs accessing capital markets for
     the first time or on the basis of a reform program.
     Infrastructure assets being long-term, they require a solid long-term investor base, whereas key
     investors, such as pension funds or insurance companies, are usually constrained by investment-
     grade and low-risk portfolios. Reaching investment-grade status thus plays a crucial role in
     facilitating long-tenor funding at an attractive cost. Partially-guaranteed issuances could therefore
     be an opportunity for SOEs to finance wide infrastructure programs and bring new investors into
     the country with significantly beneficial impact on the economy. The key to successful execution
     would be to identify such institutional investors with appetite for investment-grade risk out of
     emerging market countries.
     Furthermore, by using a partial guarantee structure, the debt undertaken for the SOE project may
     not be reflected in the government debt ratios apart from any explicit support provided by the
     government to the SOE. Such a structure could allow refinancing of existing infrastructure assets
     through debt at the SOE level rather than at the government level.


       “Most SOEs are too small to consider since for liquidity purposes, the minimum size needs to
       be $500mn. However, if there was a partial-guarantee, we could consider looking at the
       underlying credit.” An Investor


     9.3     Address investors’ concerns on the impact of a restructuring on
             the partial-guarantee

       “How does guarantee survive a restructuring? The multitude of possible scenarios does not
       facilitate the precise pricing of the guarantee.” An Investor


     The Ghana 2030 bond guarantee’s main limitation in its current form, as pointed out by a large
     number of investors, is the range of possible scenarios depending on the trajectory of a
     theoretical Sovereign default or restructuring.
     The IDA guarantee cannot be accelerated. Investors have the right to call on the guarantee and
     receive payments, as per the original debt service schedule, on each payment date up to the
     guarantee amount, as long as the partially-guaranteed bond is outstanding. In the Ghana 2030
     bond framework, any restructuring would have to be approved by IDA since it would represent an
     amendment to the bond’s terms and conditions. Investors have expressed concern that harsh
     amendments to the guarantee could be proposed, hence their desire for more clarity. In particular,
     in the case of pre-emptive restructurings, they fear current instruments may end up being replaced
     by new bonds, including a diluted guarantee feature. Therefore, it will be crucial to clarify a set of
     standard scenario with a planned response to various restructuring and default scenarios.
     Acceleration of the guarantee could potentially address to a certain extent the concerns voiced
     by some investors regarding (i) the capacity of the sovereign to penalize guaranteed bondholders
     in a restructuring scenario, in so far as the guarantee would have paid off prior to the conclusion




43
     of the restructuring and investors left with an uncovered instrument similar to other outstanding
     bonds, and (ii) the difficulty of pricing the instrument .
     WB guarantees provided by IDA cannot be accelerated. There is clear rationale and policy
     restrictions for IDA-guaranteed instruments not to have an accelerable guarantee – as the WB
     would not want to add additional financial burden to the borrower to an already distressed
     situation. Acceleration for IBRD-guaranteed instruments which are by nature more remote from
     a potential default can only be considered on an exceptional basis..
     Given the consent requirements of the WB in the event of a restructuring, as a minimum measure,
     it would be useful to clarify how the institution would react in standard restructuring scenarios.
     Indeed, this would reassure a number of investors and contribute to further expansion of the
     investor base.
     In conclusion, further work could be pursued with legal counsels in order to assess what can be
     added to the guarantee agreement or the prospectus, so as to limit uncertainty.




       “Ghana will presumably repay the USD400m guarantee first in case of default as the sovereign
       has an indemnity agreement with the IDA – even though the IDA is legally ranked pari passu
       with other senior creditors. “The IDA is the de facto preferred creditor,” said Elisa Parisi -Capone,
       lead sovereign analyst for Ghana at Moody’s, which is rating the notes B1. “Under the indemnity
       agreement, Ghana has an obligation to reimburse for any called guarantee.” IFR, October 2nd
       2015



     9.4      Further explore new routes to expand the volume of deals and
              educate the investor base
     To succeed in building a new asset class, a critical volume of transactions should be reached so
     as to attract a larger set of investors, obtain index inclusion and optimize the rating treatments of
     guaranteed instruments. Stable and well-known structures are indeed reassuring in the eyes of
     investors. Succeeding in standardizing some product structures will be another step towards the
     expansion of the volume of issuances. The ideal volume target to meet these objectives is
     estimated at c. USD5bn per annum.
     The investor base is expected to increase over time by diversifying and adapting the types of
     products proposed, not only to Sovereigns but also to SOEs. Partially-guaranteed transactions
     have the potential of becoming a new asset class. However, such a process does not constitute
     an immediate evolution and will take time. Ongoing contacts with market-makers should
     accelerate the process. On top of transactional roadshows and communications organized by
     issuers, which constitute interesting vectors to address fixed-income investors, direct contact
     should be kept with investors, banks and rating agencies.
     A wide range of issuers can be interested by such issuances, which have the advantage of being
     highly flexible and tailor made for the issuer on top of bringing a price advantage at issuance. The
     PBG guarantee can be used both for FX and domestic currency issuances, as well as potentially
     supporting swap transactions, helping at all stages of the construction of a financing plan. With
     regards to structure, public or private placements can be considered depending on the issuers’
     needs. A variety of eligible issuers can be considered with regards to their geography, their type
     – both SOEs and governments – and their rating. The development of this product will go through




44
     the construction of a mix of deals to expand the number of transactions and the range of interested
     investors.

     9.4.1         Opportunity to attract institutional investors (insurance companies or
                   select EM funds) to participate as cornerstone anchor investors in future
                   deals
     Attracting a solid base of new investors can be facilitated by the identification of a pool of
     cornerstone anchor investors to support future deals. The idea would be to identify a number of
     tier-one institutional investors, willing to invest time in a partially-guaranteed transaction, on the
     back of their understanding and appreciation of the benefits of the structure.
     JLMs, together with the WB and the Issuer, could define optimal parameters of a public
     transaction ahead of launch, limit the execution risk and ensure more certainty of outcome.
     For a limited number of investors, a specific process called wall-crossing could be initiated prior
     to the launch of public transactions. This would enable JLMs to work more closely with select tier-
     one investors in designing the transaction to fit these investors’ needs and form a view on potential
     pricing range ahead of formal launch. Should the mandate letter signed with bookrunners allow
     it, securing a minimum size in the final granted allocation could incentivize such investors to
     participate.
     Furthermore, the WB could engage directly with institutional investors to discuss the possibility of
     creating dedicated funds investing exclusively in partially-guaranteed issuances. There has
     already been one reverse enquiry related to a dedicated fund. The WB would therefore be in a
     position to offer to its clients a dedicated tier-one investor base, alongside the above mentioned
     benefits of the structure.

     9.4.2         Education of investor base
     Without any issuance of partially-guaranteed bonds of a similar nature to that of Ghana over the
     past 15 years, investors had limited recent precedent to value the guarantee and were left
     assessing the best methodology to use.
     Upcoming issuances should see their pricing significantly facilitated for investors as a result of
     the research paper published by the WB in February 2016. The paper Pricing partially-guaranteed
     bonds20, combined with the publication of the underlying financial model, should enable investors
     to benefit from a consolidated and harmonized view on potential pricing.
     In this paper, four different alternative pricing are considered and detailed:
            -    Nominal weighted average yield: Based on the weights of guaranteed and non-
                 guaranteed cash-flows, calculating an average bended yield

            -    Rolling nominal weighted average yield: calculating the percentage of the remaining cash
                 flows guaranteed by the WB year by year, averaging the yields obtained and iterating to
                 reach the yield

            -    Discounted cash flows: Calculating the WB guaranteed NPV as well as the non-
                 guaranteed NPV at their respective discount rates and equalizing their sum to the face
                 value




     20
          http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/723281467998238063/Main-report




45
           -   Recovery analysis: extracting the implied annual probability of default from the current
               trading levels, and finding the yield which, adjusted for the probability of default and the
               payments received from the WB guarantee, is equal to a US Treasury bond with a similar
               maturity

     9.5       Moving towards index eligibility
     9.5.1       Expanding the volume issued with a stable structure
     Focusing the attention of investors on a stable structure can also guide the market towards
     inclusion of the product in standard indexes. In particular, an inclusion in the JPM’s Emerging
     Markets index would likely make the product more attractive. It would bring many current index-
     constrained investors to the table.
     A short-term objective should therefore be to build a significant volume of issuances in time for
     the next JPMorgan EMBI index annual meeting. This would incentivize key stakeholders to take
     this new asset class into greater account and to consider means of including it in indexes.

     9.5.2       Enhancing the number of investors championing index inclusion of the
                 product
     It is critical to continue building momentum with the JPM index team based out of New York.
     Given the independent nature of the JPM EMBI index, this would be best achieved over time with
     increasing reverse enquiries from investors in the Ghana 2030 bond and future transactions
     requesting index inclusion and contacting the JPM index team directly.

     9.6       Continue work with rating agencies
     Past experience and discussions with Moody’s and Fitch Ratings have led to the conclusion that
     reaching a two-notch uplift is possible with a 40%-guarantee (for a B-rated issuer). The next step
     is therefore to determine how alternative structures would be rated, especially for SOEs. Indeed,
     rating methodologies in the corporate space may be different and use more thorough recovery
     approaches. The support of agencies will be key to facilitate the instrument’s deployment in the
     SOE space.
     At the same time, discussions could be pursued with Standard & Poor’s to reassure the agency
     that measures could be put in place to ensure the Sovereign would not use unfairly its discretion
     to penalize partially-guaranteed instruments in a restructuring scenario which would neutralize
     the value of the partial guarantee. Additional measures by the WB could be considered, such as
     including clauses in the Indemnity Agreement to incentivize the Sovereign to treat guaranteed
     creditors equitably. Over time and through regular issuances, the agency may update its
     methodology.




46
                        10.           Conclusions
     The Ghana 2030 bond benefiting from an IDA partial guarantee set a strong precedent and
     opened the way for other select Sovereigns, quasi-sovereigns and SOEs to access capital
     markets in a challenging environment.
     In the third quarter of 2015 when a number of issuers had to pull or scale back issues, Ghana
     was able to raise USD1 billion under turbulent market conditions. Despite being impacted by
     negative market sentiment and a challenging credit story, Ghana nonetheless achieved 150-200
     bps in spread savings. Demonstrating its homegrown reform program and the support of
     international organizations enabled market access when there was none.
     Based on the Ghana experience and taking into account the recommendations discussed in this
     report, we believe partially-guaranteed bond issuances can be impactful for selected types of
     issuers which exhibit one or more of the following characteristics:
      Countries with limited concessional funding allocation but on the path towards sector reforms
       and development of investment programs by crowding-in private sector;
      Issuers which may benefit from accessing a completely new investor base (for example
       investment-grade, different currency);
      Complicated credit story involving some form of turnaround or reform with the assistance of
       WB or other international organizations;
      New issuers without previous market experience either in the sovereign or sub-sovereign
       space;
      Access problems (volume and / or tenor) which would benefit from demonstrating support from
       the international community.



     10.1.1    Recommendations to optimize and scale-up the product
     In summary, our key recommendations for developing the product and maximizing its impact can
     be summarized as follows:
      Keeping a broadly stable structure would ensure continuity and facilitate the emergence of an
       asset class: Maintaining the existing rolling guarantee structure seems to be the optimal way
       to accustom investors to the instrument. The level of guarantee should be adapted to the rating
       level of the country. The lower rated the country, the greater the benefits from the guarantee.
       Changing the percentage of guarantee depending on the issuer and the tenor can be
       considered. Exploring an amortizing guarantee by fixing the guarantee amount as a
       percentage of outstanding notional can also be considered to reduce the costs of the
       guarantee for issuers.
      Expand volume of deals and continue education of the investor base: Building a pipeline of
       circa USD5 billion per annum in volume would help in establishing this product as a new asset
       class with investors. Educating investment banks and investors about the partially-guaranteed
       bond structure is critical to extracting the best value from the WB guarantee. Attracting a solid
       base of new investors can be facilitated by the identification of a pool of cornerstone anchor
       investors to support future deals. JLMs, together with the WB and the Issuer, could define
       optimal parameters of a public transaction ahead of launch, limit the execution risk and ensure
       more certainty of outcome. For a limited number of investors, a specific process of wall-




47
         crossing could be initiated prior to the launch of public transactions. Another idea may be to
         explore the creation of a fund of institutional investors for partially-guaranteed transactions.
      Resolve investors’ concerns on the impact of a restruct uring on the partial guarantee: While
       there is clear rationale and policy restrictions for IDA-guaranteed instruments not to have an
       accelerable guarantee – as the WB would not want to add additional financial burden to the
       borrower in an already distressed situation, the WB could explore making acceleration non-
       exceptional for IBRD-guaranteed instruments which are by nature more remote from a
       potential default. Indeed, this could widen the category of investors from standard Emerging
       Market investors, and entice those who would appreciate a less structured and simpler
       guarantee mechanism. Given the consent requirements of the WB in the event of a
       restructuring, it would as a minimum measure, be useful to clarify how the institution would
       react in standard restructuring scenarios. Indeed, this would reassure a number of investors
       and contribute to further expansion of the investor base. Further work should be pursued with
       legal counsels in order to assess what can be added to the guarantee agreement or the
       prospectus, so as to limit uncertainty on this point.
        Move towards index eligibility: Focusing the attention of investors on a stable structure can
         guide the market towards inclusion of the product in standard indices. In particular, an inclusion
         in the JPM’s Emerging Markets bond index would make the product more attractive. It would
         bring many current index-constrained investors to the table. A short-term objective should
         therefore be to build a significant volume of issuances in time for the next JPMorgan EMBI
         index annual meeting.
        Continue work with rating agencies: Past experience and discussions with Moody’s and Fitch
         Ratings have led to the conclusion that reaching a two-notch uplift is possible with a 40%-
         guarantee for a B-rated issuer. The next step is therefore to determine how alternative
         structures would be rated, especially for issues of different credit standing and for SOEs.
         Indeed, rating methodologies in the corporate space may be different and use more thorough
         recovery approaches. The support of agencies will be key to facilitate the instrument’s f urther
         deployment.




48
Appendices
A. Ghana 2030 issuance - Termsheet

 Issuer: The Republic of Ghana

 Size: USD 1 billion, of which USD 400 million guaranteed

 Date of issuance: October 14th 2015

 Issuers’ rating: Moody’s: B3 (Negative Outlook), Fitch: B (Negative Outlook)

 Notes’ rating: Moody’s: B1, Fitch: BB- [two notch uplift]

 Format: 144A / Reg S

 Structure: Senior unsecured, benefiting from the Partial Guarantee

 Tenor: 15 years, amortizing 3 equal instalments in years 13, 14 and 15

 Use of proceeds: Refinancing of existing debt

 Events of default:

  – Non-payment under the Notes (If IDA pays under Demand Notice, there is no Event of
    Default)
  – Cross default if non-payment on a Ghana Note or guarantee exceeding USD25mln
  – Ceasing of IMF membership
B. Overview of WB Guarantee Program                                                         21




WB guarantees help countries mobilize private financing by sharing with private lenders the risk of
payment or debt service default or the occurrence of other specified risks that may arise due to a
government or government-owned entity’s failure to fulfill its obligations. WB guarantees cover risks only
to the extent necessary to obtain the required private financing. The existing policy is that WB guarantees remain
partial in nature given that they are aimed at leveraging private financing. All WB guarantees require a sovereign
indemnity under which the sovereign agrees to indemnify the WB if it pays out on guarantee claims.
The WB’s mandate for providing guarantees is rooted in its Articles of Agreement. The WB started issuing
guarantees in 1983 for the purpose of attracting private co-financing for WB-financed projects. In 1994, the
Executive Directors approved specific policy provisions for the use of partial risk guarantees (PRGs) and partial
credit guarantees (PCGs) for private and public sector projects in IBRD-eligible countries. PRGs became
available for projects in IDA-only countries in 1997 in the form of IBRD guarantees for enclave projects, and IDA
PRGs for private sector projects. Policy-based guarantees (PBGs) were introduced in 1999 for well-performing
IBRD borrowers. In 2002, Management summarized the WB guarantee policy provisions approved by the
Executive Directors since 1994 in an Operational Policy statement (OP 14.25, Guarantees) and issued an
accompanying WB Procedures statement (BP 14.25, Guarantees).
The new WB's Operational Policy Framework on Guarantees went into effect on July 1, 2014. Guarantees
have since then been available as a form of financing – alongside grants, credits, and loans – in
Development Policy (DPO) and Investment Project Financing (IPF) operations 22. The ultimate objective of
the enhanced operational policy framework was to support the more widespread, more effective use of WB
guarantees in country engagements to leverage more effectively WB resources in delivering critical
infrastructure, other investments and reform programs, and allowing for more streamlined collaboration across
the WB Group (WBG) in deployment of guarantees for private and public sector projects. The policy changes
built upon extensive internal discussions and also incorporated feedback received from relevant parties on three
continents, including with lenders and investors, governments and donor agencies, bilateral and multilateral
development partners, and non-governmental organizations.
WB guarantees are distinct from, but complementary to, MIGA and IFC guarantees in mobilizing private
sector financing. Each WBG institution has a mandate that is defined under its Articles and each serves the
needs of its clients according to these mandates. Given that IBRD and IDA clients are first and foremost member
countries, WB guarantees play a different yet complementary role to that of MIGA’s and IFC’s guarantees. MIGA
provides guarantees in the form of political risk insurance for cross-border direct investments for a wide range
of private sector clients. IFC provides credit guarantees for private sector participants as their primary clients.
Neither MIGA nor IFC guarantees require an explicit sovereign counter-guarantee. WB guarantees can also
support private sector projects but only by backstopping public sector obligations for which the member country
is willing to provide a Member Country Indemnity23. One example of natural convergence for WBG support
through guarantees comes in the support to PPPs, where IFC loans, MIGA political risk insurance and WB
guarantees have been deployed together. In practice, IFC guarantees are designed in a manner that there is
very little overlap with MIGA and WB guarantees


Types of Guarantee:
WB Guarantees consist of Project Based Guarantees which follow Investment Project Financing
guidelines and Policy-Based Guarantees which are provided through Development Policy Operations.
Although the financing mobilized with Guarantees is obtained from commercial sources, a Development Policy

21
   For more information, see worldbank.org/guarantees
22
   The policy led to the use of the terms ‘PRG’ and ‘PCG’ becoming redundant
23
   Member Country Indemnity means the counter-guarantee and indemnity provided by a member country to the Bank in connection with a
Bank Guarantee
Objective which is consistent with policy guidance is prepared for each Guarantee operation in the same as way
for traditional WB loan operations. Eligible Guarantee projects need to follow the WB’s standard environmental
and social safeguards, and integrity and anti-corruption requirements, along with other considerations.
Project Based Guarantees
A WB Guarantee covers, in relation to a project: (i) loan-related debt service defaults caused by government 24
failure to meet specific payment and/or performance obligations arising from contract, law or regulation; and/or
(ii) payment default on non-loan related government payment obligations. The WB provides guarantees to the
extent necessary to mobilize private financing for the project and/or to mitigate payment risks of the project,
taking into account country, project and market circumstances. The member country requesting the WB
Guarantee provides a Member Country Indemnity to the WB. The financial costs and benefits, access to private
and public financing, and leverage of WB resources, among other considerations, are considered in deciding on
the form of IPF financing, as appropriate.
Policy-Based Guarantees
Policy-Based Guarantees (PBGs) help to improve governments’ access to capital markets in support of social,
institutional, and structural policies and reforms as agreed with the WB. While they are structurally the same
with Project Based loan guarantees provided, PBGs are offered for general balance of payments support. Like
loan guarantees, PBGs cover a portion of debt service on a borrowing (loans or bonds) by an eligible member
country from private foreign creditors in support of agreed structural, institutional, and social policies and reform.
While the actual structure would be determined on case by case basis, the guarantee could be self-standing or
part of a larger package of WB financial support.


        Eligible country/borrowers: Sovereign governments eligible for the WB’s fiscal support programs
         termed as Development Policy Operations (DPO). PBGs are selectively offered to countries with a
         strong track record of performance with a satisfactory social, structural, and macroeconomic policy
         framework and a coherent strategy for gaining (or regaining) access to international financial markets.


        Eligible debt: PBGs can be used for any commercial debt instruments (loans, bonds) provided by any
         private institution. PBGs can cover foreign currency debt. Proceeds of the guaranteed debt can be used
         for any budgetary purposes.


        Guarantee coverage: PBGs, like partial credit guarantees, cover part of the scheduled repayments of
         commercial loans or capital market borrowings against all sovereign default risks.




24
  For the purposes of Bank Guarantees, “government” includes a member country’s political and administrative subdivisions and all other
public sector entities.
C. Past WB partially-guaranteed public bonds
Contact details

Rothschild & Co                        The World Bank
23bis, avenue de Messine               1818 H Street
75008 Paris                            NW Washington, D.C. 20433
France                                 United States
Tel.: +33 1 40 74 40 74                Tel.:   +1 202 473 1000
                                       guarantees@worldbank.org
                                       worldbank.org/guarantees



Anne-Laure Kiechel                     Pankaj Gupta
Partner – Global Advisory              Practice Manager - Financial Solutions
anne-laure.kiechel@rothschild.com      pgupta2@worldbank.org


Alexandre Gélas                        Sebnem Erol Madan
Assistant Director – Global Advisory   Senior Infrastructure Finance Specialist
alexandre.gelas@rothschild.com         serol@worldbank.org

Gatien Bon                             Jukka Strand, CFA
Analyst – Global Advisory              Senior Infrastructure Finance Specialist
gatien.bon@rothschild.com              jstrand@worldbank.org

                                       Vincent Launay, CFA
                                       Infrastructure Finance Specialist
                                       vlaunay@worldbank.org
