Building Capacity of School Leaders
Strategies that Work
Jamaica’s Experience1




Harriet Nannyonjo

Education Global Practice
The World Bank



April, 2017



1
  This paper was prepared by Harriet Nannyonjo, Education Global Practice, The World Bank. Data collection was
supported by Kristin Fox, consultant; National College of Education Leadership (NCEL) and National Education
Inspectorate (NEI).
Table of Contents
Jamaica’s Experience .................................................................................................................................... 1
Acronyms ...................................................................................................................................................... 3
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................... 4
Context .......................................................................................................................................................... 4
Literature Review.......................................................................................................................................... 5
   What do effective school leaders do? ...................................................................................................... 5
   What are the good practices in preparing school leaders? ...................................................................... 7
The NCEL Effective Principals’ Training Program...................................................................................... 9
Methodology and Data collection ............................................................................................................... 12
Survey ......................................................................................................................................................... 12
Findings ...................................................................................................................................................... 12
   What are the key good practice features of Jamaica’s school leadership Program? ............................... 12
   Challenges of the NCEL program ........................................................................................................... 17
   Principal’s practices after training .......................................................................................................... 18
   Teachers’ views of Principal practices.................................................................................................... 22
   Impact on school outcomes ..................................................................................................................... 25
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................................. 29
References ................................................................................................................................................... 30
Annex 1: Details of training modules ......................................................................................................... 36
NCEL Questionnaire - to be completed by the school principal ................................................................ 37
NCEL Questionnaire - to be completed by a teacher .................................................................................. 40




                                                                                 2
Acronyms
CSEC Caribbean Secondary Education Certificate
CXC Caribbean Examinations Council
EOs   Education Officers
GFLT Grade Four Literacy Test
GNAT Grade Nine Achievement Test
JTC   Jamaica Teaching Council
LDAP Leadership Development Action Plan
NCEL National College of Education Leadership
NEI   National Education Inspectorate
NER   Net Enrollment Rate




                                           3
Introduction

Research demonstrates that improvement in student achievement is contingent on talented school
leadership (Louis et al., 2010). School leadership impacts teacher motivation, the conditions and
the environment in which teaching and learning takes place, and the school's interaction with the
broader community. Effective school leadership is far from the norm. Many countries simply
assume that school leaders will discharge responsibilities and initiatives without determining
whether the school leaders have the knowledge, skills and understanding to be effective. Moreover,
programs to prepare and or support school leaders are either lacking or ineffective. Jamaica is one
country that has invested in a comprehensive school leadership development program.

The Government of Jamaica established the National College for Education Leadership (NCEL)
in 2011. NCEL was intended to serve the following purposes: (i) improve children’s education
achievement and well-being through excellent school leadership; (ii) identify and develop future
school leaders by equipping them with the requisite knowledge and skills; (iii) bring coherence to
existing training and leadership development programs in education by ensuring that there are
specific requisite skills and competencies; and (iv) enhance the capacity of school boards to
exercise their statutory responsibilities. The NCEL program includes several key features of good
practice in developing school leaders and has already developed a reputation in the Caribbean for
developing school leaders who focus on teaching and learning and turning around schools. The
program has received requests from other Caribbean states to offer similar services. NCEL has
also received a Bright Spot Award in innovations by the Canadian Department of Foreign Affairs,
Trade and Development

Jamaica’s approach to leadership development is part of a broader national policy for transforming
the country’s education sector. In an effort to support continuing development of existing
principals, the NCEL introduced an Effective Principals’ Training Program designed to develop
skills for serving principals and to address any capacity gaps identified by the National Education
Inspectorate (NEI).

The purpose of this report is to examine literature about good practices in developing capacity for
school leadership, identify key good practices in the Jamaica NCEL program and report on
leadership practices of principals who were trained under this program.


Context
Jamaica has succeeded in increasing access at lower levels of education but challenges pertaining
to quality remain. By 2009, the net enrollment rates (NER) for primary education averaged nearly
ninety five percent and increased at the secondary level from fifty seven percent in 1975 to seventy
eight percent in 2007. Jamaica determined that there was an urgent need to improve the quality
and standards of education if the country is to build a dynamic globally competitive economy. The
2009 Grade Four Literacy Test revealed that thirty percent of fourth grade learners had not
mastered at their grade level material. The National Grade Nine Achievement Test (GNAT) scores
for 2009 revealed low student performance in English language (51.5%) and mathematics (43.9%).
The percentage of Grade 11 cohort in public schools passing the Caribbean Secondary Education
Certificate (CSEC), administered by the Caribbean Examinations Council (CXC), had only

                                                 4
increased in English language from an average of twenty eight percent in 2001 to thirty-five
percent in 2009 and in math from seventeen percent to twenty percent. Addressing these challenges
was the primary focus of Jamaica’s education reform efforts, including school improvement policy
and leadership development.


Jamaica’s School Improvement Policy
Jamaica’s school leadership program is part of a national shared vision focusing on present and
future school leaders. In 2004 the Government of Jamaica commissioned a Task Force on
Educational Reform to review and address the quality challenges and to formulate an action plan
with the goal of creating a world class education system. The Task Force articulated a National
Shared Vision to enhance quality, access, enrolment, participation, sector accountability,
transparency and performance. The Task Force was informed by a detailed study of international
good practice including research on effective schools. To this end, it recommended a set of
strategies; inter alia, improving teaching and learning; strengthening school leadership and
governance and community participation.
The need to strengthen school leadership was justified by local needs and international
perspectives. Jamaica’s Vision 2030 emphasizes the need to strengthen the quality of leadership
in schools and to provide more training opportunities to ensure that school leaders are better
prepared to discharge their duties. A comparative analysis of successful education systems
presented in the McKinsey Report of 2007, documented the fact that successful education systems
emphasize strengthening school leadership among other things. The need to strengthen school
leadership in Jamaica was also highlighted in the Chief Inspector’s Report 2010 that identified
lack of strong leadership in almost all the schools in Jamaica.
Structure of the remainder of this report
The following section provides a review of the literature on school leadership, including good
practices in preparing school leaders. This is followed by a description of the methodology of the
study, then a description of the key features of the leadership training program in Jamaica,
including these conform with international best practice. Next changes in the leadership practices
of a cohort of Principals who have completed a training program. Finally, some conclusions are
drawn.

Literature Review


What do effective school leaders do?

Pioneering research on school leadership concluded that effective school leadership is correlated
with improved school outcomes (Hallinger & Heck, 1998; Leithwood, Louis, Anderson, &
Wahlstrom, 2004; Waters, Marzano, & McNulty, 2005; Leithwood and Jantzi, 2008). These
researchers found that the effects of leadership on student outcomes operate mainly through two
main pathways: through support and development of teachers and teaching processes, and via

                                                5
processes that affect the organizational conditions of the school. Processes include building school
community partnerships and developing school procedures and plans, as well as at the classroom
level, through focus on instruction and assessment. Each of these categories has been linked to
improvement in student learning outcomes.
Figure 1 demonstrates the centrality of school leadership and provides a summary of the leadership
interactions to improve school outcomes.

Figure 1 Framework demonstrating the centrality of school leadership to school outcomes




                                 Family
     Government                                               School
                               background
       policies                                             conditions


                                                                                          Student
                                                               Teachers
                           School Leadership                                             Learning,
                                                                                        attendance,
                           actions/practices
                                                                                        enrollment,
                                                                                        graduation


        Leadership
       development                                                  Classroom           Graduation
                                                                    conditions             rates
                                   Wider
                                 community


Source: By the author based on research literature
Consistent with earlier research the framework does not posit direct effects of leadership behaviors
on student success but rather it charts the impact of school leaders on student learning as mediated
by other people, events and organizational factors such as teachers and school climate (Hallinger
and Heck, 1998) which in turn lead to student success.
The framework also suggests that there are aspects of the context within which leadership and
schooling take place that bear on leadership. Government policies, family background, the wider
community (including the media, unions, professional associations, and business groups) influence
school leadership practices which in turn influence conditions in schools, classrooms, and the
professional community of teachers. And of course leaders are influenced by their own
professional learning experiences and by student and family backgrounds. School leadership helps
to shape school conditions (for example, goals, culture, and structures) and classroom conditions
(instruction content, classrooms size, and teaching methods) that in turn lead to improved
outcomes.

                                                 6
Earlier research has consistently highlighted key leadership practices and strategies of effective
leadership. Reviews by Leithwood & Jantzi in 2000 and again in 2008 suggest the following
practices as being the most critical to school effectiveness and performance: (i) setting direction,
by developing a consensus around vision and goals; (ii) working directly with teachers to improve
instruction and effectiveness in the classroom; (iii) regularly monitoring teaching and student
progress; (iv) fostering collaboration and engaging families and community.
Effective school leaders engage all stakeholders in a collaborative process to develop a clear vision
and concrete goals focused on student learning and growth and keeping those goals at the forefront
of the school’s attention (Leithwood et al., 2004). They communicate to all the stakeholders and
constituencies both in and outside the school about the school vision and goals (Leithwood and
Riehl (2003). They systematically collect and analyze data to monitor progress towards school
goals, identify the underlying causes of deficiencies or success in student achievement (Louis et
al., 2010; Douglas Reeves, 2006). They also train staff members to analyze the data in different
ways and use it to guide instruction (Powell, 2004). Moreover, they undertake an array of activities
to monitor the quality of instruction, such as ongoing classroom observations and feedback to
teachers (Robinson, 2007; Heck et al., 1992).

Research is unanimous that effective leaders create opportunities for relevant and sustained
professional development which is a powerful tool for improving teacher quality, the most
important school level determinant of student performance (Marzano et al., 2003). They also
ensure that teachers do not work in isolation from one another, but, instead, work collaboratively,
giving each other help and guidance to improve instructional practices (Marzano et al. 2003). Such
collaboration serves to increase commitment to the common good (Pounder (1999) and encourages
a focus on shared practices and goals (Chrispeels, Castillo, & Brown (2000). Effective leaders
implement joint planning time for teachers and other structures as mechanisms to develop a culture
of learning and professional behavior (Murphy, 2005).


Effective school leaders act as advocates of their school and engage other stakeholders—parents
and school communities—in school activities (Louis et al. 2010; Leithwood & Jantzi, 2005).
Several findings have reported positive relationships between family involvement and social and
academic benefits for students (Henderson and Mapp, 2002; Shaver & Walls, 1998).

What are the good practices in preparing school leaders?

Acknowledging that leadership is vital and what attributes of leadership practices make a
difference is one thing, systematically developing these practices and attributes is another. What
do we know about developing school leaders who can successfully transform schools?
Davis et al., 2005 recommend the following: standards-based curriculum emphasizing
instructional leadership, organizational development and change management; field-based
internships with skilled supervision; cohort groups that create opportunities for collaboration and
teamwork in practice-oriented situations; active instructional strategies that link theory and
practice, such as problem based learning through case studies; strong partnerships with schools to

                                                 7
support quality, field-based learning. Research on in-service leadership programs by Peterson and
Kelley (2002) also concluded that stronger programs offer combined on-site training, practice and
coaching which are closely linked to participants’ work; and foster a sense of membership.
Moreover, Leithwood et al. (1996) found that teacher perceptions of principals’ leadership
effectiveness were strongly influenced by program features such as instructional strategies, cohort
membership, and program content.
Davis et al’s (2005) review of research about leadership preparation identified the following key
features of effective program design which are most frequently identified in the literature as being
essential to the development of effective school leaders:
Content which includes knowledge that will allow school leaders to better promote successful
teaching and learning, especially knowledge about collaborative decision-making strategies,
distributed leadership practices, a culture of collegiality and community, the development of
management competence in the analysis and use of data and instructional technologies to guide
school improvement activities. Program content delivered through a variety of methods to best
meet the needs of adult learners and to allow trainees to apply the curricular content in authentic
school settings. This may be done through:

Field-based internships – which expose trainees to situations requiring the application of acquired
skills, knowledge, and problem-solving strategies within school settings and when guided by
critical self-reflection under the guidance of a veteran practitioner -mentor. Bottoms et al., 2003,
proposes adopting field-based experiences as a central focus and high priority area in the training
of school leaders. Murphy, 2005 also emphasizes the practical aspects: although adequate theories
would make the education world a better place, theory without practice is a like a “bridge to
nowhere”.

Mentoring – This involves a more experienced individual guiding a less experienced one/mentee
in his or her search for strategies to resolve problems (Pont et al. 2008). This helps to boost self-
confidence, and develop a broad repertoire of leadership skills through modeling and coaching.
Mulford, 2003 indicates that because adult learners respond more to demonstration, modeling and
learning by doing, mentoring is well-placed to meet their needs. In the United States and Britain,
mentoring is a standard part of principal preparation programs. Hobson, 2003 found that most
graduates who were mentored in the course of formal development rated mentoring as the most
important part of the program.

Cohort groups – adult learning is best accomplished as part of a socially cohesive activity structure
that emphasizes learning opportunities through collaboration and teamwork in practical situations.

Linking school leadership standards to professional learning: Cheney and Davis, 2011 suggest
setting high standards that emphasize quality of school leadership accreditation through evaluation
of capabilities during leadership development. Standards for school leadership can act as an
important frame of reference for the development and implementation of a professional learning

                                                  8
infrastructure. Orr and Barber (2006) found that a standards-based curriculum, and internships
were significantly, but differentially, related to leadership knowledge and skills.
Emphasizing performance-based methods and assessment rather than course completion alone.
Effective preparation programs feature instructional activities and assessments that focus on
problems of practice and stimulate effective problem-solving and reflection. Emphasis on portfolio
tasks for certification is designed to engage school leaders in active modes of learning. Using
performance-based methods as part of an overall program approach portrays what Fullan, 2002
notes as a shift from “acquisition” of information to its “use” in relation to a given school context.



The NCEL Effective Principals’ Training Program
The NCEL Effective Principals’ Training Program is a professional development program
targeting existing principals of primary and secondary schools. It is designed to assist school
principals to effectively manage inputs and to improve processes as well as to address the
challenges they face in running schools with a view of improving student learning. The program
is based on six attributes of effective school leaders namely: leading personal growth and
development, leading student learning, leading organizational management, leading for capacity
building and sustainability and leading for legal and fiduciary responsibility. Based on these
leadership capabilities NCEL developed seventeen modules designed to improve competencies of
school principals. These modules are based on international best practices, local supervisory and
NEI reports, and focus group discussions with principals and other education personnel. Table 1
shows the linkage between capabilities and the modules developed.
NEI is a quality assurance agency which appraises school effectiveness in the delivery of
education services, and provides recommendations for improvement. NEI uses indicators for
school inspection focused on the following criteria:
      A clear school mission
      Instructional leadership
      Opportunity to learn – time on task
      Monitoring of student progress
      A safe and orderly environment
      Positive school and home relations




                                                  9
Table 1: A Framework for Linking Standards, Capabilities and Modules to ensure
Leadership Accountability

 Capabilities                                           Modules
                               Round 1 of training                    Round 2 of training
 Leading Personal                                                   Self-Management
 Growth and                                                         Ethical Leadership
 Development                                                        Becoming a Reflective
                                                                     Practitioner
 Leading Student             Improving Education for               Effective Classroom
 Learning                     Boys                                   Observation and Feedback
                                                                    Conflict and Behaviour
                                                                     Management
 Leading                     Roles and Responsibilities            School Governance
 Organisational               of the School Principal               Creating a Culture of
 Management                  Preparation for the New                Accountability
                              School year                           Safety and Security
                             School Planning and Data
                              Management
 Leading for                 Quality Educational                   Emotional Intelligence
 Capacity Building            Leadership                            Managing Media Relations
 and Sustainability          Human Resource
                              Management
                             Towards a Service
                              Oriented School
 Leading for Legal           School Financial                      Procurement: Policies and
 and Fiduciary                Management                             Practices
 Responsibility                                                     Records Management


The initial training (Round 1 of training) provides exposure to eight (8) modules carefully selected
from a menu of 17 modules. This initial training involves three intensive residential days of face-
to-face training followed by preparation and implementation of LDAP.
The program consists of case studies (experiential) presentation, modeling, practice and interactive
assignments focused on the following areas:
      Identifying key contributions to effective school leadership
      Understanding the impact of leadership roles and responsibilities on the outcomes of the
       school and community
      Understanding the implications of the Financial Administration and Audit Act for
       effective management of school funds
      Using accurate data to inform school directions and policies
      Putting in place systems to address safety and security concerns

                                                10
        Providing effective instructional leadership in an effort to improve teaching practice and
         student learning outcomes.

Program participants
Training is organized in cohorts based on specific criteria. Principals are invited to attend the
development program and are certified upon successful completion. Priority was given to school
leaders whose inspection results pointed to a need for immediate support, were newly appointed,
tenured principals identified as underperforming and Education Officers [EOs] who are entrusted
with the responsibility of supervising principals. Cohorts 1 – 8 comprised 572 participants. There
were clear criteria for constituting the cohorts for school leaders to be trained to ensure that they
had some commonalities (see Table 2).


Table 2 Process by which Cohorts were selected

 Cohort        Training              Process by which cohort was selected               Number
                Dates
    1        Nov. 22 – 24,  Regional Directors were asked to identify the             77
             2012           participants by virtue of performance; school size;
                            location; school type; and years of experience.
    2        March 6 – 8, Newly appointed EOs and principals of schools               24
             2013           deemed by the NEI as being in need of immediate
                            support
    3        April 10 – 12, Principals who were appointed between 2011 and            94
             2013           2013
    4        July 8 – 10,   Principals of schools who were inspected by the NEI       36
             2013           and found to be in need of immediate support
    5        September 24 Newly provisional and tenured Principals and                97
             – 27, 2013     Education Officers
    6        February 3 – Principals of schools who were inspected by the NEI         82
             4, 2014        and found to be in need of immediate support
    7        July 28 – 30, Newly appointed and tenured Principals and                 87
             2014           Education Officers
    8        October 21 – Principals of schools who were inspected by the NEI         26
             22, 2014       and found to be in need of immediate support
    9        January 21 -   Tenured Principals of schools identified as               49
             23, 2015       underperforming.
             Total                                                                    572


Questions
Recognizing this background, the study was designed to answer the following questions:
        (1) What are the key aspects of the Jamaica NCEL school leadership program?


                                                 11
      (2) Do graduates from the NCEL program demonstrate leadership practices that are
          associated with effective schools?

Methodology and Data collection


The team used quantitative and qualitative approaches in order to understand how the program
was structured and views on the helpfulness of the program in developing school leadership
capacity. The team interviewed NCEL staff, graduates of the program, teachers, members of the
school boards and students on their perception of the changes in leadership practices; reviewed
program documents; surveyed graduates of the program about their practices before and after the
program; interviewed and surveyed teachers with whom the graduating school leaders work, and
examined data on achievements and trends to collaborate their views with outcomes. Interviews
were only conducted for the ten schools visited as part of this study.

Survey


The team sent out survey questionnaires to 4202 graduates of the NCEL program and to a subset
of teachers in the schools led by focus principals. This was through Survey Monkey. The total
number of respondents was 385 school principals3 and 400 teachers. Principals’ surveys captured
program participants’ assessments of their sense of effectiveness of the program in improving their
leadership practices in the schools where they work. Teacher surveys asked about their principals’
practices. Survey items were drawn from Leithwood and Jantzi’s (1999, 2000) studies of effective
school leadership practices and the professional standards for school leaders Jamaica.
Quantitative data was analyzed for school leaders and teachers from 385 schools for which
responses were received from both principals and teachers. The results were also used in
comparisons with before and after the training program.
The team also conducted semi-structured interviews with school principals, teachers and
education officers.

Findings


What are the key good practice features of Jamaica’s school leadership Program?

Jamaica’s school leadership program has several core elements which are consistent with
international best practices in developing capacity of school leaders, including: (i) based on
research and needs; (ii) inclusion of field experience and practical aspects (iii) cohort model; (iv)
uses certified practitioners; (v) mentorship; (vi) competence-based and integrates theory and


The team used Survey Monkey and did not send questionnaires to some of the principals because they had been
transferred to new schools. No information was obtained on why some of the principals did not respond.
3
  The high non response rate was mainly as a result of time constraints on the part of school principals and some of
them were in process of being transferred to new schools.

                                                        12
practice that links to schools; and (vii) based on professional standards. In addition, the Jamaica
program exhibits high political commitment.
Based on research of school effectiveness and needs of school leaders. The program is based on
needs analysis and gaps informed by research on school effectiveness in the Jamaican context.
The needs analysis and results of NEI were used to determine the leadership development
requirements of school leaders in the Jamaican context. The attendees view the training as very
relevant to their needs because the modules include problem-based learning case studies, applied
tasks related to leadership roles and responsibilities and development action plans linked to the
real-life demands of school-level practice. Participants expressed satisfaction with the program.
They considered the training rewarding because of its focus on real life experiences in schools and
the insight provided in problem solving.

Program content includes a strong focus on instructional improvement and school transformation.
The program includes a strong focus on teaching and learning— including use of data to diagnose
the learning needs of students, providing feedback to teachers on teaching practices and planning
professional development. Furthermore, the program aims to develop transformational leaders
dedicated to improving the school as an organization and who are ready to develop structures that
support high quality teaching and learning through enhanced teacher collaboration, enhance the
capacity of the teachers to meet the needs of students (including a specific module for boys
education) and implement reform strategies that will improve student outcomes. The focus of the
Jamaica training addresses the criticism in many of the current courses that cover general
management principles, school laws, administrative requirements, and procedures, with little
emphasis on student learning, effective teaching, professional development, curriculum, and
organizational change (Elmore, 2000). The focus on these areas is critical for leadership of
instruction and professional development, organizational design of schools that promote teacher
and student learning and building communities across diverse school stakeholders.

Inclusion of field experience and practical aspects. The field experience aspect of the program was
applauded by participants. Participants are of the view that the program is comprehensive and
offers practical suggestions and solutions. These modalities expose principals to strategies which
help them to improve systems at school they lead or to start the journey towards improvement.
Most participants stated that the field experience component forced them to reflect on what they
had been taught in the context of their own school and provided the opportunity to implement
some of the numerous innovative ideas shared during the training. An education department
official who participated in the training indicated they had gained a new perspective. “My eyes
were opened to the gaps which exist in classroom teachers who become school principals, even
after they complete a Master’s Degree in Educational Administration.”

Uses cohort groups constituted based on specific criteria that reflects commonalities of leaders or
their schools. The program uses supportive relationships such as cohort groups and mentoring
relationships that is consistent with Leithwood et al., (1996) regarding what works in preparing
school leaders. Each participant is part of a cohort. Each cohort forms a learning community that
offers formal and informal principal’s networks and peer coaching. Principals indicate that cohort
groups serve several purposes including: (i) maximizing learning through sharing experiences and
as a sounding board when they encounter challenges in their schools; (ii) providing opportunities

                                                13
to share knowledge, and forums in which they collectively reflect on emerging issues; (iii)
allowing they to turn to someone in a similar job and ask for advice when encountering a new
situation; (iv) acting as a critical professional resource in school leadership work which can be
used as a “sounding board”; and (v) helping to build an environment where ideas can be tested in
a shared and non-judgmental setting. Principals also indicate that cohort groups help them to keep
in touch with one another as they meet on a monthly basis to share experiences in addition to
regular social media contacts to provide peer support and coaching. They rely on these groups to
share experiences and knowledge and to solve problems. Principals credited the regular meetings
with their peers as an invaluable knowledge base of experiences and resource for ideas from peers.

Delivery of modules by certified and experienced practitioners. The modules are delivered by a
carefully selected team of leadership practitioners whose expertise in the respective field is
considered exceptional, including highly respected current or retired school leaders. This ensures
that the courses are more authentic and reflect real experiences and examples from respected
leaders in the education system.


Mentoring or coaching. The program includes mentoring and coaching that supports modeling
observations of practice, and feedback from more seasoned or even retired principals recognized
to have done well as school leaders.
Link to the overall sector reform program. The program is linked to the overall education system
transformation program, which includes school development planning and improvement. Some
of the training cohorts were explicitly linked to the results of the National Education Inspectorate
and preparation of an action plan to address the weaknesses identified and monitoring the
implementation of that plan is part of professional development.

Program content is aligned with professional standards. The program includes a series of modules
developed around professional standards that provide common expectations for knowledge, skills
and dispositions of school leaders. These are aimed at developing professional practices required
of effective school leaders. The development of content of the program is based on research and
analysis of the needs. This is consistent with the results of a meta-analysis of studies of
effectiveness of managerial development programs. This analysis found that practitioners can
attain substantial improvement in both knowledge and skills if sufficient front-end analysis is
conducted to assure that the right training is offered to the right leaders (Sanders & Simpson,
2005). The professional standards provide a set of common expectations for the knowledge, skills,
and dispositions of school leaders that are grounded in principles of effective teaching and learning
(Jackson & Kelley, 2002). The alignment with professional standards addresses the criticism by
for example (Peterson, 2002) relating to lack of alignment with standards for effective leadership
and administrative practice. The standards-based approach strengthens the focus on improving
instruction and school improvement. This was reinforced by development and implementation of
leadership development action plans and submission of professional portfolio, assessment and
certification. The standards are also used for performance appraisal of the school leaders and this
further strengthens the role of the standards in strengthening leadership capacity.



                                                 14
The NCEL program integrates theory and practice through LDAPs and case studies . The
modules stress the importance of problem-based learning situations that integrate theory and
practice in line with Hallinger & McCary (1992) in that they include field-based projects,
analysis and discussion of case studies and a portfolio of evidence about practice. The use of
case studies and problem-based learning has several advantages: First, it exposes trainees to
concrete elements of real-world practice and is consistent with earlier research (Kolb & Boyatzis,
1999) which suggests that most adults learn best when exposed to situations requiring the
application of acquired skills, knowledge, and problem-solving strategies within authentic
settings. Second, it offers opportunities that foster deep reflection and help trainees to link
experience with newly acquired knowledge. Third, it supports the connections and understanding
with real world problems. Fourth, implementation of LDAPs provides an opportunity to work
with the day-to-day demands of school leadership under the watchful eye of an expert mentor.
Each participant by way of reflection and self-assessment is required to articulate how
competence in at least four modules will be developed. Two weeks are permitted for submission
of a Leadership Development Action Plan [LDAP]. This is subject to a review process aimed at
ascertaining compliance with minimum standards. Subsequent to the approval of the LDAP,
participants engage in a three month field experience in which they implement the strategies
geared at helping them develop the relevant competencies. At the end of the field experience, a
professional portfolio [informed by professional standards determined by the Jamaica Teaching
Council (JTC) which comprises evidence of competencies developed is submitted for
assessment. The assessment of competencies is led by a team of two individuals who were trained
and certified by the National Education Inspectorate [NEI] as lead inspectors.
Competence-based training that involves certification. The program uses various assessments to
ascertain attainment of competencies as part of the certification process. The system requires
certification for all school leaders following the training program. Competency evaluation includes
both quantitative and qualitative data in an effort to determine the competency level prior to
certification. Primary data sources include interviews with the participants and relevant personnel
in the school. Observations of the context are also key. Secondary data sources include the
Leadership Development Action Plan (LDAP); the professional portfolio with evidence of success,
documentation and other evidence deemed pertinent to the strategies implemented. Figure 2
presents the school leadership development pathway. Based on evaluation of the portfolio, school
leaders who are deemed competent are certified and those not deemed competent are required to
re-enroll the training. Non-compliance with the requirement to re-enroll triggers Ministry of
Education accountability measures, including the Ministry of Education taking over the
management of the school.

High level of political commitment. Another significant feature of the Jamaica program is the high
level of bi-partisan political support and commitment to the program. The Minister of Education
updates parliament on the program on a regular basis as part of the report on the activities for
improving education outcomes in Jamaica. In one presentation the Minister stressed the
importance of school leadership stating: “This is a critical area, as several pieces of research have
indicated that the quality of leadership in a school is a determining factor in how effectively that
institution carries out its core functions of teaching and learning.”

                                                 15
Figure 2 Leadership proficiency pathway




Source: Jamaica National College of Education Leadership Records.
Link to professional standards. The opportunities for professional learning for current and aspiring
principals are set out in the national standards for school principals. These standards are consistent
with the research findings on effective school leadership. They are aligned with Ministry of


                                                 16
Education policy directions for school leadership. The standards were designed to provide the
knowledge and skills necessary for proficiency in leadership. They serve the following purposes:
(i) clarify the knowledge and skills necessary for effective school leadership; (ii) provide a basis
for scoping the spectrum of leadership development; (iii) help school leaders assess their own
competencies and capabilities; (iv) guide the monitoring and evaluation of school leaders; (v)
inform the development of policy to support the training and deployment of school leaders; and
(vi) promote the link between effective leadership and improved learning outcomes.


Another key feature of the program design was the close monitoring and feedback loop to ensure
program quality. The program included a monitoring and evaluation program which evaluated
each of the cohorts. The results informed adjustments in subsequent cohort training. The evaluation
covered participant views of the content of the program, delivery methods (for example, case
studies, discussions, group work, practical application of knowledge and skills) of the program,
presenters, overall quality of the program, time allowed for the program and cohort composition.


Challenges of the NCEL program

Although the training content was very well received by participants there were several challenges.
These included: resistance to the program, absence of a legal framework and limited staffing, and
time clashes between of face-to-face training requirements and regular work during the school
year. The challenges were identified through the strong monitoring and evaluation system which
was an integral part of the NCEL training program design.
Resistance to the program. Competency based training was new to school administrators many of
whom already had graduate degrees in educational leadership. They needed to be convinced about
the benefits of participation in the program. This led to resistance to participation at initial stages.
The program requirements included attending the sessions; generating a leadership development
action plan (LDAP) that was focused on improving their competencies; implementing and
recording evidence of leadership competencies; producing a professional portfolio, and accepting
the award of a competency rating subsequent to a triangulated process of assessment. These
challenges were addressed through the following actions:
      engaging in a series of consultations with school leaders, school boards and education
       officers;
      marketing the program through social and traditional media;
      making public the performance of the school leaders; and
      demonstrating the impact of competence- based training on school performance as reported
       by state agencies such as the National Education Inspectorate


Lack of legislative and policy framework. The lack of a legal framework to hold school leaders
accountable for their participation in and performance post training made it difficult to achieve
full compliance. In order to address this challenge, NCEL took the following actions:

                                                  17
      proposed changes to the Education Act;
      collaborated with the Teachers’ Services Commission, the body that ratified the
       appointment of principals;
      persuaded the Minister of Education to adjust the requirements to become a principal to
       include participation in the program and in the interim
      incentivized the participants. Those who performed well on the program had their names
       and photographs published in the daily newspapers. The ultimate incentive was for the
       principals to receive a principal’s license following successful completion of the program.

Limited initial NCEL capacity. The College started with a small staff complement that was
insufficient for number of school principals who needed to be trained. In order to address this
challenge, NCEL engaged trainers and assessors who were / had been successful and highly
respected school leaders; made the follow up process entirely online; and developed strategic and
operational plans against which to report progress against targets.
Too many sessions delivered in a short period of time. Participants stated parts of the training
were rushed and crammed with too many things within a short period of time. This was
addressed by making the program modular and to enable the participants to focus on the most
critical modules and residential to allow for longer days.
The timing of the face-to-face sessions was initially done during the school year yet principals
preferred this to be done during the summer. This was addressed through changing the training
sessions to be delivered during the summer which was outside the school year.
Principal’s practices after training

The influence of the training is reflected in how school principals execute their leadership and the
impact on their schools, teachers and students. Leadership practices were examined in two ways:
what the principals reported as their leadership practices based on how frequently they engaged in
various activities over the past one month, and the changes they reported in their schools since
they completed the training. Since self-reports by principals are subjective, the study also
examined what the teachers said about practices by principals and changes they had observed. In
addition, there were discussions with members of school boards and parents for the schools visited
and examination of data about changes in practices.


Frequency of effective leadership practices
In answers to the survey questions, school principals reported the frequency with which they
engage in various activities. After attending the program they spent on average more time on
instruction and school improvement activities. They were more likely to report that they observe
instruction, monitor students’ work, meet with teachers to provide feedback on how to improve
instruction, plan professional development activities, foster teacher collaboration, use data to plan
improvement activities, track the performance of boys, (See Figure 3 and Table 2). The Principals
were also more likely to engage with the school community, work with teachers to develop short-


                                                 18
term goals and organize professional development activities. The frequency of practices is further
demonstrated in graph 1 below.
Table 2: Principal’s Practices before and after training4
    Please indicate how often do you engage in the           Percentage           Percentage
    following activities in your role as principal of this   indicating more      indicating more
    school?                                                  than once or twice   than once or
                                                             a month before       twice a month
                                                             training             after training
                                                             N=385                N=385

    Observe instruction in classrooms                        30                   70
    Use data to monitor school and student progress and      63                   88
    identify problems
    Meet with teachers to provide feedback on how they       20                   56
    can improve instruction
    Engage in school or instructional improvement            60                   75
    activities
    Collaborate with principals from other schools           37                   65
    Engage the school community in matters of the            52                   65
    school
    Monitor the performance of boys                          20                   75
    Work with teachers to develop short term goals           30                   73
    Use data to plan school improvement activities           38                   83
    Work with teachers to solve school problems              53                   88
    Organise teacher professional development activities     38                   68
    Meet with teachers                                       33                   66


Regarding observing instruction and support to teachers, principals expressed that they now
schedule weekly classroom visits to observe teaching and learning in the school and provide
feedback to teachers on how to improve instruction. They also monitor lesson plans on a weekly
basis and review test papers to ensure that they are in line with what is being taught and worked
with teachers to establish a Curriculum implementation team. Some have put in place a system to
ensure accountability and monitor teacher performance. Members of the school boards note a
stronger team spirit and focus of working towards targets and purpose.


Principals also report more engagement in the following effective leadership practices:
consensus building around the school goals, working according to school goals, use of data and
improved teacher collaboration. Principals characterized their schools’ improvement strategies,
including: (i) shared vision and consensus among staff about the school’s goals; (ii) encouraging
collaboration among teachers that is focused on improving instruction; (iii) using student


4
    Percentage of 385 scoring 2, 3 or 4.

                                                     19
performance data to develop and implement school improvement goals; (iv) encouraging
teachers to use student learning data to plan instruction; (v) facilitating professional development
for teachers; (vi) discussing student academic progress with teachers to identify strengths and
weaknesses; and (vii) building productive relationships with the community (see Table 3).


Figure 3: Percentage of school leaders engaged in specific practices of a weekly basis before and
after training



                                Figure 3: Leadership Practices Before and After Training

                                      Track performance of boys
   Leadership practices




                                    Provide feedback to teachers

                                           Teacher collaboration

                          Collaboration with other school leaders

                                      meet with teachers weekly

                                      Observe instruction weekly

                                                                    0   10    20       30      40   50   60   70   80
                                                                               Percentage of school leaders

                                                            Before training   After training




Regarding use of data for planning, principals indicate that the leadership training strengthened
their understanding of some very crucial aspects of leadership for transforming a school,
including a culture of school planning and management that is based on data. They also noted
acquisition of skills to improve relationships both internally and with the wider community.
School principals pointed to a stronger focus on how to improve the way boys are taught in the
school and greater awareness of how boys learn. Teachers noted how they have been influenced
by their principals to plan lessons which now includes differentiated teaching strategies, greater
use of manipulatives, and incorporates more resources in the teaching processes.




                                                                              20
    Table 3: Principals’ Perception of practices, strategies and climate in the school before and after
                                                the program5
     Please indicate to what extent you agree or disagree           Percentage who Percentage
     with each statement relating to your strategies,               agree or           who agree or
     practices and climate in your school before and after          strongly agree strongly agree
     the program:                                                   before Program after Program
                                                                          N=385        n=385
     School improvement strategies:
     Build consensus among staff about the school’s goals                  48                 82
     Encourage collaboration among teachers focused on                     54                 82
     improving instruction
     Use student performance data to develop school                        38                 84
     improvement goals
     Ensure learning is at the center of strategic planning and            46                 88
     resource management
     Encourages distributed leadership in the school                       44                 88
     Teachers work according to the school’s educational goals             56                 88
     Encourage teachers to use student learning data to plan               48                 86
     instruction
     Facilitate professional development for teachers                      44                 74
     School leader discusses student academic progress with                50                 74
     teachers to identify strengths and weaknesses
     School climate and conditions:
     Create a task oriented atmosphere in the school                        64                84
     Ensure teachers know what is expected of them and feel                66                 88
     responsible for student learning
     Set high standards for students and staff                             66                 84
     Encourage collaboration in solving school problems                    50                 84
     Engage school community                                               50                 78

On encouraging distributed leadership, principals indicate conducting workshops to build capacity
of senior teachers as Grade Supervisors to support student learning. Teachers indicate that it is no
longer a one-man show: senior teachers now work closely with teachers to identify any grade level
challenges; they coordinate the standardized lesson planning to include different types of
assessment and a reflective evaluation for their respective grades. They also organize monthly
grade level meetings to discuss best practices and report on students’ academic progress.
As for community engagement, principals report having developed clear goals and indicators of
success and how to organize regular parent teacher association (PTA) meetings to ensure they
provide opportunities to listen and learn from families and students. They indicate providing
information to parents on the performance of their children on a regular basis.

5
    Percentage of 385 who agree or strongly agree

                                                    21
This information was corroborated by members of school boards who reported observing
significant changes. School board members observed seeing major changes in how the school is
managed. They note that the principal organizes regular PTA meetings and involves the school
board and teachers in planning how to improve the performance of all students in the school. They
also indicate that the level of collaboration with the school community and focus on student
performance is much more evident now. Parents reported regular PTA meetings, regular
information about their children’s performance and a more welcoming school administration.
Figure 4: Changes in effective leadership strategies

        Use data to inform decisions



        Monitor classroom activities


     Use of student perform data for                                                 Before training
                planning
                                                                                     After training

      Working towards school goals


                                       0   20      40       60        80       100       120
                                                Percentage of school leaders


Another principal stated that “teacher collaboration is now the norm and it is no longer a one-man
show. I conducted workshops for middle managers to build their capacity as Grade Supervisors to
support students learning. In addition, we standardized lesson planning to include different types
of assessment and a reflective evaluation. We instituted monthly grade level meetings to discuss
best practices and report on students’ academic progress”.
Teachers’ views of Principal practices

The team asked teachers the same set of questions as Principals and their responses are provided
in Table 4. As can be seen comparing Tables 3 and 4, teachers confirm their Principals views.




                                                   22
    Table 4: Teachers’ Perception of practices, strategies and climate in the school before and after
                                               the program6
    Please indicate the extent you agree or disagree with         Percentage who Percentage
    each of the following statements relating to your             agree or           who agree or
    principal’s strategies, practices and climate in your         strongly agree strongly agree
    school before and after the program                           before program after Program
                                                                       N=385         n=385
    School improvement strategies:
    Builds consensus among staff about the school’s goals               24                 79
    Encourages collaboration among teachers focused on                  44                 82
    improving instruction
    Uses student performance data to develop school                     34                 78
    improvement goals
    Ensures learning is at the center of strategic planning and         58                 80
    resource management
    Encourages distributed leadership in the school                     42                 84
    Teachers work according to the school’s educational                 22                 75
    goals
    Encourages teachers to use student learning data to plan            42                 84
    instruction
    Facilitate professional development for teachers                    24                 82
    School leader discusses student academic progress with              22                 84
    teachers to identify strengths and weaknesses
    School climate and conditions:
    Creates a task oriented atmosphere in the school                    56                 80
    Ensures teachers know what is expected of them and feel             54                 82
    responsible for student learning
    Sets high standards for students and staff                          52                 88
    Ensures collaboration in solving school problems                    36                 78
    Engages school community                                            52                 82


Both teachers and school leaders noted that shared responsibility has been implemented in a variety
of ways such as: collaborative planning for the new school year, increasing the role of senior
teachers in lesson planning, and the establishment of cross-cutting committees with responsibility
for academic and non-academic areas of school life, chaired by selected staff.


6
    Percentage of 385 who agree or strongly agree

                                                    23
On engaging the school community, a variety of strategies and tools were employed to increase
stakeholder involvement and satisfaction. In addition to consultations, some principals established
committees to interface, at various levels, with external constituents, including potential donors.
For example, one school had a meet and greet committee, while another aimed at soliciting support
for various activities. Open day was reintroduced at one school.
Some schools have introduced visitor feedback questionnaires which asks visitors to rate their visit
to the school. This helps schools to assess the effectiveness their customer services and to identify
the areas where they need to improve in serving their clients. Some schools also hold PTA social
interaction evenings and provide more regular student reports to parents. Both school principals
and members of school boards indicate receiving positive feedback from the community and other
external stakeholders.
Teachers’ perceptions
Teachers affirmed a shift in their views of school improvement strategies and school climate and
conditions. The survey results indicate teachers observed changes in school principal’s practices
in the following areas: (i) improved consensus building; (ii) encouraging collaboration among
teachers focused on improving instruction; (iii) use of student performance data to develop and
school improvement goals, (iv) encouragement of distributed leadership; (v) facilitating teacher
professional development; and (vi) discussing student academic progress with teachers. Regarding
school climate and conditions, teachers are more likely to report: (i) a task oriented atmosphere;
(ii) knowing what is expected of them and feeling responsible for student learning, (iii) engaged
school community, collaboration in solving school problems; and (v) high standards for teachers
and students.
Teachers confirmed that the school principal schedules weekly class visit to observe teaching
and learning and to provide guidance to teachers, engaging in instructional improvement
activities, working with teachers to resolve problems and meeting with teachers (Table 5).
Teachers noted the transformation in behavior and practices of the school principal following the
training. They pointed to an improved atmosphere at the school as evidenced from a very high
level of collaboration between the principal and teachers and the community in addressing school
challenges like student performance and attendance. Teachers indicate that they have already seen
an improvement in student attendance as a result of the initiatives put in place and expect to see
improvement in learning because they discuss how to improve on a regular basis and agree actions
to support students better.
Teachers confirmed that the principals now schedule weekly class visits to observe teaching and
learning and to provide guidance to teachers (See Table 5). In addition, teachers also confirmed
the principal monitoring lesson plans to ensure that they are in line with what is being taught.




                                                 24
Table 5: Teachers’ perception of Principal’s Practices before and after training
 How often does the school principal engage in the         Percentage          Percentage
 following activities in your role as principal of this    indicating more     indicating more
 school?                                                   than once or        than once or
                                                           twice a month       twice a month
                                                           before training     after training
                                                           (N385)              (N385)

 Observe instruction in classrooms                         30                  68
 Use data to monitor school and student progress to        52                  83
 identify problems
 Meet with teachers to provide feedback on how they        43                  80
 can improve instructional practices
 Engage in school or instructional improvement             38                  83
 Collaborate with principals from other schools            25                  65
 Engage the school community in matters of the school      43                  63
 Organise teacher collaboration to develop new             35                  88
 teaching practices
 Monitor the performance of boys                           30                  73
 Work with teachers to develop short term goals            30                  65
 Use data to plan school improvement activities            48                  70
 Organise teacher professional development activities      35                  55
 Meet with teachers                                        20                  80


Teachers perceive a stronger focus on improving instruction, and stronger collaboration among
teachers, schools and the community. They are more likely to report that the principal observes
instruction in classrooms more than once or twice a month; monitors students’ work once or twice
a week; meets with teachers to provide feedback once or twice a month; engages in instructional
improvement activities once or twice a week; works with teachers to develop short term goals once
or twice a month; and organizes professional development for teachers once or twice a month.
Teachers noted major changes, including the principal involving them in setting goals and defining
priorities for the school, working together to identify challenges and agree specific actions needed
to improve learning for all students, and they feel supported by the principal. They also noted
regular professional development activities for teachers and a sense of community in their school.
Impact on school outcomes

While it may be too early to see results in learning achievement, some schools report that the
training and actions taken by school principals are already leading to improvement in school
outcomes.

                                                  25
 Another caution with these results is separating the impact of leadership training from other
factors that influence student achievement for example student background factors, changes in
teachers, principal tenure among other factors. The analysis separates out schools which have
received additional interventions for example specific literacy training for teachers, furniture or
new school principal. The study also captures stakeholder views of their perceived impact of the
program.
An analysis of performance of primary schools whose principals were trained indicates that eighty-
three percent of the schools recorded an average percentage point increase of nine in Grade Six
Achievement Test in language arts. Sixty four percent of the same schools recorded an increase
in mastery levels of an average percentage point increase of 21 on the Grade Four Literacy Test.
Figure 5 presents the trend in the average performance of primary schools whose principals were
trained. These graphs indicate a positive trend in student performance.




                                       Figure 5. Primary school performance 2011-2014
                                  90
                                  80
   Percentage of school leaders




                                  70
                                  60
                                  50
                                  40
                                  30
                                  20
                                  10
                                  0
                                        GFLT        GAIN         GSAT LANG          GSAT Com   GSAT MATH
                                                             Type of Assessment

                                                      2011   2012   2013     2014




Improvements were also recorded in Caribbean Secondary Examinations (CSEC) in English,
mathematics, and matriculation (see Figure 5). Principals interviewed note improvements in
Caribbean Secondary School Examinations Council results and believe that this has largely been
as a result of the strong focus on learning as a result of the training provided by NCEL




                                                                     26
                                                     Figure 5. Secondary Education Performance
                                             70
  Percentage of students scoring pass mark


                                             60

                                             50

                                             40

                                             30

                                             20

                                             10

                                             0
                                                  2011        2012       2013            2014       2015
                                                                     Academic Year

                                                         CSEC Math   CSEC Eng        CSEC Matricu




Principals indicate improvement in school performance.
A principal from one school said the following:



 “at first I didn’t like it, but a lot of the ideas now being implemented in my school are from
  that training. We have realized significant improvements in Caribbean Secondary School
         Examinations Council results for 2014 compared with 2012 and 2013. These
    improvements are as a result of our strong focus on learning, improvements in lesson
 planning and regular monitoring of teacher practices, guidance provided to teachers ….. all
                          of these are as a result of the training I received”




                                                                                27
A principal from one of the schools identified by NEI as in need of immediate support observed
the following:




           “student performance is steadily improving as a result of the strategies put in place
      following my training. I conducted a detailed examination of students’ assessment results
        and trained teachers on using their student data to guide planning. As a result, heads of
        departments are better able to identify areas of need and class teachers are better able to
         track individual students’ performance and make appropriate lesson plans. We jointly
           agreed school goals and everyone in the school understands these goals. We meet
       regularly with staff to review progress and discuss strategies. I also organize professional
      development activities for teachers to address weaknesses identified. We see a significant
          change in student performance and I attribute this to the training I received. I am now
       more comfortable in carrying out my roles and responsibilities as an instructional leader;
            this has resulted in improvement in lesson delivery, time management and student
           behavior. We have also noted an improvement in school/community relationship.”




About 80 percent of schools report improved attendance. School principals noted improved
attendance due to early intervention because of use of data to identify problems and possible
causes.


One of the principals said the following:




    “attendance improved due to early intervention. Because of use of data, we found that students
      are absent on the days the school does not provide lunch. We then worked with the business
     community who are now providing support to enable the school to provide lunch for the days
    the school was not in position to provide meals. The training equipped me with skills to reach
                      out to the broader school community to pursue school goals.”




                                                28
Conclusion
This report identified the key aspects of Jamaica’s school leadership development program and
changes in practices after the principals attended the training. Findings suggest that the school
leadership program has changed the behaviors and practices of school principals with the primary
focus on improved instruction and student performance, improving school climate, supporting
teachers, improving collaboration in planning school improvement, all of which have been
shown to lead to improved student outcomes in other country contexts.
The design of the NCEL program includes several elements that are considered as good practice
and are consistent with research literature. These include: (i) using a research-based curriculum
linked to professional standards and needs of school leaders; (ii) integration of theory with
practice; (iii) cohort groups and mentoring relationships; (iv) strong focus on instructional
improvement and school transformation, and (v) use of successful and highly respected school
leaders.
So what is it that makes the initial assessment of this program positive? The answer to this question
is grounded in principles of effective school leadership in responding to the specific needs of the
School Principals in Jamaica. This is reinforced by the practical aspects of the program as reflected
in the competence-based focus of the training, followed by professional support through cohorts
groups and mentoring. In addition, political commitment is vital to success, particularly in
situations of budgetary constraints and likely resistance by the school leaders who may feel that
they already know their job since many have been principals for a long time. The strong monitoring
and evaluation program also helped to ensure that weak areas are identified and addressed in good
time.
 Political commitment arising from a bi-partisan task force and through Parliament during the
implementation has helped to catalyze transformation of school leadership.
In examining Principals’ current leadership practices and school improvement work, the study
found large differences in the leadership practices before and after the Principals attended the
leadership training. The NCEL trained Principals engage in practices associated with effective
leadership: have a greater focus on fostering instructional and school improvement through a
variety of leadership, organizational and professional development strategies. They encourage
collaboration among teachers, use student learning data to develop and implement school
improvement plans, they put learning at the center of their planning and resource use, set high
standards for both teachers and students; prioritize development and support for their teachers.
The skills and dispositions of school leaders are backed by responses from teachers in schools
which were surveyed. These pointed to stronger focus on instructional improvement, more
support to teachers and stronger collaboration than before the training. Schools are beginning to
demonstrate improvement in performance. The qualitative information points to improvement in
principal’s behaviors as the main driver of this improvement. This may strengthen the
justification for strengthening the focus on building capacity for school leadership in developing
countries where learning outcomes remain very low.
                                                 29
References

Barber, M. & Mourshed, M. (2007). How the world's best performing school systems come out
on top. McKinsey & Company.

Benecivenga, A. S. & Elias, M. J. (2003). Leading schools for excellence in academics,
character, social-emotional development. Bulletin, 87 (637), 60-72.
Berliner,

Betts, Julian R. & Grogger, Jeff, 2003. "The impact of grading standards on student
achievement, educational attainment, and entry-level earnings," Economics of Education
Review, Elsevier, vol. 22(4), pages 343-352

Beyer, B. (2009). An Imperative for Leadership Preparation Programs: Preparing Future
Leaders to Meet the Needs of Students, Schools, and Communities. International
Journal of Educational Leadership Preparation, 4(1), 1-12.

Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (1992). Leading and managing: Effects of context, culture, and
gender. Educational Administration Quarterly, 28(3), 314-329.

Bottoms, G., O'Neill, K., Fry, B., & Hill, D. (2003). Good principals are the key to
successful schools: six strategies to prepare more good principals. Georgia:
Southern Regional Education Board.

Bossert, S., Dwyer, D., Rowan. B., and Lee, G., (1982). The Instructional management Role of the
Principal. Education Administration Quarterly, 18, 34-64.

Creemers, B.P.M., & Reezigt, G.J. (1997). School effectiveness and school improvement:
Sustaining links.School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 8 (4), pp. 396-429.

Cotton, K. (2003). Principals and student achievement: What the research says. Alexandria, VA:
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.

Darling-Hammond, Linda, Ruth Chung Wei, Alethea Andree, Nikole Richardson, and Stelios
Orphanos; The School Redesign Network at Stanford University. 2009. Professional learning in
the learning profession: A status report on Teacher Development in the United States and
Abroad. Dallas, TX: National Staff Development Council.

Darling-Hammond, Linda, Ruth Chung Wei, Alethea Andree, Nikole Richardson, and Stelios
Hargreaves, A., G. Halász and B. Pont (2008), “The Finnish Approach to System
Leadership”, a case study report for the OECD Improving School Leadership activity,
in Pont, B., D. Nusche and D. Hopkins (eds.), Improving School Leadership, Volume 2: Case
Studies on System Leadership, OECD, Paris.

Davis, S., Darling-Hammond, L., LaPointe, M., & Meyerson, D. (2005). School
                                                30
leadership study: Developing successful principals (Review of Research). Stanford,
CA: Stanford University, Stanford Educational Leadership Institute.

Dimmock, C. (1999), “Principals and school restructuring: conceptualizing challenges as
dilemmas”, Journal of Educational Administration, 37 (5), 441-462.

Dimmock, C., & Walker, A. (Eds.) (2000). Future school administration: Western and Asian
perspectives. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press.

Dinham, S. (2005). Principal leadership for outstanding educational outcomes, Journal of
Educational Administration, 43(4), pp. 338–356.
Duignan, P.A. and Collins, V. (2003) “Leadership challenges and tensions in service
organizations” in Bennett, M. C. and Cartwright, M. (eds), Leadership of effective education,
Milton Keynes: Open University Press.

Easton, Lois Brown. 2008. "From Professional Development to Professional Learning." Phi
Delta Kappan, vol. 89 no. 10: 755–759.


Edmonds, R. and J. R. Frederiksen, Search for Effective Schools. The Identification and
Analysis of City Schools that are Instructionally Effective for Poor Children. Cambridge.
Harvard University, Center for Urban Studies. 1978

Elmore, Richard F. 2000. Building a New Structure for Leadership. Washington, DC: The Albert
Shanker Institute.

Elmore, Richard F. 2002. "Hard Questions about Practice." Beyond Educational Leadership, vol.
59 no. 8: 22–25.

Elmore, R. (2008), “Leadership as the Practice of Improvement”, in Pont, B., D. Nusche
and D. Hopkins (eds.), Improving School Leadership, Volume 2: Case Studies on
System Leadership, OECD, Paris.

Foster Allen, E. 2010. Chief Inspectors' Report. Ministry of Education: Kingston, Jamaica

Fullan, Michael. 1993. Change Forces: Probing the Depths of Educational Reform. London,
England: Falmer.

Fullan, M. (2001), The New Meaning of Educational Change (third edition), Teachers
College, Columbia University, New York, NY.

Gray, J. (2000), Causing Concern But Improving: A Review of Schools’ Experience,
Department for Education and Skills (DfES), London.

Hallinger, P. and R. Heck (1998), “Exploring the Principal’s Contribution to School
Effectiveness: 1980-1995”, School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 9 (2),
157 191.

                                               31
Hallinger, P. (2003). Leading educational change: Reflections on the practice of instructional and
transformational leadership. Cambridge Journal of Education, 33(3), 329–351.

Hallinger, P., & Heck, R. (2002). What do you call people with visions? The role of vision,
mission, and goals in school leadership and improvement. In K. Leithwood & P. Hallinger
(Eds.), Second international handbook of educational leadership and administration. (pp. 9-40).
The Netherlands: Kluwer.

Hallinger, Philip, and Ronald H. Heck. 2010. "Collaborative Leadership and School Improvement:
Understanding the Impact on School Capacity and Student Learning." School Leadership and
Management, vol. 30 no. 2: 95–110.

Heck, R. (1992). Principal instructional leadership and the identification of high- and low
achieving schools: The application of discriminant techniques. Administrator’s
Notebook,                                         34(7),                                       1-4.

Henderson, A. T., & Mapp, K. L. (2002). A new wave of evidence: The impact of school, family,
and community connections on student achievement. Austin, TX: Southwest Educational
Development Laboratory.

Hobson, A. J. (2003). Mentoring and coaching for new leaders. Nottingham: National
College for School Leadership.

Hopkins, D. (2008), “Realising the Potential of System Leadership”, in Pont, B., D.
Nusche and D. Hopkins (eds.), Improving School Leadership, Volume 2: Case Studies
on System Leadership, OECD, Paris.

Jackson, B. L., & Kelley, C. (2002). Exceptional and innovative programs in educational
       leadership. Educational Administration Quarterly, 38(2), 192-212.
Jim Mosenthal, Marjorie Lipson, Susan Torncello, Barbara Russ and Jane Mekkelsen. Contexts
and Practices of Six Schools Successful in Obtaining Reading Achievement. The Elementary
School Journal. Vol. 104, No. 5 (May, 2004), pp. 343-367

Lieberman, A., Falk, B., & Alexander, L. (1994). A culture in the making: Leadership in learner-
centered schools. New York: Columbia University Teachers College, National Center for
Restructuring Education, Schools, and Teaching.


Kaagan, S. S., and Makle, B. W. (1993). Leadership for Learning, Perspective, 5(1). 1-16.

Kaagan, S. (1998). Leadership development: the heart of the matter. International Journal of
      Educational Management. 12 (2), 74-81.




                                                32
King, M. B. and F. M. Newman. 2001. Building school capacity through professional
development: Conceptual and empirical considerations. The International Journal of Educational
Management 15 (2): 86±94.

Knapp, M. S., M.A. Copland, J.E. Tabert (2003), Leading For Learning: Reflective Tools
for School and District Leaders, Center for the Study of Teaching and Policy, Seattle.

Leithwood, K. & Montgomery, D. (1982) The Role of the Elementary Principal in Program
Improvement, Review of Educational Research, 52(3), pp. 309-339.

Leithwood, K. and D. Jantzi (1990), “Transformational Leadership: How Principals Can
Help Reform School Cultures”, School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 1 (4),
249-280.
Leithwood, K., Jantzi, D., Coffin, G., & Wilson, P. (1996). Preparing school leaders: What works?
Journal of School Leadership, 6(3), 316-342.

Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2000). The effects of transformational school leadership on
organizational conditions and student engagement with school. Journal of Educational
Administration, 38(2), 112-129.

Leithwood, K., & Jantzi, D. (2005). A review of transformational leadership research 1996-2005.
Leadership and Policy in Schools, 4, 177-199.

Leithwood, K. and C. Riehl (2003), What We Know About Successful Leadership,
Laboratory for Student Success, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

Leithwood, Kenneth, Karen Seashore Louis, Stephen Anderson, and Kyla Wahlstrom. 2004.
How Leadership Influences Student Learning. Minneapolis, MN: Center for Applied Research
and Educational Improvement, University of Minnesota.

Leithwood, K. (2005), “Understanding Successful Principalship: Progress on a Broken Front”,
Journal of Educational Administration, 43 (6), 619.

Louis, K. S., Marks, H., & Kruse, S. (1996). Teachers’ professional community in restructuring
schools. American Educational Research Journal, 33(4), 757-798.

Louis, K.S., & Miles, M.B. (1990). Improving the urban high school: What works and why. New
York: Teachers College Press.

Louis, K. S., Leithwood, K., Wahlstrom, K. L., & Anderson, S. E. (2010). Investigating the links
to improved student learning: Final report of research findings. New York: The Wallace
Foundation.

Marzano, Robert J., Debra J. Pickering, and Jane E. Pollock. 2001. Classroom Instruction that
Works: Research-based Strategies for Increasing Student Achievement. Alexandria, VA:
Association        for        Supervision        and         Curriculum        Development.


                                               33
Marzano, Robert J. 2003. What Works in Schools: Translating Research Into Action. Alexandria,
VA:      Association      for     Supervision       and       Curriculum       Development.

Marzano, R., T. Waters and B. McNulty (2005), School Leadership That Works: From Research
to Results, Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development, Alexandria, Virginia.

McKnight, C., J.J. Crosswhite, J.A. Dossey, E. Kifer, J.O Swafford and K.J. Travers
(1987), The Underachieving Curriculum: Assessing US School Mathematics from an
International Perspective, Stipes, Champaign, IL.

McLaughlin, M. W. and Talbert, J.E. (2002). Professional Communities and the Artisan Model
of Teaching. Teachers and Teaching: theory and practice. 8 (3/4) pp 325-343

Moos, L. and S. Huber (2007), “School Leadership, School Effectiveness and School
Improvement: Democratic and Integrative Leadership” in Townsend, T. (ed.) (2007)
International Handbook of School Effectiveness and Improvement, Springer,
Dordrecht, Netherlands.

Mulford, B. (2003). School leaders: Changing roles and impact on teacher and school
effectiveness. Paris: OECD.
Murphy, J., Hallinger, P., & Mitman, A. (1983). Research on educational leadership: Issues to
be addressed. Educational Evaluation and Policy Analysis, 5(3), 297-305.

Murphy, J. (2005). Connecting Teacher Leadership and School Improvement. Thousand
Oaks, California: Corwin Press.

Murphy, J., Elliott, S. N., Goldring, E., & Porter, A. (2007). Leadership for learning: A research-
based model and taxonomy of behaviors. School Leadership and Management, 27, 179-201.

Newmann, F., & Wehlage, G. (1995). Successful school restructuring. University of Wisconsin-
Madison: Center on Organization and Restructuring Schools.

Newmann, F. M. (1997). How secondary schools contribute to academic success. In K. Borman
& B. Schneider (Eds.). Youth experiences and development: Social influences and educational
challenges. Berkeley, CA: McCutchan.

Orr, M. T., & Barber, M. E. (2006). Collaborative leadership preparation: A comparative
study of innovative programs and practices. Journal of School Leadership, 16(6),
709-739.

Orr, T. M., & Barber, M. E. (2009). Program evaluation in leadership preparation and related
fields. In M. D. Young, G. M. Crow, J. Murphy, & R. T. Ogawa (Eds.), Handbook of Research
on the education of school leaders (pp. 457–498). New York: Routledge.




                                                34
Patton, Daniel C., and Lorena Munoz. 2008. Examining Middle Schools That Narrowed the
Achievement Gap in the Los Angeles Unified School District. Los Angeles, CA: Los Angeles
Unified School District Research and Planning. Leadership: A Bridge to School Reform, 17–24.
New York, NY: The Wallace Foundation.

Peterson, P. L. (1988), “Teachers’ and Students’ Cognitional Knowledge for Classroom
Teaching and Learning”, Educational Researcher, 19 (5), 9-15.


Peterson, K. D. (2002). The professional development of principals: Innovations and
       opportunities. Educational Administration Quarterly. 38(2), 213-232.
Pont, B., Nusche, D., Moorman, H (2008). OECD Report: Improving school leadership Vol. 1
OECD: Paris


Pont, B, D Nusche and D Hopkins (eds.) (2008), Improving School Leadership,
Volume 2: Case Studies on System Leadership, OECD, Paris, France.

Portin, Bradley S., Michael S. Knapp, Scott Dareff, Sue Feldman, Felice A. Russell, Catherine
Samuelson, C., and Theresa Ling Yeh. 2009. Leadership for Learning Improvement in Urban
Schools. Seattle, WA: Center for the Study of Teaching and Policy, University of Washington.

Purkey, S. C, and Smith, M. S. (1983). Effective Schools. A Review. The Elementary School
Journal. 83 (4). 427-452.

Robinson, V.M.J. (2007), School Leadership and Student Outcomes: Identifying What
Works and Why, Australian Council for Educational Leaders,Winmalee, NSW,
Australia.
Reeves, D. B. (2006). Leading to change: Preventing 1,000 failures. Educational Leadership,
64(3), 88–89.

Wellisch, J., A. Macqueen, R. Carriere and G. Duck (1978), “School Management and
Organization in Successful Schools (ESAA In-Depth Study Schools”, Sociology of Education, 51
(3),211-226.




                                              35
Annex 1: Details of training modules


Roles and Responsibilities of the Principal: Introduces participants to competencies which
include strategic planning, leading learning and teaching; developing a learning community;
promoting positive behavior; creating institutional effectiveness; managing fiscal resources;
ensuring accountability; and building community.

Quality Educational Leadership: Empowers participants to demonstrate an understanding of the
impact of an Instructional leader on the effectiveness of a school; importance of planning; the role
of the principal in planning; the importance of collaboration and communication to the
effectiveness of a school; interpersonal skills and relations on the effectiveness of a school; and
the importance of school culture, professionalism and ethics in creating and maintaining a healthy
school environment.

School Planning & Data Management: Promotes an understanding of types of school data and
the use of this data to promote learning; identifies good practice in the effective use of data to
promote learning and staff development and overall school improvement; possible challenges in
collecting and using school data; provides a guide for ways to integrate data into the school
improvement process and how to use data to guide decision making about instruction, curriculum,
and school programs.
Customer Service Oriented Schools: Provides school leadership with the working knowledge,
skills and attitudes necessary to embrace, design and implement a service-based and customer-
focused philosophy/orientation in the schools in their care. It also provides principals with an
understanding of the importance of ‘service leadership’ in schools and how to lead the change
toward a service oriented school.
Human Resource Management: Exposes participants to the tenets of performance planning,
measurement and appraisals.

Improving Education for Boys: Develops an awareness that boys do have different learning
styles from girls so much so that they will make the necessary adjustments to their curriculum and
school organization to facilitate and capture the learning styles of the boys in their schools.

Preparation for the New School Year: Encourages reflection on the past year to determine a
collective response that focuses on possible solutions to any issues and improvements that need to
be made; and resource requirements to ensure a seamless start to the academic year.

School Financial Management: Promotes an understanding of financial management issues in
the school context management tools for controlling expenditure and understanding the Principal’s
role in Public Sector Accounting.




                                                36
NCEL Questionnaire - to be completed by the school principal


Confidentiality
All information that is collected in this survey will be treated confidentially. You are guaranteed
that neither you, this school nor any of its personnel will be identified in any report of the results
of the survey.

About the Questionnaire

This questionnaire asks for information about school leadership in relation to the training
received through NCEL. This is an opportunity for you to provide feedback on the program and
influence future initiatives.

The person who completes this questionnaire should be the principal of this school.

This questionnaire should take approximately 20 minutes to complete.

Thank you very much for your cooperation

What is your gender?                                     Male (1)      Female (2)
What is your training NCEL Cohort?                     --------------
Number of years a s school principal                     0 -2 ( ) 3- 5 ( )   6+ ( )

 Please indicate how often do you engage in the           Yearly      Once or     Once       Daily
 following activities in your role as principal of this   (1)         twice a     or         (4)
 school? 1=once a year; 2= once or twice a month;                     month       twice a
 3= once or twice a week; 4=daily                                     (2)         week
                                                                                  (3)

 Observe instruction in classrooms
 Use data to monitor school and student progress
 and identify problems
 Meet with teachers to provide feedback on how
 they can improve instruction
 Engage in school or instructional improvement
 activities
 Collaborate with principals from other schools
 Provide information to parents and guardians
 about student and school performance
 Engage the school community in matters of the
 school
 Foster teacher collaboration to develop new
 teaching practices
 Track the performance of boys
 Work with teachers to develop short term goals

                                                  37
Use data to plan school improvement activities
Work with teachers to solve school problems
Organize teacher professional development
activities
Meet with teachers


Please indicate the extent you feel each          Strongly Disagree   Neither Agree Strongly
statement characterize your strategies,           disagree (2)        agree or (4)  agree
practices and climate in your school before          (1)              disagree(     (5)
and after the program                                                 3)
1= Strongly disagree. . .5= Strongly agree
School improvement strategies:
   Build consensus among staff about the
   school’s goals
   Encourage collaboration among teachers
   focused on improving instruction
   Use student performance data to develop and
   implement school improvement goals
   Ensure learning is at the center of strategic
   planning and resource management
   Encourages distributed leadership in the
   school
   Teachers work according to the school’s
   educational goals
   Encourage teachers to use student learning
   data to plan instruction
   Facilitate professional development for
   teachers
   School leader discusses student academic
   progress with teachers to identify strengths
   and weaknesses
School climate and conditions:
   Create a task oriented atmosphere in the
   school
   Ensure teachers know what is expected of
   them and feel responsible for student learning
   Set high standards for students and staff
   Encourage collaboration in solving school
   problems
   Engage school community




                                             38
Please indicate any changes you have noticed in the following areas since you attended NCEL
training:


   a) Student performance



   b) Student Attendance


   c) Enrollment




   d) Drop out rates




   e) Please indicate any other changes




This is the end of the questionnaire.
Thank you for your participation




                                             39
NCEL Questionnaire - to be completed by a teacher

Confidentiality
All information that is collected in this survey will be treated confidentially. You are guaranteed
that neither you, this school nor any of its personnel will be identified in any report of the results
of the survey.

About the Questionnaire

This questionnaire asks for information about school leadership in relation to the training
received through NCEL. This is an opportunity for you to provide feedback on the program and
influence future initiatives.

The person who completes this questionnaire should be a teacher in the school

This questionnaire should take approximately 20 minutes to complete.

Thank you very much for your cooperation

What is your gender?                                   Male (1)        Female (2)

 Please indicate how often the school principal          Yearly       Once or       Once      Daily
 engages in the following activities in your role as     (1)          twice a       or        (4)
 principal of this school? 1=once a year; 2= once or                  month         twice a
 twice a month; 3= once or twice a week; 4=daily                      (2)           week
                                                                                    (3)

 Observe instruction in classrooms
 Use data to monitor school and student progress
 and identify problems
 Meet with teachers to provide feedback on how
 they can improve instruction
 Engage in school or instructional improvement
 activities
 Collaborate with principals from other schools
 Provide information to parents and guardians
 about student and school performance
 Engage the school community in matters of the
 school
 Foster teacher collaboration to develop new
 teaching practices
 Track the performance of boys
 Work with teachers to develop short term goals
 Use data to plan school improvement activities
 Work with teachers to solve school problems


                                                  40
 Organize teacher professional development
 activities
 Meet with teachers


Please indicate the extent you agree or           Strongly Disagree   Neither Agree Strongly
disagree with each of the following               disagree (2)        agree or (4)  agree
statements relating to your principal’s              (1)              disagree(     (5)
strategies, practices and climate in the                              3)
school before and after the program :
1= Strongly disagree. . .5= Strongly agree
School improvement strategies:
   Build consensus among staff about the
   school’s goals
   Encourage collaboration among teachers
   focused on improving instruction
   Use student performance data to develop and
   implement school improvement goals
   Ensure learning is at the center of strategic
   planning and resource management
   Encourages distributed leadership in the
   school
   Teachers work according to the school’s
   educational goals
   Encourage teachers to use student learning
   data to plan instruction
   Facilitate professional development for
   teachers
   School leader discusses student academic
   progress with teachers to identify strengths
   and weaknesses
School climate and conditions:
   Create a task oriented atmosphere in the
   school
   Ensure teachers know what is expected of
   them and feel responsible for student learning
   Set high standards for students and staff
   Encourage collaboration in solving school
   problems
   Engage school community


Please indicate any changes you have noticed in the following areas since you attended NCEL
training:

                                             41
   a) Student performance




   b) Student Attendance




   c) Enrollment




   d) Drop out rates




   e) Please indicate any other changes




This is the end of the questionnaire.
Thank you for your participation




                                          42
