Partnership Charter
                             GLOBAL FACILITY FOR DISASTER REDUCTION AND RECOVERY                                                 1




                                  partnership charter

                             I.   Background
                             1.   The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) is a global partnership
                                  program administered by the World Bank Group. GFDRR supports developing countries to:
                                  (i) mainstream disaster risk management and climate change adaptation in development
                                  strategies and investment programs, and (ii) improve the quality and timeliness of resilient
                                  recovery and reconstruction following a disaster.

                             2.   GFDRR was launched on September 29, 2006 to support implementation of the Hyogo
1 The GFDRR Partnership           Framework for Action 2005-2015 (HFA)1. On March 18, 2015, the Sendai Framework
  Charter (the Charter)           for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 (Sendai Framework) was adopted. GFDRR now
  was adopted by the
  Consultative Group on           supports the implementation of this framework.
  February 23, 2007, and
  amended in 2010 and
  2013.                      II. Mission
2 As adopted on March
  18, 2015 by the Third      3.   The mission of GFDRR, aligned with the Sendai Framework, is to help build resilient
  World Conference on             societies that manage and adapt to emerging disaster and climate risks, and to contribute
  Disaster Risk Reduction
  (March 14-18, 2015,
                                  to the substantial reduction of disaster risk and losses in lives, livelihoods, and health, and
  Sendai, Japan) - United         in the economic, physical, social, cultural and environmental assets of persons, businesses,
  Nations, Sendai                 communities, and countries.
  Framework for Disaster
  Risk Reduction 2015-
  2030, A/ CONF.224/         4.   GFDRR’s mission supports the Sendai Framework’s goal, which is to: “prevent new and
  CRP.1 (March 18, 2015),         reduce existing disaster risk through the implementation of integrated and inclusive
  available at www.unisdr.
                                  economic, structural, legal, social, health, cultural, educational, environmental,
  org.
                                  technological, political and institutional measures that prevent and reduce hazard exposure
                                  and vulnerability to disaster, increase preparedness for response and recovery, and thus
                                  strengthen resilience.”
2                                                                            PARTNERSHIP CHARTER




5.   GFDRR pursues this mission by supporting developing countries in their eﬀorts towards:
        i.     Coordinating and scaling up technical and ﬁnancial assistance; and
       ii.     Strengthening global, regional, and country partnerships.

6.   GFDRR supports activities and prioritizes resources based on the following operating
     principles:
       i.    Targeting developing countries with high exposure and vulnerability to disaster and
             climate hazards at the national, sub-national and local level, in particular the least
             developed countries.
      ii.    Responding to countries’ commitment to and demand for resilience-building
             investments.
     iii.    Developing and supporting the implementation of policies and activities that aim
             at coherence across sustainable development and growth, food security, health and
             safety, climate change adaptation, environmental management and disaster risk
             reduction agendas.
      iv. Integrating gender, disability, age, and other social vulnerability dimensions to
          promote equity and an inclusive approach to disaster risk management and climate
          change adaptation.
      v. Promoting coordination and collaboration among partners and local stakeholders at
         all levels, including civil society.
     vi.     Demonstrating the potential to leverage additional ﬁnancing, knowledge and
             coherence, including from the World Bank Group, intergovernmental organizations,
             international ﬁnancial institutions, UN agencies, civil society and private sector
             organizations, private foundations, and other partners.
     vii.    Preventing and mitigating undue harm to people and their environment within project
             design and implementation.

III. Program Structure
7.   GFDRR is organized under the following program structure:
       i.    Country Programs: Activities that promote the mainstreaming of disaster risk
             management and climate change adaptation in country development strategies,
             national adaptation plans, and investment programs.
      ii.    Thematic Programs: Technical support, capacity, and knowledge development in
             specialized areas of disaster risk management and climate change adaptation.
     iii.    Special Programs: Dedicated programs that target thematic and country priorities in
             areas of disaster risk management and climate change adaptation.
8.   The program structure is implemented through contributions provided by partners to trust
     funds administered by the World Bank Group, including:

       i.    A Multi-Donor Trust Fund (the GFDRR MDTF), comprises a commingled pool of
             resources. The GFDRR MDTF is the central vehicle through which GFDRR implements
             its activities within the GFDRR work plan as approved by the Consultative Group. The
                              GLOBAL FACILITY FOR DISASTER REDUCTION AND RECOVERY                                                 3




3
    Reference to the Core                  GFDRR MDTF is also the primary vehicle to support the GFDRR governance structure,
    Fund under existing
    Administration                         partnerships, and management.3
    Agreements is deemed
                                     ii.   A Callable Fund, comprises a commingled pool of resources to support disaster risk
    to refer to the GFDRR
    MDTF.                                  management, climate change adaptation, and recovery and reconstruction activities,
4
    Reference to a Non-                    mobilized through speciﬁc call of funds.
    Core Fund under
                                    iii.   A Single Donor Trust Fund, comprises resources contributed by a single donor to
    existing Administration
    Agreements is deemed                   support a Special Program according to speciﬁc preferences, requirements, and
    to refer to the single-                supplemental governance arrangements.4
    donor trust funds.
                              9.    The allocation and use of resources under the trust funds is aligned with GFDRR’s work plan,
                                    results framework and administrative arrangements.

                              IV. Governance Structure
                              10.   The governance structure of GFDRR comprises: the Consultative Group, the Secretariat, and
                                    the Trustee.

                              A. The Consultative Group
                              11.   The Consultative Group is GFDRR’s primary decision-making, oversight, and advisory body.
                                    It is comprised of Members and Observers. The Consultative Group has a Chair and Co-chair.
                                    A representative of the World Bank Group serves as Chair. A Member of the Consultative
                                    Group serves as Co-Chair.

                              12.   The Members of the Consultative Group are:
                                      i.   The World Bank Group.
                                     ii.   The United Nations Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction.
                                    iii.   Countries, intergovernmental organizations, international ﬁnancial institutions, and
                                           United Nations (UN) agencies that commit to contributing at least US$ 3 million or
                                           an equivalent amount over a three-year period to the GFDRR MDTF, as reﬂected in an
                                           Administration Agreement or amendment thereto.
                                    iv. Developing countries committed to contributing at least US$ 500,000 or an
                                        equivalent amount over a three-year period to the GFDRR MDTF, as reﬂected in an
                                        Administration Agreement or amendment thereto.
                                     v. Developing countries that receive GFDRR support, upon invitation of the Consultative
                                        Group, per recommendation of the Secretariat, for a renewable one-year term.
                                    vi.    Countries or entities that are recommended by the Secretariat due to exceptional
                                           cases and are approved by the Consultative Group. Exceptional cases include
                                           countries or entities, which due to administrative and/or regulatory constraints,
                                           contribute outside of the GFDRR MDTF as the principal vehicle for supporting GFDRR’s
                                           activities and that ﬁnancially meet or exceed the contribution requirements for the
                                           GFDRR MDTF.
4                                                                           PARTNERSHIP CHARTER




13.   Observers include:
         i.   Former and prospective Members.
        ii.   Intergovernmental organizations, international ﬁnancial institutions, and UN
              agencies.
       iii.   Developing countries.
       iv. Civil society organizations.
        v. Private sector organizations.
       vi.    Private foundations.
      vii.    Countries or entities whose contribution is below the membership contribution.

14.   The roles and responsibilities of the Consultative Group include, but are not limited to:
         i.   Selecting the Co-Chair.
        ii.   Providing strategic directions to the program.
       iii.   Reviewing and approving GFDRR’s work plan, including the strategy and results
              framework.
       iv. Reviewing and approving the annual report, including reporting of achievements
           based on the results frameworks, and studies and reports commissioned by the
           Consultative Group.
        v. Commissioning studies and reports, including independent evaluations, to inform
           decisions and assess the progress and impact of the program.
       vi.    Approving the creation, composition, and terms of reference of advisory or working
              groups.
      vii.    Inviting developing countries, recipients of GFDRR support, to be non-contributing
              members of the Consultative Group for a renewable one-year term.
      viii. Approving Consultative Group membership to countries and entities per paragraph 12(vi).
       ix.    Approving and amending the Charter, per recommendation of the Secretariat.

15.   The roles and responsibilities of the Chair, together with the Co-Chair, include, but are not
      limited to:
         i.   Calling and presiding over regular and any special meetings of the Consultative Group.
        ii.   Consulting and providing strategic advice to the Consultative Group in coordination
              with the Secretariat.
       iii.   Inviting Observers to the Consultative Group.
       iv. Declaring all or part of the meeting to be open to Members only.

16.   The Co-Chair is selected by the consensus of the Members for a one-year term. The
      Secretariat facilitates the selection process following guidelines approved by the
      Consultative Group.
GLOBAL FACILITY FOR DISASTER REDUCTION AND RECOVERY                                              5




17.   The Consultative Group meets at least once each year. The Consultative Group makes
      decisions in meetings through consensus. Members and Observers that are unable to
      participate during a meeting may provide inputs electronically in advance of the meeting to
      the Chair and Co-Chair.
18.   The Consultative Group may make decisions between meetings on an electronic basis
      through a process facilitated by the Secretariat.

B. The Secretariat
19.   The Secretariat supports the mission of GFDRR and manages its day-to-day operations.

20.   The Secretariat is housed at the World Bank Group headquarters in Washington, D.C. and
      operates under the World Bank Group’s policies and procedures.

21.   Staﬀ of the Secretariat, including secondments from GFDRR partners, are employed
      following the policies and procedures of the World Bank Group.

22.   The roles and responsibilities of the Secretariat include, but are not limited to:

         i.   Facilitating the selection of the Co-Chair.
        ii.   Supporting the Consultative Group, including the Chair and Co-Chair.
       iii.   Supporting the organization and deliberations of Consultative Group meetings.
       iv. Preparing GFDRR’s work plan, including the strategy and results framework.
        v. Preparing the annual report, including reporting of achievements based on the results
           frameworks, and studies and reports commissioned by the Consultative Group.
       vi.    Assessing and deciding on activities to implement GFDRR’s work plan.
      vii.    Supervising and evaluating GFDRR activities.
      viii. Fostering partnerships, including with intergovernmental organizations, international
            ﬁnancial institutions, UN agencies, research and academic institutions, civil society
            and private sector organizations.
       ix.    Recommending to the Consultative Group the creation, composition, and terms of
              reference of advisory or working groups.
        x.    Consulting the Consultative Group on the establishment of Special Programs.
       xi.    Recommending to the Consultative Group the invitation of developing countries,
              recipients of GFDRR support, to be Members for a renewable one-year term.
      xii.    Making recommendations to the Consultative Group membership status for
              exceptional cases.
      xiii.   Preparing and/or coordinating studies and reports, including independent evaluations,
              commissioned by the Consultative Group.
      xiv. Collaborating with the Trustee.
       xv. Proposing amendments to the Charter.
C. The Trustee
23.   The World Bank Group is the Trustee of GFDRR. The roles and responsibilities of the Trustee
      are to: establish and administer trust funds pursuant to World Bank Group policies and
      procedures and the terms of the Administration Agreements entered into between the
      trustee and donors.

V. General
24.   No provision in this Charter is intended to be a waiver of, or impair or limit, any privileges
      or immunities of any Member, including the World Bank Group under its respective Articles
      of Agreement or equivalent documents, or any applicable law, all of which are expressly
      reserved.

25.   This Charter may be adopted or amended by the Consultative Group in accordance with the
      decision-making procedures set forth in Section 17 and 18 of this Charter. The Secretariat
      maintains and distributes records of any such amendments.

26.   Any amendments to this Charter become applicable to the Administration Agreements in
      accordance with the terms of such Administration Agreements.
