                      CROSS-CUTTING SECTOR




     ECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
MACRO­




                   PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
CONTENTS

n GENERAL COMMENTS	                  1

n MACROECONOMIC IMPACT ESTIMATION	   2
        GENERAL COMMENTS
        One of the main objectives of a post-disaster assessment is to estimate the impact of the event on overall so-
        cio-economic development in the affected country or area. To estimate total disaster impact, two components
        are normally estimated: first, the economic impact that represents the consequences of the destruction of
        physical assets and of the changes in production flows arising from the event that triggered the disaster, on
        overall economic conditions and performance; second, the impact on human development that represents the
        consequences of the disruption of the population´s normal livelihoods, employment and income as well as access
        to basic services of health and education. A subsequent estimation of post-disaster financial requirements to
        achieve recovery and reconstruction is possible only after disaster impact has been determined.

        One of the main features of disaster impact assessment involves the estimation of the disruptions caused by the
        disaster on the macroeconomic performance of the affected country or area. This is usually made in comparison
        to the expected or foreseen performance of the main macroeconomic variables of the country or area in the
        absence of a disaster, by superimposing into it the estimated isolated effects of the disaster on the destruction
        of physical assets and on the resulting changes in the flows of production of goods and services. Based on
        such projections of post-disaster macroeconomic performance, a set of activities aimed at restoring pre-disaster
        economic performance and including disaster-resilient reconstruction standards may be designed, constituting a
        strategy for recovery and reconstruction.

        In addition to the above, and following recent universal trends, efforts aimed at measuring negative disaster im-
        pact on human development have been started. Making use of the conceptual notions of human development
        and its components, introduced by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in the latter part of the
        20th century, it is also possible to estimate the possible negative impact of disasters on selected human-related
        development indicators that measure personal income, living conditions, and health and education access. In
        addition, potential setbacks to the achievement of Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) caused by disasters
        provide another possible measure of the human development impact of disasters. Once disaster impact on
        human development is quantified, it is possible to estimate the financial requirements to achieve human devel-
        opment recovery after disasters.

        The following section of the PDNA Handbook describes the manner in which macroeconomic disaster impact
        may be estimated on the basis of a quantification of the destruction of assets and disruption of socio-economic
        activities caused by disasters of any kind and origin. A separate section describing the methodology to estimate
        disaster impact on human development will be added later. In turn, the estimation of disaster impact leads to
        the subsequent estimation of the financial requirements or needs to achieve post-disaster economic recovery
        and disaster-resilient reconstruction.

1   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        It may not be necessarily evident to the reader that in order to estimate overall disaster impact at both macroeco-
        nomic and human development levels, it is essential that post-disaster assessments be conducted on a sectoral
        fashion, covering all institutional social and economic sectors of activity that are regularly measured in each coun-
        try of the world, and using a standard assessment methodology to enable a valid aggregation of sectoral results
        to obtain the overall view of disaster impact for the entire affected country or area. Furthermore, it is essential
        for the reader and user of the PDNA Guidelines to understand that the quantitative estimation of disaster impact
        must be evidence-based in order to satisfy the normal reliability requirements of the agency or agencies that
        are to provide the required financial resources to achieve recovery and reconstruction after a disaster, be they of
        national or international scope.

        At the national level, this task will likely fall within the purview of the Ministry of Finance and of Economic Devel-
        opment Planning, while any of numerous international organisations and friendly donor government organisa-
        tions may decide on the type and quantity of post-disaster assistance and financing to be provided.



        MACROECONOMIC IMPACT ESTIMATION
        INTRODUCTION
        Macroeconomic impact is defined as the consequences of the estimated destruction of assets and of the chang-
        es in economic flows caused by a disaster on overall economic performance. Thus, in order to analyse macroeco-
        nomic disaster impact it is essential to first estimate the total value of destroyed assets and of the changes in the
        flows of production of goods and services caused by the disaster in the entire affected area of the disaster; i.e. in
        all sectors of economic activity. After that estimation is done, it is possible to estimate the impact of the disaster
        at all levels of economic activity, the possible positive impact of proposed activities aimed at achieving economic
        recovery, and the possible positive impact of reconstruction investments following disaster-resilient standards.

        It must be recognised from the outset that there is no unique parameter to define macroeconomic disaster
        impact. In fact, some effects of a disaster, such as the cost of treating persons who are injured in a disaster, are
        considered positive to economic growth, as the number of medical treatments is used to define health sector
        production growth. Different analyses must be made to obtain a comprehensive estimation of disaster impact.
        The estimation of disaster effects on destroyed assets and on production of goods and services flows is the basis
        on which the impact of the disaster on the performance of the main macroeconomic variables may be estimat-
        ed, including – inter alia – gross domestic production and growth, the external sector, and the fiscal position of
        the affected country.

        It must be stressed, however, that not all disasters cause a measurable impact at the macroeconomic level that
        warrant the introduction of interventions to stabilise the overall economy, since a disaster may only cover and
        affect limited geographical areas of a country, or have no effect on strategic sectors of economic activity. In fact,
        many events are likely to have only a localised impact on the geographical areas covered by the natural phenom-
        enon causing the disaster without negatively impacting, in significant terms, the macroeconomic position of the
        country. On the other hand, all disasters – whether large or small – may cause significant impact and suffering at
        the personal or household levels, which would require the undertaking of interventions to lessen such negative
        conditions. In addition, disasters may have a negative impact on specific sectors of economic and social activity,


2   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        and may – directly or indirectly – produce positive effects on other sectors, and thereby affect different popula-
        tion groups in both negative and positive manners, as discussed later.

        A distinction must also be made of the impact caused by the disaster itself and the subsequent impact of post-di-
        saster activities or interventions aimed at recovery, reconstruction and risk reduction. Isolated disaster impact is
        that which may be noticed and measured immediately after the disastrous event, and which would remain in
        place if no recovery and reconstruction activities were undertaken. Measuring this type of impact – assuming
        no recovery and reconstruction activities are carried out – is precisely how a strategy and goals for recovery and
        reconstruction are defined right after a disaster occurs.

        Many persons tend to combine the negative impact of the disaster itself with the possible positive impact of
        post-disaster activities of recovery and reconstruction, and as a result may state that disasters bring about (net)
        positive results on the macroeconomic performance of a disaster-affected economy. The reader of this handbook
        must be warned, however, that such a positive outcome is not likely to occur in all cases of disaster, but only in
        countries that have a significant capacity to develop and to face economic crises; and that there are many cases
        – usually in smaller and poorer States – where the capacity to undertake and finance recovery and reconstruction
        is normally very limited and where the negative impact of a disaster is never totally overcome. Thus, the need
        to analyse isolated disaster impact separately from recovery and reconstruction impact becomes very evident.

        In addition to the above, it must be recognised that to analyse historical economic performance data to assess
        the macroeconomic impact of a disaster may not yield valid results because historical data already includes the
        effects of post-disaster interventions for recovery and reconstruction that were implemented by both public and
        private sector agents of society after disasters, unless of course details on the value and efficiency of each recov-
        ery and reconstruction activities are also available for the analysis. Therefore, historical macroeconomic data may
        not provide a sound basis for estimating the isolated impact of the disastrous event itself; it may only be used to
        estimate the combined impact of disasters and of post-disaster interventions.

        Thus, it becomes evident that the time to conduct an assessment of isolated disaster impact is immediately after
        a disaster has occurred, since that is the time when disaster effects are still visible to an Assessment Team, to
        base the definition of a strategy for recovery and reconstruction derived from the actual isolated impact of the
        disaster on the affected population and on the socio-economic development conditions that prevailed prior to
        the disaster. And, as has been mentioned previously – since in many cases of disaster there may not be a signif-
        icant and measurable impact at the macroeconomic level – impact analyses must be carried out in all cases of
        disaster at the sectoral and personal levels as well, and covering the geo-political divisions of the affected country
        (provinces, districts, communities).

        From the above considerations, it is evident that the following sequence of activities must be followed in order
        to estimate macroeconomic disaster impact:

                •	 Estimation of total value of disaster effects (i.e. aggregation of sectoral assessments);

                •	 Estimation of isolated disaster impact at the macroeconomic level; and

                •	 Estimation of the possible impact of recovery and reconstruction activities.

        The following sections describe the methodology to be used in carrying out the aforementioned activities to
        estimate macroeconomic impact of the disaster and of the recovery and reconstruction programs and activities
        that are to be developed afterwards.
3   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        SUMMARY OF DISASTER EFFECTS
        As has been defined in the preceding chapters of the PDNA handbook, disasters have two main economic ef-
        fects: first, the destruction of physical assets existing in the affected area, which is defined as “damage” and,
        second, the changes of production flows which may include decline in production and/or increase in production
        costs, which are defined as “production flow changes”. In order to have an overarching framework for analysis
        to estimate damage and flow changes in a post-disaster assessment, use is made of the world-wide System of
        National Accounts that all countries have in place to measure overall production and growth, and for which a
        standard set of institutional sectors of economic activity is considered.

        The values of destroyed assets and of changes in production flows are therefore estimated by sectoral Assess-
        ment Teams during field visits to the disaster-affected areas, in comparison to the baseline information collected
        prior to the assessment. Once all sectoral Assessment Teams have completed their separate estimations follow-
        ing a standard methodology, aggregation is made to ascertain the total value of disaster effects (i.e. damage and
        production flow changes) caused by the disaster. In that process, special care must be exercised to ensure that
        no double or multiple accounting is incurred, since very often the boundaries between sectors may not be well
        known by the sectoral Assessment Teams. In addition, care must be exercised to ensure that only those items
        that are normally measured in the national accounts are included, for which the readers of the PDNA handbook
        are referred to the National Accounts Handbook developed by the United Nations Statistics Division of the De-
        partment of Economic and Social Affairs (UNSTATS): National Accounts: A Practical Introduction, in Handbook of
        National Accounting, Series F, Number 85. In regard to the latter point it is to be noted that personal or house-
        hold income decline and expenditures are not to be included in the estimation of sectoral damage and produc-
        tion flow changes; rather, physical assets and production flow changes at the sector level are the inputs to be
        used for the estimation of disaster effects in this part of the analysis. Changes in personal or household income
        and expenditures are to be used separately for the estimation of disaster impact on human development condi-
        tions, but should not be added to estimated damage and production losses of the sectors of economic activity.

        To obtain the total value of disaster effects, an arithmetic aggregation of sectoral damage and production
        flow changes is made. In strict economic concepts, such aggregation of stocks and flows may be debatable;
        however, it is done only to illustrate the value of the global or total effects caused by any disaster. Furthermore,
        when conducting the assessment of disaster impact at the macroeconomic level, only the value of changes in
        production flows is used to estimate production decline due to the disaster; and the value of destroyed assets
        is used separately to estimate financial requirements for reconstruction. This has been recognised since the very
        early assessments made in the 1970s (as indicated, for instance, in Informe sobre los daños y repercusiones del
        huracán Fifí en la economía hondureña, pages 31 and 32, CEPAL, Mexico City, 1974).

        The aggregation of disaster effects is made not only to obtain the value of the global effects of the disaster,
        but to provide a basis for estimating the impact of the disaster on overall socio-economic development, for the
        design or modification of public policies to lessen or shorten the impact of the disaster in the short to long term,
        to provide a first idea of priorities for recovery and reconstruction among sectors, and to provide a quantitative
        basis for the estimation of financial requirements for economic recovery and disaster-resilient reconstruction.

        Persons concerned about the validity of adding assets and flows should also be assured that the values of
        damage and production flow changes will be used separately in subsequent steps of the assessment, as will be
        discussed later on in the PDNA Guidelines. Indeed, for the analysis of macroeconomic impact, only the values of


4   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        changes in the production of goods and services flows are to be used; and the values of destruction of assets
        are to be used separately to ascertain disaster impact on stocks or capital.

        There are many possible cases of duplications to be avoided during the aggregation of sectoral results. For
        example, production losses in agriculture, livestock and fishery are to be measured using unit prices paid to
        producers, and not wholesale or retail market prices. Doing otherwise would result in including parts of the
        losses of manufacture and trade sectors into the losses of the primary sectors of agriculture, livestock and
        fishery. The value of damages to housing should include the damage to the water supply, sanitation and
        electricity components that are located within the housing units only, while the damage to assets in the sys-
        tems of water supply, sanitation and electricity distribution – which reach to the street adjacent to the hous-
        ing units – are to be accounted for under the sectors of Water, Sanitation and Electricity, respectively. Any
        damage to primary, secondary and tertiary roads is to be included under the Road Transport Sector, while
        damage to roads within farms is to be included under the Agriculture Sector. Damage and production flow
        changes to built-environmental assets and services are normally accounted for in the sectors of economic
        activity that utilize them; damage and production flow changes to natural environment assets and services
        should be accounted for under the environment. Thus, the value of agricultural soils that have sustained
        damage through erosion or siltation is included as damage in the Agriculture Sector; the value of urban soils
        that may have sustained destruction is included as damage in the housing or urban sector; damage or pro-
        duction flow changes to natural forests are included under Environment. In the Tourism Sector, any damage
        to water and sanitation, electricity, transport and communications systems is only included when they are
        owned and operated by the hotel or restaurant owners; otherwise, such damage should be accounted
        for under the sectors of Water and Sanitation, Electricity, Transport and Communications, respectively.
        Production flow changes in productive sectors that are caused by the interruption of basic services such as
        water supply or electricity are accounted under those production sectors; losses in revenues of water and
        sanitation and electricity enterprises that interrupt the provision of those services to consumers due to the
        disaster are accounted as production flow losses in the sectors of Water and Electricity, respectively. In some
        countries where tourism activities and income are significant to the national economy, a satellite account
        on tourism may be included in the national accounts, and any assessed damage and production flow losses
        are included in this Tourism Sector; otherwise, any damage and production losses sustained by the hotels
        and restaurants are to be included in the Trade Sector.

        These are examples of possible duplications. In actual practice, the sectoral Assessment Teams must refer to the
        system of national accounts of the affected country to define in which sector to locate damage and production
        flow changes, and the Macroeconomic Assessment Team members should provide guidance to them on the
        matter. To assist in this matter, Annex A presents a summarised version of the United Nations Handbook of
        National Accounts, where the reader may find guidance to define the boundaries of sectors.

        Since disasters may sometimes bring positive effects, once the sectoral values of damage and production
        flow changes have been aggregated, any such positive effects of the disaster must be factored in to ob-
        tain the net value of damage and losses. An example of such a positive effect is the case of some coastal
        areas of Ecuador, which are normally uncultivated due to lack of sufficient rainfall; after the El Niño in
        1982-1983 which brought about heavy rains, a full seasonal crop was obtained and its production was
        deducted from the value of production losses. Another example of positive effects is when torrential
        rains have generated flooding and have concurrently increased the volume of water stored in hydropower

5   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        dams. In subsequent months, thanks to the additional storage of water, the affected country may be
        able to derive a positive benefit from the disaster through a higher amount or volume of hydropower
        generation, instead of using fuel-fired thermal power units, as was the case during the 2009 floods in El
        Salvador following a tropical storm.

        An example of a summary of total damage and production flow changes is shown in Table 1.

        After completing its estimation, the value of damage and production flow changes must be broken down
        into its different components. On one hand, it is very useful to define the public versus private owner-
        ship breakdown. This will provide an indication of how much, in relative terms, public and private sectors
        have been affected, which in turn will provide an early indication of the relative efforts that public and
        private sectors must make in the financing and conduction of recovery and reconstruction programs. It is to
        be borne in mind that the private sector involves ownership by private enterprises and individuals, and that the
        public sector may include ownership by national and sub-national (or local) governments (see figure 1 below).

        Table 1: Estimated drought effects in Uganda, 2010-2011 (billion Shillings). Office of the Prime Minister, The 2010-2011
        Integrated Rainfall Variability Impacts, Needs Assessment and Drought Risk Management Strategy, Government of Uganda,
        Kampala, 2012.

                                                                    Disaster Effects                         Ownership
                                    Sub-
         Sector                                                Production        Higher pro-
                                    sector       Damage                                            Total     Public     Private
                                                                  losses        duction costs

         Agriculture                                  106.2          1,969.6               85.4    2,161.2         --      2,161.2
                                    Food crops            --            911.8                 --     911.8         --        911.8

                                    Cash crops            --           123.0                  --     123.0         --       123.0

                                    Livestock         106.2            934.9               85.4    1,126.5         --      1,126.5

         Industry                                         --           278.0                  --     278.0         --       123.0
         Commerce                                         --            39.2              130.7      169.0         --       169.9
         Electricity                                      --               --             106.3      106.3      29.0          77.3
         Water supply/ sanitation                         --              0.6                1.3       1.9         --          1.9
         Health                                           --               --               14.9      14.9      10.5           4.4
         Food assistance costs                            --               --               16.9      16.9      16.9               --
         Total                                        106.2          2,287.3              355.4    2,749.0      56.4      2,692.6




6   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        Figure 1: Breakdown of Public vs Private Ownership of Disaster Effects, 2010-2011 Uganda Drought

             Ownership of disaster
               effects by sector
                                      Private


                                      Public

                                                1                  10                100                 1000                10000
                                                                   Disaster Effects, billion Shillings (LOG)

                                                    Damage                   Production losses                 Higher production costs



        Since national governments very often assist private individuals, especially those who belong to the lowest
        income strata, through the provision of cash grants, credit, and/or other incentives for recovery of production
        and for reconstruction of their assets after a disaster, the final breakdown of efforts between public and private
        sectors for reconstruction may differ from what is indicated in the previous chart.

        Other useful information for the analysis of the total value of disaster effects is the breakdown between
        damages and production flow changes; or the breakdown between the value of destroyed physical assets
        and the value of changes or losses in the production of goods and services. After conducting many assessments
        of the effects of disasters, it has been found that the relationship between damage and losses varies roughly in
        accordance to the origin of the natural event that causes the disaster. The up-to-date DaLA database available
        at the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) of the World Bank, which includes disasters
        assessed during the 40-year period between 1972 and the present time (www.gfdrr.org), shows evidence that
        events of geological origin (such as earthquakes and landslides) normally cause more damage than production
        flow changes. Disasters of hydro-meteorological origin – such as floods and drought – normally cause more
        production flow changes than damage (see Figure 2 below).

        Figure 2: Typical Distribution of Damage and Production Flow Changes for Different Types of Disasters



                                 Drought
                                     Floods
                 Earthquakes

                                              0%             20%           40%             60%                80%          100%
                                                                          Percent of total disaster effects

                                                     Damage                    Production losses                Higher production costs




7   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        The spatial or geographical breakdown of disaster effects by sub-national, geo-political divisions affected
        by the disaster enables identifying the most affected provinces, districts or municipalities. This information can
        later on be used to define the assignation of financial resources for recovery and reconstruction (see Figure 3).
        A map may also be developed showing the spatial distribution of disaster effects.

        Figure 3: Spatial Distribution of Disaster effects, Typhoons Ondoy and Pepeng, Philippines 2009



                         CAR
                         NCR
                        Bicol

                  Mimaropa

                 Calabarzon

              Central Luzon
                    Cagayan
                       Ilocos

                             0%              20%              40%              60%              80%           100%
                                                              Disaster Effects, million US$

                                     Damage                       Production losses                 Higher production costs



        The value of disaster effects may also be broken down by the main sectors of economic activity, to
        understand better the nature of the affected activities, as well as the type of activities that will need priority
        attention in the recovery and reconstruction programs. An example of such a breakdown is shown in Figure 4,
        which refers to the flood disaster in Yemen in 2008, where it may be observed that disaster effects were
        concentrated in productive and social sectors, rather than in infrastructure .

        A further refinement is the breakdown of disaster effects by individual sectors of economic and social
        activity that enables a detailed visualisation of the effects of the disaster in the specific sectors affected by the
        disaster, information that may be useful to later define sectoral priorities of intervention in recovery and recon-
        struction. This breakdown also provides a basis for the estimation of possible disaster impact on the overall
        economy, and for the subsequent estimation of financial requirements for recovery and reconstruction. Figure 5
        shows such a sectoral breakdown for the Uganda drought in 2010-11.




8   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
        Figure 4: Breakdown of Damage and Losses (in million US$) by Main Sectors of Activity After the 2008 Floods in Yemen. From
        Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment, October 2008 Tropical Storm and Floods, Hadramout and Al-Mahara, Republic of Yemen,
        The World Bank, GFDRR, Washington, D.C., 2009.

                                                       3.9


                                               29



                                  45.5                                                                 Productive

                                                                                                       Social

                                                                                                       Infrastructure
                                                                             249.1
                                                                                                       Cross-sectoral




        Figure 5: Breakdown of Disaster Effects by Individual Sectors of Economic Activity after Uganda Drought 2010-2011


                   Food Assistance
                            Health
              Water and Sanitation

                         Electricity

                        Commerce

                           Industry
                          Livestock
                        Agriculture

                                       0         200           400          600            800              1000        1200

                                                                 Disaster Effects, Billion Shillings

                                           Damage                    Production losses                  Higher production costs

        A comparison of the values of disaster effects versus the gross domestic product (GDP) in the affected country
        in the year prior to the disaster may provide an idea of the relative size of the disaster vis à vis the size of the
        affected economy. Note that the comparison is made to the previous year´s GDP to avoid comparing to the
        disaster-affected GDP in the current year.


9   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     While the addition of stock and flows values is debatable in purely economic terms as has been previously indi-
     cated, the ratio thus developed does provide an empirical measure of the magnitude or significance of a disaster,
     which may be used to compare the effects of different disasters in the same country and to other disasters in
     different countries.

     Using such a comparator, Figure 6 shows the most significant disasters that have been assessed using the DaLA
     methodology from 1972 to the present time. It seems evident that the highest magnitude values correspond to
     disasters of hydro-meteorological origin that have occurred in small-country economies, especially those of Small
     Island Development States (SIDS).

     Figure 6: Estimated DaLA Magnitude of Most Significant Disasters, 1972 to 2012. From DaLA Database, in
     http://www.gfdrr.org, and Supplemented with Data from More Recent Disasters.



                    Hurricane Joan Nicaragua 1988
                    San Salvador Earthquake 1986
                         Cyclone Evan Samoa 2012
                   Hurricane Mitch Nicaragua 1998
                      Hurricane Fifi Honduras 1974
                              Floods Guyana 2005
                   Hurricane Mitch Honduras 1998
                    Maldive Islands Tsunami 2004
                        Managua Earthquake 1972
                            Haiti Earthquake 2010
              Hurricane Ivan Cayman Islands 2004
                Hurricane Louis Sint Marteen 1995

                                                     _         50          100         150           200      250

                                                                    Disaster Effects versus GDP, %



     Similarly, the comparison of disaster effects per person (using the affected country’s total population) is a
     very useful empirical comparator to develop, so that the significance of each disaster for each country may be
     realised and also to compare disasters of different types and origins that have affected different countries in
     the past. Figure 7 shows the most significant disasters in terms of damage and production flow changes per
     person, duly adjusted for inflation, in the period 1972 to 2012, which are included in GFDRR’s DaLA Database.
     From the graph it becomes evident that small-size economies and island countries, affected by disasters of
     hydro-meteorological origin, have higher values of disaster effects per capita.




10   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     Figure 7: Most Relevant Disasters in Terms of Per Capita Disaster Effects, 1972 to 2012. From DaLA Database,
     http://www.gfdrr.org.


                                    Floods Thailand 2011
                          Hurricane Mitch Honduras 1998
                               Cyclone Evan Samoa 2012
                Hurricane Jeanne & Francis Bahamas 2004
                             Hurricane Keith Belize 2001
                               Managua Earthquake 1972
                             Hurricane Keith Belize 2001
                           Maldive Islands Tsunami 2004
                           Hurricane Louis Anguilla 1995
                       Hurricane Louis Sint Marteen 1995
                     Hurricane Ivan Cayman Islands 2004

                                                        1,000                   10,000                  100,000

                                             Disaster Effects per capita, inflation-adjusted US$/per person (LOG)


     The ratio of damage versus gross fixed capital formation (GFKF) of the affected country is another useful
     comparator that provides a first indication of the capacity of the country to rebuild the assets destroyed by the
     disaster, as well as a first idea of the possible time required to achieve full reconstruction. Figure 8 also draws
     from GFDRR’s DaLA Database to show disasters that occurred from 1972 to 2012, where the ratio of damage
     versus GFKF is highest. It may be observed that smaller economies, affected by disasters of geological origin,
     tend to result in higher values of the ratio between damage to gross fixed capital formation.

     A comparison of the value of production flow changes versus the value of the previous year´s gross
     domestic product may provide a first indication of the possible degree of affectation of economic growth, as
     well as useful comparisons to other past disasters in the same country or in others. The comparison of disaster
     effects is made with the previous year’s GDP in order to avoid a comparison that already involves the impact of
     the disaster. A full assessment of the impact of losses on the growth of GDP, however, is to be obtained through
     the impact analysis described later.




11   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     Figure 8: Most Relevant Disasters in the Ratio of Damage Versus Gross Fixed Capital Formation, 1972 to 2012, from
     DaLA Database, http://www.gfdrr.org.

                        Hurricane Mitch Nicaragua 1998
                           Hurricane Fifi Honduras 1974
                            Hurricane Keith Belize 2001
                              Cyclone Evan Samoa 2012
                           Guatemala Earthquake 1976
                          Hurricane Joe Nicaragua 1988
                          San Salvador Earthquake 1976
                        Hurricane Mitch Honduras 1998
                                    Floods Guyana 2005
                                  Haiti Earthquake 2010
                         Maldive Islands Tsunami 2004
                              Managua Earthquake 1972

                                                           _   50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 450 500

                                                                        Damage versus GFKF ratio %

     Estimation of the spatial or geographical distribution of disaster effects may enable the identification of
     the disaster’s most affected geo-political or geographical areas. Depending on the specific nomenclature used
     in each specific country, such sub-divisions may include provinces, districts, municipalities and villages. Thus, any
     field surveys conducted during the assessment should take into consideration such spatial breakdowns.

     Figure 9: Map Showing Most Affected States After 2012 Flood Disaster in Nigeria, Indicating Value of Disaster Effects
     in Million Naira




12   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     After the spatial distribution of total disaster effects has been determined, maps showing the most affected
     geographical subdivisions may be prepared to clearly illustrate those that have been more affected than others.
     Figure 9, taken from the Nigeria Flood Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), 2013, shows such a map for the
     extraordinary floods that affected Nigeria in 2012.

     Another useful comparison of the effects of disasters is the spatial distribution of per capita disaster
     effects. This entails the comparison of disaster effects vis à vis the population of each affected sub-national
     division being analysed, whether they are provinces, districts or any other lower level geographical unit, and pro-
     vides a more meaningful index of the destruction and production decline sustained by the affected population
     which can be useful for defining priorities for post-disaster interventions and investments.

     In this respect, a table must be developed showing values of disaster effects in each geopolitical or geographical
     subdivision, the corresponding population in each for the current year of the disaster in question, and a third
     column providing the average value of disaster effects per capita. These values may later on be used to derive a
     map, similar to the previous one, showing the most affected subdivisions, as shown in figure 10.

     Figure 10: Spatial Distribution of Per Capita Disaster Effects After 2010-2011 floods in Lesotho. From the Government of the
     Kingdom of Lesotho, Post-Disaster Needs Assessment Heavy Rains 2010/11, Maseru, 2012.




13   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     ESTIMATION OF MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF A DISASTER

     OVERVIEW

     The destruction of physical assets (defined as damage) and the changes in production flows caused by any di-
     saster may have an impact or consequences on the value and growth of the economy of the affected country,
     whenever the affected area is large and whenever strategic sectors of economic activity have been affected. In
     spatially concentrated cases of disaster, such impact may not be significant at the macroeconomic level; however,
     individual sectors of activity may show high levels of impact, and the affected individual persons or households
     may suffer a considerable negative impact on their living conditions, including employment and income decline
     and increased costs of living after a disaster.

     Consideration needs also to be given to possible disaster cases where a region of a country is heavily and nega-
     tively impacted so that its future economic growth is pushed below its pre- or non-disaster potential, while the
     overall impact on the national economy is negligible. Such disaster-affected regions may not be able to recover
     and reconstruct without receiving targeted assistance from the central government.

     The impact of the disaster is to be measured with respect to a baseline given by the expected or forecasted
     performance of the national or regional economy if the disaster had not occurred. To clarify, the value of sectoral
     production flow changes is to be superimposed on the performance of the economy that had been forecasted
     (before the disaster occurred) for the current and several subsequent years, for the entire country or for the
     affected areas. This superposition would enable measuring the “delta” on economic growth caused by the eco-
     nomic shock imposed by the disaster.

     As mentioned before, the aforementioned analysis of macroeconomic impact is to be made in a staged fash-
     ion; i.e. first isolating the effects of the disaster and later superimposing the positive effects of recovery and
     reconstruction activities. The isolated impact of the disaster is obtained by the subtraction of the changes in
     production flows caused by the disaster from the originally forecasted performance of the economy, assuming
     that no post-disaster interventions for recovery and reconstruction are to be made. In subsequent steps of the
     analysis, the future impacts of recovery intervention activities and of investments required for reconstruction are
     to be superimposed on the post-disaster economic performance, to estimate the combined isolated impact of
     the disaster and of post-disaster activities and their effectiveness (See Figure 11 below).

     Figure 11: Combined Impact of Hurricane Mitch and of Post-disaster Recovery and Reconstruction in Honduras

                                                 6
                     Annual GDP growth rate, %




                                                 4

                                                 2

                                                 0
                                                      1995       1996       1997   1998    1999   2000   2001      2002
                                                 -2

                                                 -4


                                                             Pre-Disaster            Forecasted          Post-Disaster

14   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     It must be mentioned that disaster impact is not expected to be the same at different levels of aggregation in
     the analysis. As stated before, the estimated isolated disaster impact at the macroeconomic level may not be
     significant, but it may be substantial in specific, individual affected sectors depending on which activities have
     sustained more disruption of productive activities. Moreover, sector-level impact may vary from one sector to the
     other, as a function of the degree of affectation of their respective activities; in many cases, the negative impact
     may be very high, while it is quite possible that other sectors may actually derive positive benefits.

     As an example, consider the combined impact on economic growth in Honduras after Hurricane Mitch in 1998
     and the subsequent recovery and reconstruction interventions. Using annual information from the System of
     National Accounts of that country, obtained from the United Nations Statistical Database (http://www.unstats.
     org) as shown in Figure 12, the combined impact of the disaster and of post-disaster activities on the growth of
     the gross domestic product is very clearly observed as a decline for years 1998 and 1999 in the agriculture sector,
     and a clear recovery trend after 2000. The impact on the trade sector, though, as shown in same graph, is less
     pronounced since that sector was less intensively affected by the hurricane. On the other hand, the impact on
     the construction sector follows an opposite trend, showing significant growth after the hurricane occurred, in
     direct response to reconstruction activities.

     Figure 12: Annual Growth of Gross Domestic Product for Selected Sectors of Economic Activity in Honduras After Hurricane
     Mitch and After Post-disaster Recovery and Reconstruction Activities.

                                                   15
                     Sectoral GDP growth rate, %




                                                   10

                                                    5

                                                    0
                                                         1995       1996      1997   1998   1999   2000   2001     2002
                                                    -5

                                                   -10

                                                   -15

                                                                Agriculture            Commerce           Construction


     The impact of disasters at household or individual person levels would normally be much higher than at sectoral
     or macroeconomic levels, and employment, livelihood and personal income losses are to be estimated as well to
     provide the basis for that separate analysis. However, from the above considerations on sectoral impact, it may
     be foreseen that employment and income would change – either decline or increase – in response to the post-di-
     saster performance of the affected sectors. As indicated in the previous example, individual persons working
     in the agricultural sector may lose more employment and income than those working in trade; conversely, the
     construction sector is likely to increase its demand for labor as a result of reconstruction activities.


     USE OF THE SYSTEM OF NATIONAL ACCOUNTS

     As has been indicated before, systematic use is made of the worldwide System of National Accounts (SNA) for
     the analysis of disaster impact. The System of National Accounts is a tool that enables economists to measure


15   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     the level of economic development and the annual rate of economic growth, changes in consumption, savings,
     investments, debt and wealth for the total economy of a country and for each of the sectors of economic activ-
     ity. Using information available in this system, economists are able to:

              •	 Forecast the future growth of an economy;

              •	 Analyse the impacts of alternative policies adopted by the government on the economy and
                 sectors; and

              •	 Estimate the impact of a disaster or any other shock on the economy and its sectors.

     The National Accounts essentially integrate, in a consistent manner, economic and statistical concepts and meth-
     ods, and thus provide a means to conduct domestic and international comparative analyses.

     Moreover, the National Accounts consist of a coherent, consistent and integrated set of macroeconomic accounts,
     balance sheets and tables that have been defined based on internationally agreed concepts, definitions, classi-
     fications and accounting rules. These accounts provide a comprehensive record of most of the complex set of
     economic activities occurring at all times in an economy, and of the inter-action between economic agents and
     groups of agents that goes with it.

     In brief, the National Accounts System is a quantitative macroeconomic representation of the national income
     cycle that uses the principle of double-entry bookkeeping of business accounting as well as several accounts, in
     order to show existing relationships between the various economic variables.

     While it is not required for all Assessment Team members to have a thorough knowledge of the National
     Accounting System in order to conduct the sectoral assessment entrusted to each of them, it is essential for
     the team members that produce the Macroeconomic Impact Assessment to be fully acquainted with this tool.
     For full particulars on the subject, readers are referred to the handbook developed by the United Nations Sta-
     tistics Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs: National Accounts: A Practical Introduction,
     in Handbook of National Accounting, of which a summarised version is included in Annex A to provide a basic
     knowledge of the subject for use and application during assessments.

     The System of National Accounts falls within the institutional domain of the National Bureau of Statistics in
     all countries. It is therefore advisable that representatives of this government agency in any disaster-affected
     country be part of the Macroeconomic Assessment Team.


     BASELINE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS

     Before undertaking the analysis of impact assessment, it is essential that an adequate baseline of pre-disaster
     conditions for comparison be collected and duly organised. This refers to two types of information: on one hand,
     historical data on the performance of the main macroeconomic aggregates for the disaster-affected country,
     including gross domestic product (GDP), balance of payments (BoP), fiscal sector position and consumer price
     information for the past five years. On the other hand, the most recent forecasts available on the same variables
     for the current and subsequent years of the disaster, as developed by the relevant country authorities for condi-
     tions expected in the future.

     The use of such information enables the elaboration of the scenario of macroeconomic performance that would
     have prevailed in the country if the disaster had not occurred. The non-disaster scenario thus developed is then

16   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     used as a base to superimpose the resulting economic flow changes as estimated during the sectoral assess-
     ments, so that the “economic growth delta” caused by the disaster in question can be estimated, assuming that
     – as a first stage in the analysis – no post-disaster interventions are to be made. Afterwards, as subsequent steps
     in the analysis, the estimated positive values of recovery interventions and reconstruction investments are to be
     superimposed, with the anticipated appropriate time delays, to forecast their positive impact on the performance
     of the economy.

     In regard to baseline on gross domestic product, annual historical information is to be obtained – usually
     from authorities of the Central Bank, the Ministry of Finance and/or the Bureau of Statistics – expressed in cur-
     rent and constant values, and broken down by sectors of economic activity, at national and sub-national levels,
     for the past five years. The same type and disaggregation of information on GDP forecasts for the current year
     of the disaster and for two or three subsequent years should also be obtained. Normally, the calendar year is to
     be used for such forecasts, although it is also possible to use the fiscal year in those countries where it is used in
     the national accounting.

     In many countries, the Ministry of Agriculture, in cooperation with FAO and WFP, conduct annual forecasts of
     agriculture production in the first quarter of each calendar year, based on the expected acreage or surface area
     that farmers intend to plant for each type of crop and on the anticipated average unit yield of different crops
     based on the type of seed varieties to be used by the farmers. When that information is available, care must be
     exercised by the Macroeconomic Assessment Team to determine whether the forecasted GDP figure prepared
     by the Central Bank or Finance Ministry takes into consideration such more recent, more substantive and special-
     ised projections of Agriculture Sector output.

     Another item required as part of the baseline for the assessment of disaster impact is the full list of technical
     coefficients or ratios that relate value added over output for each sector of economic activity included in the
     GDP figures. The most recent set of these coefficients or ratios is to be obtained from supply-and-use tables in
     the National Accounts that are normally developed by the Bureau of Statistics. These value added/output ratios
     are developed on the basis of detailed census on output and costs which are conducted by Statistical Offices in
     benchmark years; the same office estimates the value of these ratios for non-benchmark years.

     In connection with the baseline on the balance of payments, annual historical data on the current account bal-
     ance is required together with forecasted annual information about it for the current and two or three subse-
     quent years after the disaster. This information may be obtained from the Central Bank, Bureau of Statistics or
     the Ministries of Trade and of Finance in the affected country.

     In connection with baseline for the fiscal sector, annual values on both historical and forecasted series of
     revenues and expenditures, showing the current, fiscal and primary accounts, will be required. A table showing
     the current types of taxes is another essential element of baseline required for this analysis of fiscal sector im-
     pact. This information may be obtained from the Ministry of Finance and/or from the IMF Representative in the
     affected country.

     Baseline data on the historical annual variation of consumer price indexes (CPI), together with forecasted
     quarterly variation for the current year of the disaster, and annual forecasted values of the same variable for the
     years after the disaster, are to be obtained from the Central Bank and/or the Bureau of Statistics in the affected
     country, to enable the conversion between nominal and constant values for the analyses.


17   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     A set of historical data on official exchange rates between the national currency and that of the United States
     Dollar is also required for the assessment, and should be obtained from the Central Bank.


     STEP-WISE PROCEDURE TO ESTIMATE MACROECONOMIC DISASTER IMPACT

     The following sections describe the procedure to be followed by the Macroeconomic Assessment Team for
     the estimation of the possible impact of disasters at the macroeconomic level, following a step-wise approach
     that first analyses the impact of the disaster in isolation, and later examines the possible positive impact of the
     different activities designed to achieve economic recovery and reconstruction of destroyed assets under a “build-
     ing-back-better” strategy that involves reduction of disaster risk. While the UN-ECLAC Handbook (Handbook for
     estimating the socio-economic and environmental effects of disasters, United Nations Economic Commission for
     Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago and Mexico, 2003) provides the required theoretical background for
     such analysis, the procedure described here is oriented towards the practical aspects of the analysis that mem-
     bers of the Macroeconomic Assessment Team should follow.

     Three stages are required to determine whether there is any resulting negative or positive impact on the mac-
     roeconomic performance of a country affected by a disaster. In the first stage, only the isolated effects of the
     disaster in terms of changes in economic flows, assuming no recovery and reconstruction interventions, are con-
     sidered; in the second stage, the positive impact of economic recovery activities is estimated, after the needs
     for economic recovery have been estimated separately; and, in the third stage, the positive impact of disas-
     ter-resilient reconstruction activities is estimated, after the needs for reconstruction with risk reduction features
     have been estimated. The same procedure is to be followed for each of the above-mentioned stages.


     i) Possible disaster impact on GDP performance

     The following steps are to be followed to estimate the possible impact of a disaster on the performance of
     gross domestic production after a disaster. The first stage of the analysis is that of isolated disaster impact that
     assumes no activities or interventions to achieve recovery and reconstruction are ever conducted, which in fact
     is a worst-case, post-disaster scenario.

          1.	 Determine the value of gross domestic product that is to be used as baseline for comparison in the
              analysis of GDP impact after the disaster, for the current and for several (1 to 3) subsequent years, de-
              pending on the possible duration of disaster effects as indicated by sectoral Assessment Teams:

              •	 Obtain from pertinent government authorities the most recent – but as yet not affected by any
                 disaster effects – value of gross domestic product for the affected country and/or next lower
                 geo-political units available, using constant values, in the year of the disaster. These annual
                 values should normally refer to calendar years; any fiscal-year values should be converted into
                 calendar-year figures;

              •	 Adjust – upwards or downwards – the above value, using the annual agriculture production fore-
                 cast prepared by the Ministry of Agriculture in cooperation with FAO and WFP in the first quarter
                 of the year, that estimates expected crop production on the basis of farmers’ intention on planted
                 surface area for each crop and of the expected crop unit yield on the basis of seeds being used,
                 normally available at the end of the second quarter each year. This adjustment is required only if
                 the overall GDP forecast does not already include the agriculture sector’s most recent estimations.


18   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
                    In most countries, GDP forecasts are prepared by the Central Bank and/or Ministries of Finance
                    and/or Economic Planning, at the start of each calendar year; and updated on a quarterly basis
                    thereafter. Since the agriculture production forecast only becomes available at the start of the
                    second quarter, it is possible that the first forecast made at the macro level may not include the
                    agriculture sector projection;

                •	 Prepare a table showing gross domestic product for the year of the disaster and for several subsequent
                   years, for use as the basis for comparison of isolated disaster impact, expressed in constant terms.

             2.	 Using data from the sectoral assessments, already converted into constant values by using deflation
                 coefficients obtained from Central Bank or Bureau of Statistics, develop sectoral tables to estimate
                 disaster impact using the model spreadsheet presented in the next page. These sectoral tables
                 should have three main columns for the estimation of disaster impact per calendar year of the
                 analysis, beginning in the current year of the disaster and continuing on with subsequent years
                 during which disaster impact is expected. Referring to the spreadsheet shown below, fill in the
                 required information and make the following estimations:

         A            B                         C                           D                     E                F
          1                                                        Non Disaster          Post Disaster    Disaster Impact
          2 Gross production, LCUs                                 D2=D3*D4              E2= E3*E4
          3                     Quantity produced, tons            D3                    E3
          4                     Producer price, LCU/Ton            D4                    E4
          5 Intermediate consumption, LCUs                         D5=(1-D6)*D2          E5=(1-D6)*E2
          6                     Value-added coefficient            D6                    D6
          7 Post-disaster higher cost of production, LCUs                                E7= E8
          8                     (From sectoral assessment)                               E8
          9 Value Added, LCUs                                      D9=D2-D5              E9=E2-E5-E7      F9=E9-D9

     In the column for non-disaster conditions, again using data already converted into constant values, enter the
     data obtained from the forecasted performance of each sector for the current year of the disaster:

                •	 Fill in the quantity of production expected (D3) and fill in the forecasted price paid to the producer
                   (D4) to obtain the non-disaster forecasted value of gross sectoral production (fill in cell D2);

                •	 Fill in the value of sectoral value-added coefficient obtained from the Bureau of Statistics (D6), and
                   obtain the forecasted value of intermediate consumption under non-disaster conditions (filling in
                   cell D5 using the formula provided);

                •	 Obtain the non-disaster forecasted value added of production for the sector (D9) by subtracting
                   intermediate consumption (D5) from the value of gross sectoral production (D2) and fill in cell D9
                   using the formula provided.

     In the column for post-disaster conditions enter the data (again using constant values) obtained by the sec-
     toral Assessment Team for each sector for the current year of the disaster, and conduct the necessary estimations
     as follows:

                •	 Fill in the sector-estimated quantity of post-disaster production (E3) and fill in the estimated price paid
                   to the producer (E4) to obtain the estimated post-disaster value of gross production (fill in cell E2);

19   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
                   •	 Fill in the normal value of intermediate consumption, using the same value of the technical value-
                      added coefficient as used for non-disaster conditions, filling in cell E5;

                   •	 Fill in cell E7 with the sector-estimated higher production costs taken from the assessment;

                   •	 Estimate the post-disaster value added of production for the sector (E9) by subtracting the normal
                      intermediate consumption (E5) and the post-disaster higher cost of production (E7) from the esti-
                      mated post-disaster value of gross production (E2) and fill in cell E9.

     In the last column of the spreadsheet to obtain disaster impact, fill in cell F9 by subtracting the post-disaster
     value added of production for the sector (cell E9) minus the non-disaster forecasted value added of production
     (D9), which will yield the impact of the disaster on production for the sector analysed. Repeat the procedure for
     all sectors of economic activity that may have been affected by the disaster and for the subsequent calendar
     years during which impact may still be significant, and aggregate them to obtain the total impact of the disaster.

     In preparing this table, the Macroeconomic Assessment Team (using its knowledge of national accounting) must
     ensure that the above values of production flow changes refer to the sectors classified as per the definition of
     sectoral production boundaries specified in the System of National Accounts. In that regard, higher values of
     personal consumption (for instance in the sectors of Water and Transport) should not be included in this analysis.
     For this purpose, readers are referred to the section “Production boundary and principles of valuation,” included
     in the United Nations Handbook of National Accounts. This is essential to ensure that only flow changes that are
     considered relevant in the National Accounts are included in the analysis.

              3.	 In addition to the above, the estimated post-disaster higher production costs (as exemplified under cell
                  E8 in the above spreadsheet, and expressed in constant values) are to be taken as increases in produc-
                  tion in the sectors where they will be actually produced, and similar spreadsheets are to be developed
                  in order to estimate their value added for addition to the forecasted GDP, as shown in the following
                  additional spreadsheet:

         A     B                    C              D          E                       F             G       H
         1     Higher production costs             Post-disaster higher production
                    Sector/Item     Gross value,    Sector            Item            Gross value, Value- Added   Value Added,
         2
                                       LCUs                                              LCUs          Coeff.         LCUs
         3     Agriculture
         4     Seeds provision            350.0 Trade         Import of seeds              350.0           0.35          122.5
         5     Fertilizer costs           650.0 Industry      Fertilizer production        650.0           0.45          292.5
         6     Pesticide costs            350.0 Industry      Pesticide production         350.0           0.45         157.50
         7     Transport
         8     Fuel consumption          2,100.0 Trade        Sales of fuel               2,100.0          0.35          735.0
         9     Maintenance costs         1,800.0 Services     Vehicle maintenance         1,800.0          0.35          630.0
         10 Health
         11 Vaccination costs             450.0 Industry      Vaccine production           450.0           0.45          202.5
               Information                250.0 Industry      Printing costs               150.0           0.45           67.5
         12
               campaign
         13                                        Services   Dissemination fees           100.0           0.35           35.0
         14 Total                                                                                                      2,242.5


20   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
              In the above spreadsheet use is made of several examples that require clarification and explanations
              to ensure clear understanding. First, in the Agriculture Sector, higher expenditures are required for the
              post-disaster acquisition of agriculture inputs (seeds, fertilizers and pesticides for replanting of the sea-
              sonal crop) which increase the intermediate consumption in the sector; these translate in sales of seeds
              in the Commerce Sector and in production of fertilizers and insecticides in the Industry Sector. Second,
              in the transport sector, the higher costs of transport involved in the utilisation of longer alternative roads
              that must be used because of destruction of certain road sections that result in higher costs of Transport
              Sector costs (which again increase intermediate consumption in the Transport Sector), would translate
              to additional fuel sales in the Commerce Sector and in more vehicle maintenance in the Services Sector.
              Third, the Health Sector requires conducting a vaccination campaign together with an information cam-
              paign to control an increase in morbidity after a disaster, which is taken as an increase in intermediate
              consumption in health, but this also translates into higher production of vaccines and information mate-
              rial in the Industry Sector as well as a sale of consultancy fees in the Advertisement or Commerce Sector.

              The value added for each of the activities under the sectors listed under column D is to be obtained from
              multiplying the value of each activity listed under column E times the value-added coefficient listed for
              each sector of economic activity under column F. Once each cell of column F is estimated, the total of
              column F is obtained and filled in cell F14, which is to be added to the value of pre-disaster GDP forecast.

          4.	 Convert the value of houses destroyed by the disaster into value added losses, using the discount co-
              efficients normally included in the GDP component of “ownership of dwellings.” In this case, only the
              damage value of houses for which formal ownership is defined is to be considered; informal housing
              damage is not to be included in these calculations.

          5.	 Prepare a summary table showing the annual values of production losses (as described under point
              2 in this section) and higher intermediate consumption production (as described under point 3 of
              this section), expressed in constant values – by deflating nominal loss values using the implicit price
              deflator in each calendar year— as estimated by the sectoral Assessment Teams, ensuring no
              duplication among sectors.

                   (i)	 Estimated sectoral output losses should be included as having a negative sign (after adding up
                        all sectoral losses as described under point 2 above).

                   (ii)	 Estimated higher intermediate consumption production should be assigned to the sectors
                         where the additional production are actually going to be made in a proportion defined by the
                         sectoral specialists, and should have a positive sign (as described under point 3 above).

              The table should have as many columns as the number of years that each of the negative or positive
              production flow changes would cover, on the basis of the sectoral specialists´ findings.

          6.	 Estimate post-disaster gross domestic product (GDP), for the year of the disaster and for several
              subsequent years (See Table 2 in the following page).

              •	 Subtract the disaster-induced, value-added production losses as given in 5-i) and 5-ii) from the
                 non-disaster forecasted GDP figures, and subtract the value of dwelling ownership destroyed by
                 the disaster as given in point 4), using constant values.



21   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
                 •	 Determine resulting annual post-disaster GDP growth rates, for the entire period of analysis, and
                    compare them to the forecasted growth rates if the disaster had not occurred, to ascertain disaster
                    impact (as shown in Table 2) (note that in this case, most of the houses that were destroyed were
                    of the informal type; thus, losses on home ownership in the national accounts are negligible), and
                    prepare a time chart showing GDP change over time, as shown in Figure 13. In order to do that,
                    if a significant modification has arisen in the labor force due to the action of the disaster – i.e. a
                    sizable number of deaths, and/or temporary or permanent disability of workers, or of prolonged
                    illness – the additional sudden decline in GDP for the first subsequent year is to be introduced. This
                    would imply the availability of detailed information on the number of deaths, in terms not only
                    of number, but of age, sector of employment, etc. Should this breakdown of data be unavailable,
                    average values may be utilised and factored in the estimations, as was done in the recent case of
                    the Haiti earthquake in 2010.

     Table 2: Example of GDP Impact Analysis After Mt. Merapi Volcanic Eruption, Sleman District, Indonesia, 2010 (In Constant
     Value billion Rp). From World Bank, Damage, Losses and Needs Assessment, Mount Merapi Volcanic Eruption, Jakarta,
     Indonesia, 2010.

                                                                      2009           2010          2011             2012
                                                      Non-Disaster GDP Performance
         GDP, real billion Rp                                             12,504        13,285        14,133           15,031
         Forecasted annual growth rate, %                                    5.11           6.25        6.38               6.36

                                                          Disaster-Induced Losses
         Production decline, real billion Rp                                                229           585                --

         Intermediate consumption production, real billion Rp                                22            47                --

         Losses in destroyed house ownership                                                 …             …                …
         Net production losses, real billion Rp                                             207           538                --
                                                  Post-Disaster Impact on GDP Performance
         Post-Disaster GDP, real billion Rp                                             13,079        13,595           15,031
         Post-Disaster annual growth rate, %                                                4.60        2.33               6.36
         Post-Disaster GDP Impact, %                                                        1.65        4.05                 --




22   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     Figure 13: Estimated Impact on GDP Growth Rate After 2010 Haiti Earthquake Without Recovery or Reconstruction
     Interventions and Investments

                                                6

                    Annual GDP Growth Rate %    4
                                                2
                                                 0
                                                  2009   2010         2011       2012           2013       2014
                                                -5
                                                -2
                                                -6
                                                -8
                                               -10

                                                            Without Earthquake     After Earthquake


     The above chart shows the estimated isolated impact of the Haiti earthquake of 2010, considering only economic losses
     and assuming no interventions for recovery and reconstruction, in comparison to the growth forecasted before the disaster
     occurred. It may be observed that, in this case, production losses and higher expenditures will be present even after the
     fifth year following the disaster.

     The Macroeconomic Team must also conduct further analysis of disaster impact on GDP, in order to ascertain the
     differential impact of the disaster in all affected geo-political or geographical subdivisions of the
     country. This is of course depending on the availability of macroeconomic data for such divisions, whether
     provinces or districts, and that the sector teams have estimated the values of asset destruction and production
     flow changes related to the same provinces and districts. The latter is standard practice under the DaLA meth-
     odology, while the availability of GDP information at the province or district level depends on the country under
     consideration and its degree of development of its System of National Accounts.

     Figures 14 to 16 show this spatial distribution of GDP impact at the national, provincial and district level for the
     disaster caused by the Mount Merapi Volcanic Eruption in Indonesia in 2010. Both tables come from the World
     Bank: Damage, Losses and Needs Assessment, Mount Merapi Volcanic Eruption, Jakarta, Indonesia, 2010. There
     it may be clearly observed that, thanks to the availability of GDP information down to the district level in Indone-
     sia and the estimation of disaster-induced production flow changes broken down to the same geographical level
     of detail, application of the DaLA methodology enables to determine the degree of GDP impact of the disaster
     in the different geopolitical units, and to identify the unit that was most affected.




23   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     Figure 14: Impact on GDP at the National Level, After Mount Merapi Volcanic Eruption in Indonesia




                                                        Real GDP Growth Rate %
                                                                                           6.25



                                                                                               6



                                                                                           5.75
                                                                                              2009            2010             2011          2012


                                                                                                         Non-Disaster      Post-Disaster

     Figure 15: Impact on GDP in Central Java Province, After Mount Merapi Volcanic Eruption in Indonesia
                 Real Provincial GDP Growth Rate %




                                                                                          6



                                                                                         5.5



                                                                                          5
                                                                                          2009             2010             2011           2012


                                                                                                      Non-Disaster      Post-Disaster

     Figure 16: Impact on GDP at the Sleman District level, After Mount Merapi Volcanic Eruption in Indonesia

                                                                                               7
                                                     Real Provincial GDP Growth Rate %




                                                                                               6

                                                                                               5

                                                                                               4

                                                                                               3

                                                                                               2
                                                                                               2009           2010             2011          2012


                                                                                                        Non-Disaster      Post-Disaster

     The comparative analysis of the three preceding graphs provides quantitative evidence of the fact that was point-
     ed out initially at the start of this handbook section: i.e. that disaster macroeconomic impact at the national level
     may be negligible (except for the case of very large disasters), while disaster impact increases at sub-national levels
     to the point of being substantial at the lowest possible geographical level. In this case, disaster impact is significant


24   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     (above 4 percent) at the district level as shown in Figure 16, while it was insignificant at the national level as indi-
     cated in Figure 14 (less than 0.1 percent), and has an intermediate value at province level as shown in Figure 15.

     Several considerations become evident to the Macroeconomic Assessment Team members. The GDP analysis
     described in the preceding paragraphs will enable them to determine whether there is any repercussion of the
     disaster on the macroeconomic performance of the affected country. In most cases, such impact will likely be
     small or negligible (such as shown in Figure 14 for Indonesia as a whole), while in cases of disasters covering
     extensive areas and/or affecting strategic sectors of a relatively small economy, impact may be significant (which
     is the case for Sleman District in Indonesia following the Mount Merapi volcanic eruption shown in Figure 16).
     Based on that analysis, it will be possible for the macro team to identify and design short- to medium-term strat-
     egies to promote and accelerate recovery of production.

     The reader of this PDNA handbook should note that the step-wise procedure described above applies to all three
     stages of the analysis of disaster impact on GDP: i.e. first, to estimate isolated disaster impact, when no recovery
     and reconstruction activities are included; second, adding the positive impact of recovery activities, once recov-
     ery needs have been estimated; and, third, superimposing the positive impact of disaster-resilient reconstruction
     investments, after reconstruction needs have been estimated.


     ii) Possible disaster impact on the External Sector

     This section provides details to guide the Macroeconomic Assessment Team to estimate the possible impact
     of the disaster on the external sector of the affected country; that is, on the country´s balance of payments
     (BoP). As in the case of analysis of disaster impact on GDP described in the preceding section, disaster impact
     on BoP is to be conducted again in three subsequent stages: first, the basic analysis of isolated disaster impact
     that assumes no activities or interventions to achieve recovery and reconstruction are ever conducted, which in
     fact is a worst-case post-disaster scenario; second, the possible impact of recovery activities, after a recovery
     strategy has been defined; and, third, the possible impact of disaster-resilient reconstruction investments.

     Before getting into the subject, it hardly seems necessary to say that balance of payment analysis is done only
     at the national level, and that the same data would not be available for sub-national geographical subdivisions.

     The following steps are to be followed to estimate the possible impact of a disaster on the balance of payments
     in a country after a disaster:

          1.	 Determine the information on the current account of the balance of payments for the affected country
              that is to be used as baseline for the analysis of post-disaster impact, for the current and subsequent
              years, depending on the likely duration of disaster effects as indicated by the most affected sectors.

          2.	 Obtain from sectoral estimations of production flow changes, those that would have an impact on
              increasing imports or decreasing exports of both goods and services (on the Balance of Trade), over the
              current and subsequent years where disaster-induced production flow changes are to be spread over
              (As a 1-year example of these, see Table 3 below).

          3.	 Subtract the higher imports and lower exports obtained in step 2 from the value of the different
              components of the current accounts in the BoP, to obtain the resulting post-disaster value of BoP
              (See Table 4 below as a single-year impact example).


25   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     The example shown in Tables 3 and 4, which refer to the impact of the recent swine flu pandemic in a small
     Caribbean island country, serves to illustrate the procedure described above for the estimation of the disaster
     impact on the current account of the balance of payments.

     Table 3: From Value of Production Flow Changes to Impact on Balance of Trade, after Swine Flu Pandemic in a Small Caribbean
     Country, in Million J$
         Sector of                                                                   Imported or                Disaster impact
                                       Production flow changes
         economic                                                                     exported                  on: (million J$)
         activity            Type of flow change               Value (Million J$)   component, %               Exports    Imports
         Agriculture         Plantation production                           23.1                       30          6.9
         Manufacture         Large industry output                        5,479.8                       30      1,643.9
         Tourism             Tourism sales                                8,465.0                   100         8,465.0
         Mining              Mining production                              144.9                   100           144.9
         Health              Anti-viral medication                          142.9                   100                      142.9
         Total                                                           14,255.7                              10,260.8      142.9
         Goods                                                                                                  1,795.8     142.9
         Services                                                                                               8,465.0


     Table 4: Estimation of Disaster Impact on Current Account of Balance of Payments, in Million US$
                                                                                        Value of
         Component                                                Non-Disaster                                   Post-Disaster
                                                                                     production loss
         Goods balance                                                        545                                           570.8
                                                     Exports                  378                       23.9                354.1
                                                     Imports                  923                        1.9                924.9
         Services balance                                                     148                   112.9                    35.1
         Other income                                                         124                                           124.0
         Current transfers                                                    313                                           313.0
         Current account balance                                              209                                           346.7

     Needless to say, should production flow changes arising from the disaster last for more than one year, the above
     tables would need to show data for each of the subsequent years.

     The Assessment Team should bear in mind that disaster-affected countries that may experience a large negative
     impact on the balance of payments that lasts over several years may qualify for special loans for balance-of-pay-
     ment support. Such special support loans are normally available from international financial institutions under
     very specific conditions.

     At the time of the second stage of macroeconomic impact analysis – which is to estimate the possible impact
     of recovery activities – the Macroeconomic Assessment Team must include the value of imports that may be
     required during the recovery period, such as food that may be required if domestic production is insufficient to
     ensure food security after the disaster.

     When stage three of the Macroeconomic Impact Analysis is carried out – i.e. to ascertain the impact of disas-
     ter-resilient reconstruction – the Macroeconomic Assessment Team should bear in mind that the value of the
     imported component of reconstruction investments must be factored in when some construction materials are

26   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     not produced in-country, as estimated by the sectoral Assessment Teams. Furthermore, that the receipt of any
     re-insurance proceeds coming from abroad and with their estimated delays would also have a positive impact
     on the balance of payments, only if and after such amounts are received and invested in the affected country.

     Any foreseen increase in the amount of family remittances coming from abroad to assist disaster-affected
     persons or households in their recovery and reconstruction must also be factored in by the Macroeconomic
     Assessment Team into the analysis of post-disaster impact on the External Sector.


     iii) Possible disaster impact on public finances

     The budget is a financial programming exercise that projects how the government plans to spend its revenue,
     and defines the levels of expected expenditures and of expected receipts. A disaster may affect the budget on
     both the revenue and expenditure sides. Possible effects of a disaster on public finances may include:

          1.	 Decline in current revenues caused by decrease in tax revenues: the tax base, tax rates, possible
              temporary reductions in import duties, and non-tax revenues;

          2.	 Decline in capital revenues due to destruction and damage to property;

          3.	 Possible increase in current expenditures: increases in operations outlays, increases in transfers and
              decreases of interest on public debt; and

          4.	 Increase in capital expenditures: increase in direct investment, capital transfers and financial operations.

     Some of the items described above would result from post-disaster recovery and reconstruction – such as pos-
     sible temporary tax holidays to enterprises to assist them in recovery, and increases in capital expenditure that
     occurs during reconstruction – and should be isolated and dealt with after the first stage of impact analysis.

     Public sector operations are carried out in the context of a fiscal year, which does not necessarily coincide with
     the calendar year. Thus, fiscal data adjustments to the calendar year will be required to make fiscal figures com-
     patible with the national accounts.

     The financial impact of the disaster should be analysed by estimating the gap between central government
     operations and their financing. The influence on the budget of the rest of the general government accounts and
     that of state enterprises should be taken into consideration.

     The following is the first analysis of isolated disaster impact on public finances that assumes no activities
     or interventions to achieve recovery and reconstruction are ever conducted, which in fact is a worst-case
     post-disaster scenario. Later on, as subsequent stages of the analysis, the possible impact of recovery in-
     terventions is to be made, as well as the possible impact of disaster-resilient reconstruction investments is
     to be taken into consideration.

     Follow these steps to estimate the possible isolated impact of a disaster on the fiscal sector after a disaster:

          1.	 Obtain the available information on government revenues and expenditures in the affected
              country, referred to the situation before the disaster, that is to be used as baseline for the analysis
              of post-disaster impact, for the current and for several (1 to 4) subsequent years, depending on
              the likely duration of disaster effects as indicated by the most affected sectors.


27   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
          2.	 Obtain the different prevailing rates of taxes applied to production, sales, exports and imports that
              constitute the total revenues for the government. On that basis and in combination with production,
              sales and export/import flow changes estimated during the assessment in each sector of economic
              activity, estimate the reduction or decline in revenues that arise after the disaster, during the current
              and subsequent years, as needed.

          3.	 Obtain the extraordinary expenditures that the government has had to make to face the
              post-disaster emergency situation (without including recovery and reconstruction activities),
              which are over and above the regular budget assigned in each sector of economic activity. Typical
              government expenditures for the emergency stage after a disaster include: costs of setting up
              and running temporary shelter schemes, costs of providing medical attention to injured persons
              and of monitoring and controlling higher morbidity arising from the disaster, costs of providing
              temporary education facilities and services, costs of re-opening road traffic, cost of emergency
              food provision, etc.

          4.	 Superimpose the value of losses in revenues and of higher, unforeseen expenditures on the baseline
              on the government budget, and ascertain how the government budget has been affected due to
              the disaster.

     In some cases, governments have special budget lines to finance such post-disaster expenditures; in other
     cases, expenditures are done using funds earmarked for other development activities that are left undone due
     to the urgency to meet emergency demands: in other cases, special, additional budget allocations are made
     after the disaster.

     In some cases, fiscal deficits are incurred or increased due to the situation of lower tax revenues and increased
     expenditures caused by a disaster. Governments that have faced this kind of situation after reaching an agree-
     ment with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) not to exceed a certain percentage of GDP in their fiscal
     deficits may obtain an exception after the assessment shows the situation to have been caused exclusively
     due to the disaster.

     Table 5 shows an example of estimation of a disaster fiscal impact on a small island economy where a flu
     pandemic occurred. First of all, the second column shows the “non-disaster” fiscal situation if the disaster
     had not occurred; the third column shows the lower revenues on sales taxes and export duties that would
     not be collected due to lower production caused by the disaster, the bauxite extraction levy that would not
     be collected for the same reason; and the increased expenditures for medical attention and other services
     that were required. The last column on the right shows the resulting fiscal sector position after the disaster.
     The impact of the disaster and the fiscal sector may be obtained from the comparison of values from the
     “non-disaster” and the “post-disaster” columns. In the example, the disaster caused the current balance
     (current revenues minus current expenditures) to be negative by 2,991 million instead of the near-zero bal-
     ance; the fiscal balance (revenues and grants minus total expenditures) to reach a deficit of nearly 7 billion
     from an expected 4 billion; and the primary balance (fiscal balance plus interests) to decrease from 13.3
     billion to 10.3 billion (see table 5).




28   |   MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
     Table 5: Estimation of Flu Pandemic Disaster Impact on Fiscal Sector
                                                                                Million J$
                                                       Non-Disaster    Losses due to Pandemic        Post-Disaster

         Revenue and grants                                   41,054                                           39,246
                    Current revenues                          39,651                     -1,807                37,844
                                       Tax revenues           36,522                     -1,798                34,724
                               Non-tax revenues                2,399                                            2,399
                                       Bauxite levy             731                             -9                   722
                    Capital revenues                            711                                                  711
                    Grants                                      691                                                  691
         Total expenditures                                  45,057                                            46,244
                    Current expenditures                     39,648                          1,187             40,835
                                          Programs             8,716                                             8,716
                              Wages and salaries              13,626                         1,187              14,813
                                           Interests          17,306                                            17,306
                    Capital expenditures                       5,409                                            5,409
         Current balance                                           3                                            -2,991
         Fiscal balance                                       -4,003                                            -6,998
         Primary balance                                     13,303                                            10,308

     It is to be noted that in the above example, only taxes on production were considered since there was no
     destruction of assets, as may occur in the case of earthquakes, landslides and floods. Needless to say, when
     assets are destroyed, property taxes should also decline and be included in the analysis.

     The example shown in Table 5 does not include the estimation of the impact of government capital expen-
     ditures on the fiscal sector since no reconstruction is required after the case of a health crisis such as the
     swine flu pandemic.

     The Macroeconomic Assessment Team should again conduct this impact analysis in the three post-disaster
     stages mentioned above: i.e. first, assuming no recovery and reconstruction; second, assuming only recovery
     activities are conducted; and third, after disaster-resilient reconstruction is undertaken.

     It should be borne in mind that when carrying out the second stage of the analysis, any lower tax revenues that
     may arise due to import-tax exemptions approved by the government and any expenditures to be made by the
     government (for instance, food imports to ensure food security of the population) to facilitate recovery are to
     be factored in. When conducting the third stage of the analysis, the impact of capital investments made by the
     government must be factored in by the Macroeconomic Assessment Team.




29   |    MACROECONOMIC IMPACT OF DISASTERS
