           SOCIAL SECTOR




        EDUCATION




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
ii   |   EDUCATION
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION	1
n THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                2
n BASELINE INFORMATION	                                  5
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS	                        7
n ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER	   10
n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                         12
n CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES AND ISSUES	                    15
n THE EDUCATION SECTOR’S RECOVERY STRATEGY	              17
n REFERENCES AND RESOURCES	                              23
n ANNEXES	25
        INTRODUCTION
        This chapter provides guidance on the process and components of a PDNA for the Education Sector. An Educa-
        tion Sector Assessment should utilise participatory, people-centered approaches in creating a clear framework for
        recovery and reconstruction, and its links to long-term development. It should be conducted through a risk reduc-
        tion and gender-sensitive lens, and will often inform the revision of flash appeals and donors´ conferences. The
        PDNA process will be led by national governments and thus the Ministry of Education (MoE) will most often serve
        as the sectoral lead. It is the responsibility of the sectoral lead to determine, in consultation with relevant partners,
        the methodology for data collection and approaches to data analysis. Thus, these guidelines are meant to guide
        the Education Sector of the PDNA team in the preparation of a comprehensive assessment of the event and
        develop a full recovery strategy. This preparation follows the internationally accepted standards for assessments.

        Education serves as a critical tool for human development. Successive generations have pointed to education as a
        means to develop knowledge, values and skills for their personal health and future employment, and for society’s
        economic, social and cultural development. Research demonstrates that every year of schooling increases both
        men’s and women’s wages by an average of 10 percent, with the highest returns in low- and middle-income
        countries (World Bank, 2002). The Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and ‘Education for All’ (EFA) place a
        strong emphasis on achieving universal, free and compulsory primary education. Disasters pose direct impedi-
        ments to educational goals, including by exacerbating insufficient prioritisation and support to education on the
        part of the national governments (such as inadequate spending as a percentage of GDP or inequitable distribution
        of funding and resources). Furthermore, a disaster situation could be exacerbated by the actions of the national
        and/or international community in response to the event. Within many countries, the negative consequences of a
        disaster compound the effects of poverty, child exploitation and inequality due to gender discrimination or cultur-
        al factors, resulting in increased vulnerability and creating more barriers to quality education.

        Given the significant damage and changes in flows that disasters can inflict on education systems, assessment
        efforts must be comprehensive and holistic. They must adopt a life-cycle approach to education and encom-
        pass both the ‘hard’ (damages and changes in flows) and ‘soft’ (human recovery needs) elements of education.
        Specific consideration of the impact of the disaster on women, as well as the specific needs of female and male
        children and youth is particularly important in the Education Sector. This is in contrast to the 1990s when efforts
        were primarily focused on reconstruction of physical infrastructure. A report entitled, Education for Reconstruc-
        tion (Philips et al., 1998) articulates the human recovery needs emerging from disasters by distinguishing be-
        tween ‘physical’ reconstruction of school buildings, ‘ideological’ reconstruction that includes reform and democ-
        ratisation of the education system and re-training of teachers, and ‘psychological’ reconstruction that responds
        to issues of demoralisation, loss of confidence and health-related issues of stress and depression. The PDNA
        process works to combine a complete analysis of both the physical and human recovery aspects of assessing and
        addressing needs after a disaster.

1   |    EDUCATION
        Assessments must involve comprehensive risk analyses, encompassing natural hazards, conflict and other
        threats to resilience. In many contexts, there is a strong correlation between insecurity and disasters. Conflict
        can increase vulnerability to disasters by weakening coping mechanisms and fueling population displacement,
        etc. In turn, disasters can worsen conflict by limiting access to resources and basic services, and inequitable
        recovery assistance can exacerbate political and social tensions. If quality education remains consistently ac-
        cessible or becomes immediately available after a disruption, it may promote respect for human rights and be
        a starting point for overcoming the impact of disasters. Schools and temporary learning centres may provide
        the locus for promoting disaster prevention and risk management strategies among individual girls and boys,
        their families and their communities. Education is crucial in processes of socialisation and identity formation,
        which have direct relevance for state-building, economic growth and the development of social cohesion.
        Over the longer term, quality education can be a critical ingredient in reconstruction and recovery, and in
        building resilience.



        THE ASSESSMENT PROCESS
        FRAMEWORK FOR THE ASSESSMENT
        As a starting point, it is necessary to establish a framework for the assessment of the Education Sector. Past,
        current and forthcoming education policy frameworks, including specific progress, challenges or innovations
        made, should be reviewed. These should be considered in relation to national education goals as set out in
        sector plans and related policy documents, as well as in relation to international frameworks such as EFA and
        the MDGs. It is important to understand the pre-disaster context and the impact of the disaster to serve as
        a relative baseline for reconstruction and the recovery strategy. In concert with the larger policy review, it is
        essential to consider the key partnerships in place prior to and following a crisis. For example, it is critical to
        consider the sector-wide approach (SWAP), the role of civil society, the nationally convened Education Work-
        ing Group or other partnerships, the presence of an Education Cluster and others working directly on the
        recovery process post-disaster.

        The guidance given in this chapter follows in the tradition of the methodology for the Assessment of Disasters
        developed by the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC),1 fur-
        ther developed by the World Bank as the Damage and Loss Assessment (DaLA) methodology,2 and now stan-
        dardised through the PDNA, which assesses the economic and social impact of a disaster on the Education
        Sector, including infrastructure, equipment and furniture. Depending on the context, this includes all levels of
        formal schooling (pre-primary to tertiary), vocational training centres, private institutions and non-formal ed-
        ucation centres. Additionally, the guidance in this chapter is also based on the necessity to inform the human
        recovery needs following an event, thus measuring the human, social, cultural and environmental impact,
        including service delivery and access to these services, governance and risks.




        1	
             See The Handbook for Estimating the Socio-Economic and Environmental Impact of Disasters, Economic Commission for Latin
             America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2003.
        2	
             Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery, Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment Guidance Notes, 3 Vols., World Bank,
             Washington, D.C., 2010.

2   |        EDUCATION
        SCOPE: MAPPING THE EDUCATION SYSTEM
        This section provides a protocol to guide the PDNA assessment process for the Education Sector by present-
        ing a general overview of the education system, identifying the relevant issues that need to be assessed and
        showing how this may be achieved in a disaster setting. The process is based on an education ‘system’ and
        is organized around a specific matrix that sets out what information needs to be collected at the emergency
        and recovery stages, and then provides guidance through the process. Utilising an ‘information needs matrix’
        enables an assessment and analysis of immediate trends, shows pre-existing performance and identifies early
        constraints that may affect restoring access to essential education services.

        THE EDUCATION SYSTEM

        System functionality is assessed along four key domains (International Network for Education in Emergencies
        [INEE], 2010) with primary concern for the education ‘system’ or sector that is experiencing a disaster. Integrated
        throughout is the notion that both physical and human recovery needs are equally paramount.

            1.	 Access and Learning Environment – This refers to how the education system ensures that girls and
                boys of all ages have access to quality and relevant education. There is an opportunity not just to
                re-establish education facilities and services that may have been severely destroyed during disasters,
                but also to ‘build back better’. An example is ensuring that facilities are accessible, safe, secure and
                gender-sensitive, for example, separate water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) facilities for males and
                females). It includes attention to the linkages to health, nutrition and protection services to promote
                the protection and psychosocial well-being of learners, teachers and other education personnel.

            2.	 Teaching and Learning – This part of the education system involves curricula, training, professional
                development and support, instruction, learning processes and assessment of learning outcomes.
                Circumstances may require intensive training of a new cadre of education personnel and training for
                existing teachers to ensure support for disaster risk reduction (DRR), life skills and psychosocial support
                for affected learners. Furthermore, instruction and evaluation of learning outcomes must take into
                consideration the event and its impact, and be organized accordingly.

            3.	 Teachers and other Education Personnel – This key component of the education system relates to
                human resources, without which the education system cannot function. In the post- disaster context,
                addressing critical gaps in human resources is vital. In such efforts, attention to diversity, equity and
                transparency in recruitment is important. Attention must also be paid to the conditions under which
                education personnel work, noting that the conditions for female and male personnel will most likely be
                distinct. It is often necessary to adapt the general support, management and supervision in a way that
                helps all personnel – non-Federal entities, or NFE, private – function effectively following a disaster.

            4.	 Education Policy – This component concerns the regulatory framework, education laws and education
                policy formulation. Most authorities prioritise continuity and recovery of quality education, which often
                includes free and inclusive access to schooling or suspending school fees or associated costs during the
                recovery period. In addition, this domain involves planning and implementation of education activities
                that help integrate the local, national and international standards, laws, policies and plans for learning
                that is delivered for the disaster-affected populations.



3   |    EDUCATION
        DATA COLLECTION
        The PDNA sector assessment will need to use a combination of qualitative and quantitative assessment tools. In
        addition to quantitative methods demanded by the DaLA, assessing the human impact of the disaster requires
        additional qualitative data. These data may be based on household surveys, as well as a multitude of other as-
        sessment tools and approaches that can support the sector assessment, such as the Participatory Community
        Vulnerability Analysis tool (Oxfam, 2012) or the Good Enough Guide (ECB Project, 2007), which focuses on
        accountability to affected populations. The most appropriate methods and tools should be agreed upon by the
        assessment team based on the context and needs.

        The data collection methods and tools should be consistent with international standards, EFA goals and rights-
        based guidelines. This helps to connect global initiatives with the local community and promote linkages at
        the local level to global frameworks and indicators. Data collection forms should be standardised in-country to
        facilitate the coordination of projects at an inter-agency level and minimise the demands on information suppliers.

        Stakeholders should include as many individuals as possible from the affected population group(s). Affected
        populations can take part in data collection and analysis (surveying their communities), participate in interviews
        and focus group discussions, and support dissemination and feedback processes. The assessment should strive
        to capture the most urgent needs as expressed by the affected population, as well as recovery needs. The as-
        sessment should capture the impact on female and male students (pre-school to tertiary), families, schools and
        communities, and give special consideration to women, children and any sub-groups who may be dispropor-
        tionately affected by the disaster.

        Ethical considerations are essential to any form of data collection. Collecting information for any purpose, includ-
        ing monitoring, assessment or surveys, can put people at risk – not only because of the sensitive nature of the in-
        formation collected, but also because simply participating in the process may cause people to be targeted or put
        at risk. The basic principles of respect, informed consent, do no harm, and non-discrimination must be kept in
        mind and data collectors are responsible for protecting and informing participants of their rights. Special efforts
        must be made to ensure appropriate approaches, and consent procedures are established for surveying children.

        In order to minimise bias, data should be triangulated from multiple sources during analysis, before conclusions
        are drawn. Consider if data gathered from communities versus official sources differ, whether data differ be-
        tween women and men, or adults and children. Triangulation is a mixed-method approach to collecting and
        analysing data to measure overlapping but also different facets of a phenomenon, yielding an enriched under-
        standing to ensure the validity of qualitative data.

        ‘INFORMATION NEEDS MATRIX’ FOR ASSESSMENT AND ANALYSIS
        The government, pre-existing emergency preparedness systems, disaster and recovery plans within the Ministry
        of Education should be consulted at the outset to reach an agreement on the overall required information needs.
        If there are no disaster plans in place, development plans should be considered via a risk reduction lens. The com-
        prehensive Information Needs Matrix found in Annex 1 sets out the key questions that a post-disaster education
        needs assessments should strive to answer, together with recommended indicators that reflect the actual data
        that should be collected for each question. Not every question should be asked nor all indicators used. Selection
        of the most relevant assessment questions and corresponding indicators should take into account the nature
        of the disaster and the particular country context. Questions and corresponding indicators should be selected

4   |    EDUCATION
        by the PDNA sector assessment team based on the priority information requirements in each setting. Priorities
        should be determined via the MoE, the sector lead in consultation with the Education Assessment Team and
        humanitarian response actors.

        The Matrix consists of critical domains in the Education Sector to assess and aligns directly with the INEE Minimum
        Standards for Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery (2010) categories for easy reference. In addition, the
        recognised system information and corresponding questions are added to the matrix together with suggested
        indicators to reflect the variety of actors and actions in a typical disaster response. The ‘immediate trends’ are
        focused on in the emergency phase (usually addressed via humanitarian action and not included in costing
        assessments) where distinct indicators are less possible to discern, whereas the recovery indicators point to the
        longer-term information needs that will link to development goals and form the foundation of the Education
        Sector‘s PDNA.

        THE ASSESSMENT TEAM
        The PDNA process requires a wealth of skills and expertise, from planning to data collection, entry and analysis,
        to dissemination and application of findings. In order to fully utilise existing capacities and identify any gaps
        in the Education Sector, it is advisable to form a multi-agency Education Sector working group. This working
        group is involved in the first step in conducting a PDNA. This group should be led by an appropriate Represen-
        tative of the MoE with the support of a coordinating agency. The primary aim is to harness collective capacities
        from among all the education actors. Capacities should also be considered at the sub-national levels since this
        is where most of the data collection and analysis will most likely occur. Determine if there is expertise required
        from outside of the Education Sector, such as gender experts, engineers or architects. The country’s Disaster
        Management entity can also participate to support the inclusion of DRR. Consideration must be made for both
        the national and sub-national levels at every step. Sub-national governance structures and partners active at
        sub-national levels must be engaged. All levels should be fully informed and work towards the same coordina-
        tion and assessment goals.

        It is also important to consider contextual factors such as local language needs and knowledge of culture and
        social norms, particularly when assisting affected populations after a crisis. Since a balance of different types of
        stakeholders and partners can also add value, including youth, school personnel, civil society actors, and a mix
        of United Nations and government officials on assessment teams should be considered. Gender will also be a
        critical consideration, especially in stakeholder consultations and data collection; a there should be a good mix
        of male and female assessment team members.



        BASELINE INFORMATION
        INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
        Below are some basic examples of key baseline information needed for the Education Sector Assessment:

                •	 Number and characteristics of existing educational institutions, by type of building and level
                   of education, as well as typical furniture, equipment and education material contents,
                   broken down by urban and rural areas, and by public and private sector;

5   |    EDUCATION
                •	 Normal calendar of school year, including indication of any short holidays within the year;

                     -- Number of education years or education months at each level of education for the
                        non-disaster situation;

                •	 Enrollment rates in education, broken down by sex, age and other relevant demographics;

                     -- Attendance rates;

                •	 Fees charged to students in private and public sector schools;

                •	 Prevailing costs prior to the disaster of rehabilitation and construction of education buildings,
                   and replacement costs of furniture, equipment and education materials;

                •	 Number of teachers available in private and public sector schools;

                •	 Adult literacy index.

        SOURCES OF INFORMATION
        Baseline data should come from all available verified sources, but ideally from household survey data, national
        census data, Education Management Information Systems (EMIS), school censuses and sub-national sources
        when available. Other government agencies, such as Ministries of Planning or Statistics, may also have relevant
        information, and it is essential to consult across the government. Education is often distributed across ministries
        or has separate entities that lead different areas (vocational, sports) and/or specific populations (gender, youth).
        Costing data may be available through Ministries of Finance, etc. In countries with highly privatised education
        systems, it may be necessary to collect data from faith-based bodies or associations that manage private schools,
        universities, etc. Baseline data are essential to enable the process of distinguishing between the situation prior to
        the event and the post-disaster conditions.

        General education indicators should always be disaggregated by age, sex and geographic regions, and by ability,
        poverty quintiles and other social indicators whenever possible. This disaggregation ensures representation of
        marginalised groups in reconstruction efforts, many of whom will be disproportionately affected by a disaster.
        Education indicators should reflect pre-disaster trends and disparities across all types of education program-
        ming, including early childhood learning, primary, secondary, tertiary, vocational, etc., both within the public and
        private or non-public realms, and include both formal and non-formal provision. Reliable information is often
        available via the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO) Institute for Statis-
        tics (particularly the Global Monitoring Reports), the World Bank’s EdStats or in-country agency data sources,
        although it is important to note when the data were last updated.


          Education baseline data may be unavailable due to the disaster, or outdated. In these cases, utilise general demo-
          graphic information (e.g. population census) as relevant and always refer to sub-national data. Disasters are most often
          regionalised, and non-affected regions may have comparable contexts that can be drawn upon as references. Keep
          in mind the need to incorporate populations that may be ‘invisible’ in available data due to marginalisation or
          under-representation, such as street children, people with disabilities and internally displaces persons (IDPs).




6   |    EDUCATION
        ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
        The PDNA team will determine how to quantify and estimate damage and losses to define and describe the
        effects of the disaster. These will fall under four dimensions:
                1.	   Destruction of infrastructure and assets;
                2.	   Disruption to service delivery and production;
                3.	   Disruption of governance; and
                4.	   Emerging risks and vulnerabilities.
        These effects should be presented according to locally relevant geographical divisions and reflect key sociological
        characteristics (sex, age, ethnicity, ability, etc.) and expressed in both quantitative and qualitative terms.

        In addition to sources of information described above, post-disaster impact assessment data that may be avail-
        able from government bodies such as disaster management committees, local partners and civil society, or
        through United Nations agencies. The United Nations Office for the coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UN
        OCHA) may deploy the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination (UNDAC) teams, which may
        facilitate a Multi-Sector Initial Rapid Assessment (MIRA). The Education Cluster or sectoral partners may also
        conduct rapid education needs assessments. However, keep in mind that education is often excluded from
        initial assessment efforts. Advanced advocacy, as part of the strategic approach and planning of the PDNA,
        can help ensure inclusion that will lead to a more informed sector report. Other bodies such as the military
        or national Red Cross/Red Crescent may also have useful data related to infrastructure assessments, use of
        schools as shelters, debris removal, satellite imagery, etc. (see Key References).

        EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
        Effects on the infrastructure and physical assets of the Education Sector include buildings, furniture, equip-
        ment and other facilities associated with education, such as recreation grounds, external sanitation and water
        facilities, etc. In keeping with international norms of assessments, sporting facilities and libraries may fall with-
        in the purview of the Education Sector and should be eventually presented within the sector report.3 There are
        two categories of effects that are reported on: total physical damage or partial damage to the infrastructure
        as a result of the event; and damage arising out of temporarily using the facilities as shelters or relief centres.

        Detailed guidance can be found in the DaLA Guidance Notes: Volume 2. The Education Sector can be found on
        pages 30-32.

        EFFECTS ON PRODUCTION AND AVAILABILITY OF/ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES
        Production in the Education Sector is defined as the number of education months or years that are obtained
        by the population. Thus, any decline in production is determined by quantifying the decline in the number of
        education months (days of school missed, decrease in transition to higher grades or completion of school cycles)
        caused by interruptions in service and access due to the disaster. . Building on the damage assessment, the PDNA
        evaluates the effect that this damage has on education service delivery and on people’s access to education


        3	
             The world-wide System of National Accounts includes pre-primary, primary, secondary and technical, higher education, and other
             education including sports, recreation and cultural education. It does not include museums.

7   |        EDUCATION
        services and goods. It is important to note the effects on all levels from system-level assets (databases, ministry
        buildings) to learner- level assets (learning materials, school uniforms). To this end, the assessment should consider
        the effect on the assets listed below and evaluate the implications for service delivery and access:

                •	 Physical: school buildings, housing (student dorms, teacher housing), infrastructure (toilets, labo-
                   ratories, offices), records, teaching and learning materials, furniture, tools and equipment, storage
                   and warehoused goods;

                •	 Natural: land (sports fields, playgrounds), water sources for education facilities (pumps, wells),
                   gardens or school-owned farms, and other education-related natural resources;

                •	 Financial: income (from fee collection), savings, credit and loans, liquid assets (firewood, coal for
                   cooking school meals) and other non-income financial assets.

        In addition, the assessment considers the effect of the disaster on public infrastructure, such as roads, water
        supplies, transport facilities and other infrastructure. In particular, it considers the way in which damage to them
        affects access to and quality of education, although they are not captured in the assessments done by the
        Education Sector. When assessing land, note the type of access rights (public, private, traditional ownership) and
        whether the location is suitable for rehabilitation or rebuilding.

        Although expenditure in education as a proportion to overall government expenditure may be lower than
        other sectors, on an annual basis, it is critical to sustaining operation, enrolment and quality of education
        provided within the sector. The change in flows should also be considered during the assessment, because
        as a result of the event, families and learners may not be able to pay tuition or fees (for enrolment, exams,
        etc.). It is also important to note that teachers often make up the largest cadre of civil servants, making their
        salaries, pensions, etc. a sizeable portion of national budgets. These issues will be expanded on in the Human
        Recovery Needs section.

        It is always a priority need of affected populations to resume education services as soon as possible. To fully
        understand the extent of disruption of educational goods and services, many factors need to be taken into ac-
        count in order to assess availability and both physical and non-physical access issues:

                •	 Closure or reduced operating hours for both formal and non-formal education institutions at all
                   levels (early childhood to adult education);

                •	 Availability of alternative structured activities (e.g. youth centres) and temporary structures;

                •	 Human and material resources that may be needed for the establishment and maintenance of
                   temporary learning spaces (teaching and learning materials, personnel);

                •	 Lower revenues that may result and possible higher operational costs in the provision of education
                   services that may occur in the sector;

                •	 Physical access to services including considerations of safety, security and transport (landmines);

                •	 Closure or reduced operation of training centers (teacher training, vocational training,
                   nursing colleges, etc.).

        Disasters can lead to large displacements of populations and unexpected conflicts between host communities
        and internally displaced persons (IDPs) due to competition for scarce resources. In disaster situations, the education


8   |    EDUCATION
        system may be burdened by large classes, teacher shortages, language of instruction issues, inadequate school
        supplies, and damaged infrastructure and facilities, creating strains on access, quality and learning achievements.
        Furthermore, schools are often used as shelters, thus unavailable for instruction, and may suffer damages from
        this alternate use often for prolonged periods. Teachers and other personnel services can also be lost to other
        work if closures are prolonged, or in situations where compensation is halted or delayed, severely reducing
        availability of services. It is necessary that all of these considerations are reflected in the assessment in terms of
        recovery costs and needs for both the sector and affected populations.

        EFFECTS ON GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
        Governance and social processes refer to the varied structures and networks, both formal and informal that
        shape the Education Sector. This includes governance institutions (education authorities, licensing bodies), pol-
        icies and procedures, and social organisations (civil society, school management entities) that operate at all
        levels, from the community to the national level in both the private and public spheres. Governance and social
        processes represent external factors that influence education coverage, access, quality and decision-making, and
        contribute to community life and social coherence.

        INSTITUTIONS, SOCIAL ORGANISATIONS AND ELEMENTS TO ASSESS

        Examples of institutions and social organisations to consider when assessing governance and social processes:

                •	 Government institutions: Ministry of Education, Ministry of Youth/Gender, Disaster Management,
                   local government offices, etc.;

                •	 Private sector: labour unions and professional organisations;

                •	 Socio-cultural: ethnic or religious groups, youth groups and women’s organisations;

                •	 Social networks: school management committees, parent groups, student groups,
                   community-based organisations (CBOs) or non-governmental organisations (NGOs);

                •	 Vocational: technical or vocational schools, teacher training institutions;

                •	 Political organisations: political parties, etc.

        When assessing the effect of the disaster on governance and social processes, consider the following categories:

            5.	 Knowledge and skills – How have technical expertise and institutional information been affected?

            6.	 Resources: human, financial, material – What has been the impact on the MoE, civil society
                organisation (CSO) and community leaders, and communal assets and spaces that support education?

            7.	 Systems, information management, communication – What support do these processes need after
                the disaster?

            8.	 Legal authority, monitoring and reporting – Has there been a change in capacity and function due to
                the disaster?

            9.	 The possible increase in school fees that may arise as a result of the disaster.




9   |    EDUCATION
     This is an area of assessment where conflict sensitivity is a necessity. Examine the social and political context of
     affected areas, considering past crises, relevant cultural issues and intra-group linkages. Carry out work to assess
     the impact of the disaster on social welfare. It is important to understand which governance and social processes
     are present in affected areas, how they operate and support education, how they have been affected, and how
     they may enable or disable recovery. This supports a more effective assessment of local capacity for recovery,
     identifies collaboration and partnership arrangements in the recovery effort and builds upon spontaneous re-
     covery efforts.

     EFFECTS ON RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
     A key element of the assessment is to identify immediate risks to education access and quality, particularly new
     potential threats that may develop as a result of the disaster. Below are some risks to assess:

              •	 Additional hazards such as possible further landslides, aftershocks and fire risk that may affect edu-
                 cation facilities and services;

              •	 Climate forecast, such as the forthcoming season (e.g. anticipated snow, rains, heat, dry season)
                 that may have an impact on the continuity of education;

              •	 Secondary risks such as an increase in some forms of gender-based violence including domestic
                 violence, sexual violence and early marriage, a prolonged shortage of schools or substantial reduc-
                 tion in available teachers, etc.;

              •	 Social and political risks, such as non-participation of young persons in education institutions as
                 they become involved in the labour force to assist families, upcoming elections, potential conflict
                 between social groups;

              •	 New vulnerabilities created by the disaster that may present additional threats;

              •	 Population groups (economic, social, geographic) that are especially vulnerable; for economic and
                 social groups, consider the intersection with gender and age.

     It is also important to consider all aspects of the situation that may affect the health and safety of children and
     youth, insofar as education may constitute a protective and/or risk factor. The assessment should include a list or
     table of risks (a ‘risk matrix’), which should document for different age groups and vulnerable groups: the risks
     associated with factors such as landmines or unexploded ordnance; safety of buildings and other infrastructure;
     child protection and security; threats to mental and physical health; problems regarding teachers’ qualifications;
     school enrolment and curricula; and other relevant information.



     ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER
     A starting point is to estimate damage and changes in flows, beginning with the number of education units (of-
     fices, classrooms, laboratories, etc.) that have been partially or totally destroyed for each pre-defined school type.
     Verification of furniture, equipment and education materials destroyed is also estimated for every school. These
     costs are combined with the pre-disaster unit costs of repairs or reconstruction to the same quality standards
     that existed prior to the disaster.


10   |   EDUCATION
     The following overview of damages and changes in flows is taken largely from DaLA Guidance Notes: Volume
     2, where the Education Sector can be found (pages 29-33).

     Damages – either full or partial destruction – are typically assessed as the number of different school
     types that must be replaced or that can be rehabilitated. In assessing education buildings, work closely
     with PDNA teams for the Housing and Human Settlement S ectors to protect against duplication of ef-
     forts and to ensure inclusion of costs such as debris removal and the lease of temporary spaces. Monetary
     values are expressed as costs according to prices just before the disaster or prevailing market prices. The
     value of the total damage from the disaster can then be estimated by aggregating the values of fully de-
     stroyed assets and those of partially destroyed assets, plus the costs involved in replacing the destroyed
     furniture, equipment and education materials. National sector budgets should serve as guidelines but
     careful consideration should be given to new methods of repair, production and distribution that may be
     more cost-efficient or a better return on investment, especially in terms of resilience and sustainability in
     the recovery strategy.

     Changes in flows include higher temporary costs and lower revenues incurred during the recovery and recon-
     struction periods. To estimate their value, the assessment team must prepare a realistic calendar of repair and
     reconstruction of physical facilities, as well as replacement of furniture, equipment and education supplies.
     During this process, it is important to consider that the capacity of the construction sector is usually limited
     and may not have sufficient resources to begin rebuilding across all sectors simultaneously. Also, the avail-
     ability of repair and reconstruction funding must be included in the calendar. It will provide the timeframe for
     estimating changes in flows in this sector, including the duration of temporary arrangements to provide access
     to education for students.

     The following are typical changes in flows in the Education Sector:

              •	 Any additional costs involved in the adopted post-disaster temporary education scheme, such as
                 interim rental of premises, or setting up temporary, alternative facilities (classrooms in tents, etc.);

              •	 Overtime salary payment to teachers and other education-related personnel whenever several
                 shifts are incorporated into the education schedule;

              •	 The cost of demolition and removal and disposal of rubble or mud;

              •	 The cost of cleaning and disinfecting classrooms;

              •	 The cost of repairing schools that have been subject to overuse while operating
                 as temporary shelters;

              •	 Other costs associated with the re-establishment of adequate education to
                 the affected population;

              •	 Possible revenue losses in public and privately owned schools while closed,
                 whenever students are charged fixed fees (particularly relevant in public sector
                 at early childhood development (ECD), secondary and tertiary levels;

              •	 Possible costs involved in the accelerated training of new teachers to replace
                 those who are no longer willing or able to teach (or perished during the disaster);



11   |   EDUCATION
                 •	 possible savings in the provision of food and transport to children during the time
                    that education activities are suspended, which represent a savings to the education
                    sector and correspond to higher costs of living for the families and losses in
                    transport sector revenues.

     Table 1: Other typical effects of a disaster that can be classified as damage or changes in flows
         Access and Learning                        Teaching and Learning                  Education Personnel
         Environments (Damages)                     (Changes in Flows)                     (Changes in Flows)
         •	 Infrastructure (accommodations)         •	 Exams for promotion                 •	 Income not collected by
         •	 Facilities (WASH, laboratories)            or matriculation                       schools (fee)

         •	 Damaged or destroyed teaching and       •	 Loss of instructional hours         •	 Decrease in work attendance
            learning materials                         resulting in lower achievement         by teachers and other
                                                       or ‘production’                        education- related staff
         •	 Grounds
            (playgrounds, sports fields)            •	 Reductions in enrolment             •	 Psycho-social support costs

         •	 Furniture                               •	 Increased repetition rates          •	 Disruptions to governance
            (school record storage, desks)          •	 Increased drop-out rates               mechanisms

         •	 Feeding support                         •	 Cost of catch-up classes
            (cooking pots, food stores)             •	 Adaptations to school calendars
         •	 Damage or destruction of registration
            and other administrative documents or
            certification/qualification documents
         •	 School transport vehicles
         •	 Human resource losses (due to death,
            leaving the field of practice)
     Note: Table includes but is not limited to the most typical effects classified as damages and losses.



     ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
     The impact assessment should develop an analysis of the expected trend for the Education Sector after the di-
     saster. Impact is based on an analysis of disaster effects, sector development plans, and lessons from past expe-
     riences, providing a medium- and long-term projection of the effects on the Education Sector. Consequences of
     the effects can be described via scenarios: business as usual, best-case and worst-case based on challenges and
     opportunities, and informed by both policy and programming. This will form the basis for the recovery strategy,
     and should consider capacity for sector recovery and complement both the macro-economic assessment and
     human development report for the country.

     CAPACITY FOR SECTOR RECOVERY
     An analysis should be made of whether education actors, particularly the state authorities, have adequate
     human, financial and operational resources to support the recovery of the sector and the provision of education
     services, particularly given the impact of the disaster. Given the often localised nature of disasters, this analysis
     should be conducted at all relevant levels – local, regional and national. To the extent possible, government
     authorities should be empowered to carry out their function and supported to strengthen their capacity to meet
     the added demands for recovery in the sector. Consider the following during the assessment:

12   |    EDUCATION
              •	 The impact of disaster on their institutional infrastructure, office equipment, records,
                 staff, projects, and other relevant capacities;

              •	 The level of their existing capacities (labour, technical expertise, equipment, etc.);

              •	 Their current and planned recovery responses;

              •	 Specific capacity-building support that can be provided at the district and
                 sub-district levels, such as training and technical support;

              •	 The equipment, materials, expertise, labour, skills and other resources needed
                 to repair damaged education infrastructure, services and systems.

     Consideration should also be given to the commitment made by the national government to gender equality
     in education. Where such commitment is articulated, then the PDNA and resulting recovery strategy must be
     aligned to such commitment, and where it is absent, the assessment and recovery strategy must include strate-
     gies and measures to ensure the equal access to education for boys and girls of all ages and equal opportunities
     for female and male teachers, as well as education personnel.

     MACRO-ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYSIS
     The Education Sector assessment team makes additional estimates of costs that could have an impact at both
     the macro-economic and the personal or household levels. For the purpose of macro-economic impact analysis,
     the following items must be estimated:

              •	 The decline or reduction of the number of education-years at each level of education arising
                 from the disaster, in comparison to the forecasted number if the disaster had not occurred,
                 for use in the estimation of disaster impact on gross domestic product (GDP);

              •	 The value of the imported component of education reconstruction and replacement costs
                 (for items that are not locally available and must be imported from abroad), expressed in
                 percentage (%) of the total reconstruction needs as soon as they have been estimated.
                 This information is then used for the balance of payments analysis;

              •	 The estimated share of the central government’s post-disaster higher expenditures
                 (over and above the regular budget appropriations for the sector) for repairs of schools used
                 as temporary shelters; demolition and removal of rubble; and payment of overtime to personnel
                 of the sector. This information is used for the analysis of fiscal budget impact;

              •	 The estimated possible savings in the government budget due to the non-provision of food
                 to students over the period of stoppage or interruption of classes, which will have to be
                 absorbed by families. This information is used for the analysis of fiscal budget impact and
                 also for the analysis of personal or household impact.

     HUMAN DEVELOPMENT IMPACT
     Understanding the impact of disasters on human development is a challenge because there are few standardised
     methods for assessing needs and associated costs for impacts that are not always visible or measurable. The
     assessment of the Education Sector should consider the medium- to long-term impact of the disaster on the
     country’s achievement towards its development goals and MDGs, particularly its target to increase access to

13   |   EDUCATION
     education. It should be noted that there is virtually no country today where the government does not articulate
     policies and goals on Education for All and MDGs 2 and 3. One measure of commitment indicates the degree to
     which public resources and leadership are used to support these policies, even in times of crisis. The team should
     consider the following, in coordination with other sector teams:

               •	 The impact on MDG 2 on universal primary education, including that on future human develop-
                  ment performance in education (enrolment, promotion and matriculation rates). This relates to
                  both the year in which the disaster occurred and the following year/s based on past performance
                  had the disaster not occurred, utilising clearly stated assumptions;

               •	 The impact on MDG 3 on the promotion of gender equality and empowerment of women,
                  including, for example:

                     -- Impact on the overall availability and accessibility of education for all groups (needs and
                        priorities as expressed by affected populations and different sub-groups);

                     -- Impact on the overall protection and safety of female and male children and youth (including
                        psycho-social well-being).

     Populations affected by disasters may experience a significant loss of employment and income, deterioration of
     living conditions and reduced access to critical services, which can negatively impact their ability to support their
     children’s education. Female and/or adolescent and adult learners may need to leave training and education
     programmes in search of more immediate livelihood opportunities or to care for young children and/or injured
     members of the household. Children and youth may miss out on days, weeks and even years of schooling, par-
     ticularly in conflict-affected contexts. School communities are often forced to move from location to location due
     to an emergency. Teachers and education personnel may also need to supplement low salaries by searching for
     supplemental work, which negatively impacts on attendance at school and thus lowers education achievement.
     Disaster-induced repetition and drop-outs will affect the time required to achieve MDGs 2 and 3.

     To estimate the human development impact of the disaster, it is useful to:

               •	 Analyse the performance on human development components before the disaster utilising a
                  pre-crisis baseline (pre-disaster human development trends, including key challenges, and the
                  salient features of the policies implemented pre-crisis that influenced the condition of human
                  development for affected populations);

               •	 Project/ forecast human development performance into the future (both for the year in which
                  the disaster occurred and for the following year/s) based on past performance had the disaster
                  not occurred by utilising clearly stated assumptions.


         The Human Recovery Needs (HRN) assessment should be participatory, inclusive, and transparent and have mech-
         anisms for feedback. The HRN should encompass considerations such as gender equity, human rights and special
         considerations for children and other vulnerable populations.




14   |   EDUCATION
     CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES AND ISSUES
     Intersectoral discussions should take place during all phases of the PDNA. Standards should be agreed upon,
     particularly on key dimensions such as administrative boundaries, place names and some of their key attri-
     butes such as demographics, which will provide a solid basis for data comparability and therefore cross-sectoral
     analysis. The Education Sector needs to always work closely together with Water and Sanitation, and Child
     Protection. Depending on the nature of the crisis, it will be necessary to consider food security (e.g. school feed-
     ing programmes) and sectors supporting specialized institutions (nurses colleges, agricultural training centres,
     etc.). These areas are relevant to education, and education considerations need to be integrated in these sectors.
     Furthermore, it is needed to clarify which sector aspects are addressed in other sectors, as to avoid double
     counting; for example, damage to health training facilities is usually included under the Education Sector.

     In developing the updated Minimum Standards for Education in Emergencies (2010), INEE members prioritised
     11 key cross-cutting issues to strengthen and mainstream gender, HIV and AIDS, inclusive education, early
     childhood development, youth, conflict mitigation, disaster risk reduction, human rights, intersectoral linkages
     (health, water and sanitation, shelter and food), child protection and psycho-social support. The INEE Minimum
     Standards Handbook is a useful tool for working on these issues because they pertain to education in emergen-
     cies, from preparedness through to recovery.

     The purpose of these cross-cutting issues in disaster contexts is to orient and guide education actors in emergen-
     cy and recovery settings to view with a particular ‘lens’ as they assess education needs, implement programmes
     and inform policy. In using such a lens, we clarify the relative importance and prominence of certain cross-cutting
     issues in any given context. In addition, we can also identify existing resources, assets, capacities, and issues that
     are critical in each particular context.

     Table 2 captures other important cross-cutting themes that should be considered in the assessment.




15   |   EDUCATION
     Table 2: Assessing Cross-cutting Issues
         Cross-cutting Issues Assessment Questions
         Gender                  •	 How does access to school or learning spaces differ for boys and girls, and what is or
                                    can be done by the school and community to promote equal access?
                                 •	 Are facilities essential for girls’ attendance and retention available (i.e. WASH)?
                                 •	 Are gender-related concerns addressed in the learning setting, in textbooks, teacher
                                    behaviour towards boys and girls, and other ways?
                                 •	 Are learning environments secure, and do they promote the protection, mental
                                    and emotional well-being of both girls and boys?

         Child Protection/       •	 What has changed in the emotional, social and cognitive needs of learners as a result
         Psychosocial               of the emergency?
                                 •	 Is there active participation by affected communities in assisting learners?
                                 •	 Who are the most vulnerable learners and what are their needs?
                                 •	 What are the major risks faced by children and youth (M/F) in schools and community?
                                 •	 What social support is available in schools/learning spaces or school community?
                                 •	 What are the dangers associated with going to and from school?

         Early Childhood         •	 What learning and development opportunities are offered for educating children
         Development                0-8 years?
                                 •	 Are young children participating in early childhood development (ECD)? What are
                                    the main reasons for non-access?
                                 •	 What is the level of parents’ involvement in young children’s development?

         Youth                   •	 What learning or other activities are youth involved in?
                                 •	 Do youth (M/F) engage in the community work?
                                 •	 How are youth participating in governance and social processes?
                                 •	 What are the particular education needs that markets and employers require of youth?

         Inclusive Education     •	 What are the barriers to education, who experiences them and how can they
                                    be minimised?
                                 •	 What measures (both policy and practice) should be established to increase participation
                                    of people with disabilities?

         Rights                  •	 Is the right to education and non-discrimination for all being upheld and monitored
                                    in the affected country/areas?
                                 •	 Is the education provided respectful of children’s and youth’s rights?

         HIV and AIDS            •	 Is there learning content on HIV prevention and AIDS in the classroom?
                                 •	 Do education providers have knowledge on learning needs and support for children
                                    and youth affected by or particularly vulnerable towards HIV and AIDS?

         Conflict Sensitivity    •	 How would any proposed intervention affect conflict dynamics?
                                 •	 Has education data (budget allocation, human, intellectual, linguistic, monetary and ma-
                                    terial resources) been disaggregated by region, ethnic, religious, gender or other relevant
                                    group characteristics to reveal education discrepancies and inform any intervention?
                                 •	 Is the equitable distribution of services across identity being promoted, avoiding pockets
                                    of exclusion and marginalisation?
     Source: Adapted from Joint Needs Assessment Toolkit, Global Education Cluster, 2009.

16   |    EDUCATION
     THE EDUCATION SECTOR’S RECOVERY STRATEGY
     The Education Sector’s Recovery Strategy or plan follows the guiding principles, objectives and consultative
     process of the overall PDNA, as outlined in the first chapter of Volume B. The Recovery Strategy must be
     aligned to national laws and existing sector development policies and strategies. In addition current best
     practices should be adopted. As such, the Recovery Strategy will include the following core components:

          1.	 Outline of recovery needs in education, based on results of the assessment;

          2.	 The agreed vision and guiding principles for the overall recovery process of the sector;

          3.	 Outline of results-based recovery strategy for education;

          4.	 Outline of implementation arrangements.

     VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
     The vision describes the desired long-term recovery outcome in the Education Sector, which should include
     measures to improve sector performance and build resilient systems, such as through emergency management
     plans and life skills training.

     Guiding principles for education recovery should be defined to inform the sector recovery strategy and guide
     the recovery process in an effective, transparent and accountable manner. These should be agreed on within the
     sector team under the leadership of the government. Below are some examples of recovery guiding principles:

              •	 Respond to the needs and priorities of affected population and maximise their participation;

              •	 Prioritise the needs of women and children;

              •	 Focus on the most vulnerable and most affected;

              •	 Restore capacities and capabilities;

              •	 Support spontaneous recovery processes;

              •	 Ensure national ownership and leadership of the education recovery strategy;

              •	 Work in partnership with civil society, donors, NGOs, and multilateral and United Nations agencies;

              •	 Maintain synergies with humanitarian actions;

              •	 Build on national development plans and align with national priorities;

              •	 Take into account and support national strategies on education and gender equality;

              •	 Reinforce national and local plans for DRR/climate risk reduction (CRR).

     The vision and guiding principles should be articulated by the sector lead (generally the MoE) in consultation with
     Education Sector partners and relevant working groups.




17   |   EDUCATION
     STAKEHOLDERS' CONSULTATION
     Consultation should present an opportunity for stakeholders to participate actively in identifying their needs
     and priorities after a crisis. Stakeholders should ideally be consulted at each stage of the assessment process:
     planning, data collection, analysis, monitoring, verification and dissemination of results. The Education Sector
     has a broad stakeholder base, beginning with children and students, and working up to national systems and
     leaders. It is critical to engage in a thorough stakeholder analysis and identification, keeping both public and
     private stakeholders in mind. Other critical considerations include ethics (especially when interacting with chil-
     dren and youth), information disclosure and informed consent.

     Examples of stakeholders in education are:

                 •	 Children and youth (especially those currently out of school);

                 •	 Students (at all education levels, from ECD to tertiary);

                 •	 Teachers and instructors;

                 •	 School administrators;

                 •	 Community members and parents (especially those involved in school management);

                 •	 District and national education officers;

                 •	 Private partners and providers;

                 •	 Religious affiliates that provide education opportunities.

     Sustained communication with stakeholders will ensure they understand how information from consultations
     is being utilised. Additionally, grievance management may need to be considered in relation to data collection
     processes and reconstruction outcomes.

     RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY, AND ‘BUILDING BACK BETTER’
     Disasters present an opportunity to ‘build back better’. The recovery of the Education Sector should redress the
     damage caused by the disaster but also address resilience-building measures to reduce vulnerability to future
     shocks, including those relating to conflict, natural hazards and climate change. An increase in cost is generally
     applied to building back better in the recovery strategy.4 Conducting an Education Sector diagnosis of the
     current situation will present an opportunity to minimise underlying factors of vulnerability, reduce the future
     impact of disasters and improve disaster preparedness through the education system. Comprehensive
     school safety is addressed by education policy and practices aligned with disaster management at national,
     regional, district and local school site levels. To ensure a resilient recovery, the assessment should consider
     the following pillars:




     4	
          The percentage increase depends on the standard of construction that prevailed prior to the disaster, and the desired, disaster-resil-
          ience level for post-disaster reconstruction. In fact, experience in the past 40 years reveals a range of 10-25 percent. The coefficient
          to be adopted must be carefully weighed by an experienced architect or civil engineer on the assessment team. There is also the
          possibility of having to rebuild in alternative, safer locations, which would increase the value of reconstruction needs by the cost of
          land acquisition and provision of basic services of water and sanitation, and electricity.

18   |    EDUCATION
     1. THE SAFE LOCATION AND DESIGN OF EDUCATION FACILITIES

     To ensure safe location and design, it will be necessary to assess the following:

              •	 Infrastructure at risk or exposed to risk, which could be done through a risk and vulnerability
                 mapping of education facilities;

              •	 The safety of rebuilding the schools/learning centres in the same location or the need to support
                 resettlement, both where and how;

              •	 Potential land tenure obstacles that should be addressed to secure safe land/safer construction;

              •	 Design codes for infrastructure, such as school buildings and their water and sanitation facilities.

     2. DISASTER RISK MANAGEMENT

     In some cases, there may be opportunities in the recovery process to improve school disaster management
     and risk reduction via national and sub-national education authorities and local school communities (including
     children), working in collaboration with their disaster management counterparts, in order to maintain safe
     learning environments and plan for educational continuity, conforming to international standards. The key
     responsibilities are to:

              •	 Develop, roll out, institutionalise, monitor and evaluate the establishment or empowerment
                 of school-site disaster risk management committee involving staff, students, parents and
                 community stakeholders;

              •	 Adapt standard operating procedures as needed, for hazards with and without warnings,
                 including: drop cover and hold, building evacuation, evacuation to safe haven, shelter-in-place
                 and lockdown, and safe family reunification;

              •	 Practise and improve on response preparedness with regular school-wide and community-linked
                 simulation drills;

              •	 Establish national and sub-national contingency plans to support educational continuity, including
                 plans and criteria to limit the use of schools as temporary shelters;

              •	 Liaise with any disaster management entities to ensure the inclusion of education in planning,
                 policy work and budgets;

              •	 Promote emergency response plans at national, local and school levels and ensuring they
                 are implemented;

              •	 Strengthen the capacity and capabilities of relevant ministries/departments in preparedness
                 and planning for emergencies (DRR and CRR), including financial planning.




19   |   EDUCATION
     3. RISK REDUCTION EDUCATION

     The curriculum and its teachers are powerful tools for building a culture of resilience. There may be opportunities
     to ensure that risk reduction education is mainstreamed into education curricula, teaching and learning:

                 •	 Provide teacher training for both teachers and teacher trainees on risk reduction
                    curriculum materials;

                 •	 Develop strategies to scale up teacher involvement for effective integration of these topics into the
                    formal curricula as well as non-formal and extra-curricular approaches with local communities.

     4. INFORMATION SYSTEMS AND EARLY WARNING SYSTEMS

                 •	 Enhance information systems, such as statistical baselines, EMIS, vulnerability and risk analysis,
                    ensuring, for example, that all data and information on learners are disaggregated by sex and age;

                 •	 Improve early warning systems and communication related to education (school closures,
                    evacuation sites, temporary learning sites, etc.);

                 •	 Strengthen the links between early warning, preparedness and response mechanisms.

     RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION NEEDS
     This section describes the main considerations for estimating post-disaster recovery and reconstruction needs in
     the Education Sector. These needs may not apply to all disaster situations, but the guidance presents the usual
     needs, which should be in direct relation to the assessment results. Estimating overall recovery needs in the Ed-
     ucation Sector may entail:5

                 •	 Carrying out quantitative estimations of destroyed physical and natural assets that need to be
                    rebuilt, repaired or restored in order to resume educational services;

                 •	 Rehabilitating education delivery systems and restoring access to goods and services;

                 •	 Restoring governance and social processes;

                 •	 Redressing immediate risks and building back better, which includes the needs for safe location
                    and design of infrastructure, as well as the needs and cost of training to build capacity for pre-
                    paredness and prevention efforts;

                 •	 Taking measures to address the human development impact.

     THE EDUCATION SECTOR’S RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION PLAN
     In line with the PDNA guidance on the Recovery Strategy, the Education Sector Recovery and Reconstruction
     Plan should be formulated following the results-based model, and therefore include: (i) priority needs at central
     and decentralised levels; (ii) interventions required; (iii) expected outputs; (iv) recovery costs; and (v) intended
     outcomes. Table 3 provides an example of how this may be achieved.

     5	
          Recovery needs are the value of changes in production flows that refer to higher costs, which are over and above the regular budget
          for the Education Sector. Reconstruction needs refer to the value of damage duly increased to introduce quality improvement, mod-
          ernisation and risk reduction features, which may imply in selected cases the costs of relocation of schools. As it currently stands,
          assessment team members would not receive clear guidance on how to estimate needs, as actually occurred during the recent Serbia
          assessment, which would confused the value of losses and the value of recovery needs.

20   |    EDUCATION
     Table 3: Indicative Example of a Results-based Recovery and Reconstruction Plan in Education
                                                                              Recovery and
         Priority Recovery                                                                          Intended
                                       Interventions         Expected Outputs Reconstruc-
         Needs                                                                                      Outcomes
                                                                              tion Costs
         Urgent need to improve        Plan for the          Completion of the       $7,650,000     Increase enrolment
         children’s access to public   rehabilitation of     rehabilitation of 226                  of children in
         primary education             partly destroyed      primary schools                        primary education
                                       primary schools       12,000 affected                        to pre-disaster level
                                       Provide scholarships  children receive
                                       to affected children  scholarships
                                       for primary education

     Note: Adapted from sector recovery plan from the Aceh Recovery Framework 2008-2011.

     PRIORITY NEEDS

     Recovery needs in the sector will need to be prioritised and sequenced (short-, medium- and long- term, as
     appropriate). Criteria may be developed by the sector team (or previously by the PDNA team) to guide the
     prioritisation process. Giving priority to critical needs expressed by the affected population and government is
     paramount. However, the needs of marginalised population groups, women and children, and most affected
     geographic areas will also need to be prioritised.

     IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
     PARTNERSHIPS, COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT

     This section describes key partnerships, coordination and management arrangements for the recovery process
     of the Education Sector, such as:

                 •	 Coordination arrangements with government, civil society, and the private sector;

                 •	 Partnership arrangements within the education working group/sectoral group or cluster
                    (where active);

                 •	 Intersectoral arrangements (such as child protection and WASH);

                 •	 Management arrangements within the government for the education recovery process;

                 •	 Inter-agency management arrangements (e.g. coordination unit or similar arrangements,
                    support services to be established, such as offices and human resources, etc.

     CROSS-SECTORAL THEMES

     Describe how cross-cutting issues will be addressed during implementation, such as governance, livelihoods,
     disaster risk reduction, gender, human rights, HIV/AIDS and any others deemed necessary. Describe intersectoral
     considerations, such as:

                 •	 WASH (latrines, water points);

                 •	 Child protection (preventing gender-based violence including domestic and sexual violence
                    and early marriage, psycho-social support);


21   |    EDUCATION
              •	 Linkages to livelihoods (vocation training);

              •	 Food security, food distribution and nutrition (school feeding);

              •	 Camp management (learning sites in camps).

     LINKS TO DEVELOPMENT

     This section outlines the ways in which the recovery of the Education Sector will link with and support the
     country’s development goals and priorities in education, aligning where possible the recovery process to the
     broader strategic development objectives for the sector. Consider the following:

              •	 National objectives for meeting EFA and MDGs 2 and 3;

              •	 National education policies and poverty reduction strategies;

              •	 United Nations development planning instruments, e.g. United Nations Development Action
                 Framework (UNDAF) and sector tools such System-wide Action Plans (SWAPs).

     MONITORING AND EVALUATION

     Include in this section the plan for monitoring and evaluation in the sector, considering the following:

              •	 What is to be monitored and evaluated;

              •	 The activities needed to monitor and evaluate;

              •	 Who is responsible for monitoring and evaluation activities;

              •	 When monitoring and evaluation activities are planned (timing);

              •	 How monitoring and evaluation are carried out (methods);

              •	 What resources are required and where they are committed.

     KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS

     Identify key assumptions made to successfully complete the recovery of the Education Sector, and the major
     constraints likely to be encountered during the recovery process indicating how they might be overcome.




22   |   EDUCATION
     REFERENCES AND RESOURCES
     The Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action (ALNAP)
     http://www.alnap.org/

     The Assessment Capacities Project
     http://www.acaps.org/

     Compendium on Transitional Learning Spaces
     http://www.educationandtransition.org/wp-content/uploads/2007/04/TLS_compendium.pdf

     Emergency Capacity-Building Project

               	 he Good Enough Guide
            -- T
               http://www.ecbproject.org/the-good-enough-guide/the-good-enough-guide

            -- PARK: Profiling and Resource Assessment Kit
               http://www.ecbproject.org/downloads/PARKDatabase-eng_WEB_Companion.pdf

     Humanitarian Accountability Partnership
     http://www.hapinternational.org/

     Humanitarian Schools
     http://humanitarianschools.org/

     The Inter-agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE):

            -- Minimum Standards for Education: Preparedness, Response, Recovery (2010)
               http://www.ineesite.org/index.php/post/inee_handbook/

            -- Guidance note on conflict sensitive education

            -- Diagnostic Programme Tool and Guiding Principles for Donors on Conflict Sensitive Education
               http://www.ineesite.org/en/education-fragility/conflict-sensitive-education

               	 isaster Risk Reduction and Preparedness:
            -- D
               http://ineesite.org/uploads/documents/store/doc_1_INEE_Toolkit_-_Preparedness_and_RR.pdf

     IASC Education Cluster

            -- Joint Education Needs Assessment
               http://education.humanitarianresponse.info/document/joint-education-needs-assessment-toolkit

            -- Short Guide to Rapid Education Assessments
               http://education.humanitarianresponse.info/document/short-guide-rapid-education-joint-needs-assessments

     Luneta, Mayfourth (2007). Child-oriented Participatory Assessment and Planning: A Toolkit, Buklod Tao, Center for Posi-
     tive Future, Center for Disaster Preparedness, Philippines.

     OCHA - UN Disaster Assessment Coordination
     http://www.unocha.org/what-we-do/coordination-tools/undac/overview

     Oxfam Participatory Community Vulnerability Analysis (PCVA) tool, 2012
     http://policy-practice.oxfam.org.uk/publications/participatory-capacity-and-vulnerability-analysis-a-practitioners-guide-232411

     Psacharopoulos, G. and Patrinos, H.A. 2002. “Returns to Investment in Education: A Further Update.” World Bank, Policy
     Research Working Paper No. 2881
     http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-1099079934475/
     547667-1135281504040/Returns_Investment_Edu.pdf



23   |   EDUCATION
     UNDAC The United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination
     http://www.unocha.org/what-we-do/coordination-tools/undac/overview

     UNESCO

            -- International Institute for Educational Planning: Integrating conflict and disaster risk reduction into Education
               Sector planning – UNESCO IIEP; UNICEF and Global Education Cluster 2011
               http://www.iiep.unesco.org/fileadmin/user_upload/News_And_Events/pdf/2011/IIEP_Guidancesnotes_EiE_en.pdf

            -- Institute for Statistics
               http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/TableViewer/document.aspx?ReportId=143&IF_Language=eng

     UNICEF

            -- Peacebuilding and Education
               http://www.educationandtransition.org/resources/the-role-of-education-in-peacebuilding-2/

            -- DRR and Education Technical Note
               http://www.unicefinemergencies.com/downloads/eresource/docs/DRR/DRR_ONE_PAGER_EDUCATION.pdf

            -- Disaster Risk Reduction in School Curricula: Case Studies from Thirty Countries – UNICEF/UNESCO 2012
               http://www.unicef.org/education/files/DRRinCurricula-Mapping30countriesFINAL.pdf

     UNISDR

            -- Thematic Platform for Knowledge and Education (2008). School Disaster Prevention: Guidance for Educational
               Decision-Makers, Consultation Version.
               http://www.unisdr.org/we/inform/publications/7556

            -- UNISDR, UNESCO (2007). Towards a culture of prevention: Disaster risk reduction begins at school – good prac-
               tices and lessons learned. United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.
               http://www.unisdr.org

     UN-SPIDER United Nations Platform for Space-based Information for Disaster Management and Emergency Response
     http://www.un-spider.org/

     Wisner, B. (2006). Let Our Children Teach Us! A Review of the Role of Education and Knowledge in Disaster Risk
     Reduction. UNISDR, Geneva.
     http://www.unisdr.org/eng/partner-netw/knowledge-education/docs/Let-our-Children-Teach-Us.pdf

     World Bank

            -- Education Statistics
               http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/EXTDATASTATISTICS/EXTED-
               STATS/0,,menuPK:3232818~pagePK:64168427~piPK:64168435~theSitePK:3232764,00.html

            -- Damage and Loss Assessment – Housing and Education
               http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTDISMGMT/Resources/3housingandeducation.pdf




24   |   EDUCATION
     ANNEXES
     ANNEX 1: INFORMATION NEEDS MATRIX FOR EDUCATION ASSESSMENTS IN POST-DISASTER SITUATIONS

         Domain        Assessment Questions            Information Needs: Immediate Trends/Early Recovery
         CORE DOMAINS
         Access and    What formal and non-formal      Immediate trends                       Early recovery
         Learning      educational activities are      •	 % (schools with) children (M/F) •	 Estimated number of school
         Environment   available? For whom? How           enrolled and attending from key    age children in the affected
                       does this compare to what          identified vulnerable groups       areas (boys and girls)
                       existed before the disaster?
                                                       •	 % of schools with initiatives to    •	 Estimated enrolment rate
                       Is there equal access to           help girls and other vulnerable        (M/F/Total), pre- and post-
                       schools/learning centres           groups participate                     crisis, for ECD, Primary,
                       (for girls and boys)?                                                     Secondary, and non-formal**
                                                       •	 % of students (M/F) and
                       Can learners (girls and boys)      teachers (M/F) who report           •	 Estimated attendance rate
                       safely reach the existing          feeling safe travelling to and         (M/F/total)
                       schools/learning spaces?           from school                         •	 Proportion of school
                       What have been the damages      •	 % of existing schools requiring        furniture lost
                       and losses to educational         total reconstruction
                       infrastructure and furniture?                                          •	 Pupil to classroom ratio
                                                       •	 % of schools / learning spaces         (pre- and in/post-crisis)
                       Are the schools sufficient in      (re)opened (pre-crisis compared
                       size and number to meet                                                •	 Estimated number of schools
                                                          to post-crisis)                        with adequate WASH facilities
                       the learning needs of the
                       affected populations?          •	 % of schools for which mea-
                                                         sures have been taken to enable
                       Are the physical environments     them to withstand expected
                       of schools safe and conducive     disasters
                       to learning?
                                                      •	 % of schools with facilities that
                       Do physical environments          support children with disabilities
                       cater to the needs of children
                       and education personnel        •	 % of schools with disaster
                       with disabilities?                management plans
                       Does the learning environ-     •	 % of schools with toilets
                       ment offer basic services and     for girls and boys
                       WASH facilities?                •	 % of schools with safe
                                                          drinking water
                                                       •	 % of schools with hand
                                                          washing facilities




25   |    EDUCATION
         Domain         Assessment Questions               Information Needs: Immediate Trends/Early Recovery
         CORE DOMAINS
         Teaching and   What have been the damages •	 Proportion of didactic                      •	 % of schools that have
         Learning       and losses to teaching and            materials lost                         (initiated) reading, writing,
                        learning materials?                •	 Pupil-textbook ratio                   and/or arithmetic activities
                        Is training available for teachers    (pre and post-crisis)               •	 % of schools/learning spaces
                        and does it correspond to          •	 % of teachers (M/F) trained            that have implemented
                        prioritised needs?                    on crisis-related topics, such         emergency-related curricula,
                        Are teachers (M/F) attending         as how to help students with            such as life skills and natural
                        school regularly?                    personal trauma, and disaster           disaster preparedness (e.g.
                                                             risk management                         what to do in case of tremors)
                        How much time (in hours)
                        do students spend learning         •	 Estimated attendance of             •	 % of schools where learner
                        each day?                             teachers (M/F)                         content is provided in the
                                                                                                     (native) language of the learners
                        How much schooling                 •	 Number of hours a day
                        was missed as a result of             students receive instruction        •	 % of schools with gender-
                        the crisis?                           in the classroom                       specific lessons and topics in
                                                                                                     school curriculum
                        Are schools following the          •	 Reduction in school
                        national curriculum?                  operating hours                     •	 % of teachers, parents and
                                                                                                     students who feel that the
                        What is the language of            •	 Extent of incorporation of life        curricula/learning content
                        instruction being used?               skills content                         is relevant to the needs of
                        Has the curricula/learning         •	 Identify any exams missed,             the students
                        content been reviewed to              particularly those relevant to      •	 no. of students who were
                        ensure it is appropriate to           promotion or completion                planning on sitting exams.
                        the needs of all learners in
                        the post-crisis context                                                   •	 no. of and type of exams needed
                        (boys and girls)?                                                         •	 location for exams take place
                        Are there specific events in                                                 and level of preparedness
                        the educational timetable                                                    (self-reported) by students to
                        (e.g. exams, matriculations)                                                 take the exams (socially and
                        that have been disrupted due                                                 mentally prepared)
                        to the emergency?
                        How can these be rescheduled
                        with minimal disruption
                        to performance?
         CORE DOMAINS
         Teachers and   What have been the effects         •	 % (M/F) of teachers affected        •	 % of teachers receiving salaries
         Other          of the disaster on teachers           by the disaster: dead, missing,        from the government and/or
         Education      (M/F)?                                injured, displaced                     incentives or support from the
         Personnel      Are teachers (M/F) receiving       •	 % of teachers who may require          community or other sources
                        compensation for their work?          psycho-social support               •	 % of school personnel affected
                        How many teachers have             •	 Estimated attendance of                by the disaster: dead, missing,
                        qualifications recognised by          teachers (M/F)                         injured, displaced
                        the state?                         •	 Student to teacher ratio            •	 Ratio of female to males in
                        Are there volunteers from             (pre-crisis and post-crisis)           school management
                        the community participating        •	 Ratio of female to male teach-      •	 % of other education personnel
                        in teaching?                          ers (at all levels: ECD, Primary,      receiving salaries from the
                        Are people available to               Secondary)                             Ministry of Education (MoE)
                        serve as school principals,                                                  and/or incentives or support
                                                           •	 % of qualified teachers (M/F)          from the community or
                        supervisors, or trainers?             (based on national standards)          other sources


26   |    EDUCATION
         Domain           Assessment Questions                 Information Needs: Immediate Trends/Early Recovery
         Education        Are there policies and plans         •	 % of affected districts with           •	 % of districts in the affected
         Policy           in place by the government              emergency preparedness plans              area with an active Education
                          for responding to education             in place that cover education             Cluster or a similar mechanism
                          in emergencies?                  •	 Existence of policies, standards              in which the MoE takes a
                          Do existing policies promote        and guidelines regarding safe                 lead role.
                          access to quality education         school construction, including    •	 Extent to which education data
                          among the crisis-affected           risk assessment during site          and/or information is shared
                          groups?                             selection, and hazard-resistant      from the district level up to the
                          Is the planning, implementation,    building designs                     central/national level and back
                          and monitoring of education •	 % of schools where the following          down to the district level
                          responses undertaken in a           factors are preventing equal
                          coordinated manner among            access to education: fees or
                          non-governmental organisa-          other costs, age limits, required
                          tions (NGO), United Nations,        documentation, school
                          and government actors?              absorption capacity
                          What types and level of              •	 % of schools that have revised
                          support are necessary to local          their academic calendar to
                          authorities so that they can            compensate for school closures
                          best respond to identified
                          educational needs of women
                          and girls?
                          Have provisions been made to
                          revise the academic calendar
                          to compensate for missed
                          classes or exams?

            *	   Making comparisons between the situation before and after the crisis will be relevant for almost all the assessment
                 questions and indicators, even if not always explicitly mentioned.

            ** 	 For most of the indicators listed here, the aim should be to have data for pre-and post-crisis, data disaggregated by sex,
                 level of schooling and location. However, it is acknowledged that it will not be possible in all post-disaster needs assess-
                 ments to collect these detailed data on education.




27   |    EDUCATION
