    INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR




WATER & SANITATION




   PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
ii   |   WATER & SANITATION
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION 	                                             1

n ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                       1

n PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION	                        5

n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS	                           13

n ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER	      17

n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                            21

n CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES INCLUDING CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES	   23

n THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY	                             27

n THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN	                                 29

n IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS	                              33

n MONITORING TOOLS	                                         33

n REFERENCES	36

n ANNEXES	37
        INTRODUCTION
        Mortality rates are closely related to infectious diseases, which in turn are strongly related to the quality of water consumed
        and on access to adequate sanitation services. Under normal circumstances, inadequate waste treatment methods nega-
        tively affect the health of the population. In a disaster, removal and treatment of human waste acquire increased relevance
        in avoiding the transmission of infectious diseases, and it constitutes a public health priority. Water, sanitation and hygiene
        (WASH) Programme can help reduce poverty and inequality if access and coverage are sufficient.

        This chapter is intended primarily for members of the PDNA WASH Assessment Team to help them understand the scope
        of WASH assessments, the challenges and the requirements of an Assessment Team and the limitations within which such
        assessments are being made. It will also orient national governments, the appropriate authorities and their representatives
        to understand the need for assessments in post-disaster situations, and facilitate their participation and contribution to the
        assessment process. Depending on the institutional context on the ground, it may be necessary for the WASH Assessment
        Team to share their expertise between the Infrastructure Team and the Social Sector Team, which works closely with the
        Housing, Health and Education subsectors. This is because the National Accounts, which forms the basis for the deploy-
        ment into the sectors, does not always have a WASH component and often disaggregates WASH into the Infrastructure
        and the Social components of the National Accounts. However, to maintain coherence between the technical, hardware
        and social aspects of WASH, the WASH Assessment Team should meet and/or exchange regularly information gathered
        during the assessment process.

        Rapid recovery of access to WASH services is one of a set of actions essential to stabilizing the health of populations and
        ultimately assisting communities return to a normal existence. Recovery of infrastructure and services in the affected com-
        munity helps reconnect communities, and their participation helps generate a spirit of recovery and control of their future
        in the minds of the affected population. The renewal of delivery of services requires the recovery of other WASH sector
        elements such as operation and maintenance, re-establishment of regulation for management purposes and ongoing
        monitoring to ensure that recovery is effectively reaching beneficiaries and addressing needs.

        Disasters can create opportunities for change, and the recovery phase of service provision can also be an opportunity to
        seek more sustainable solutions to old or chronic problems and address gaps in the provision of, and access to, WASH
        services in urban and rural populations. This can lead to a recovery strategy to guide the restoration and improvement of
        economic and human development. A solid baseline study, with a good participatory and informed data collection and a
        well-prepared recovery plan, can address both reconstruction and recurring problems from the WASH sector, identify their
        underlying causes – be they technical, cultural, social or governance-related – and minimize future risks and vulnerability,
        and build resilience to absorb future events.




        ASSESSMENT PROCESS
        WASH issues are part of a multi-sectoral process and may be identified within all three of the overarching sectors as de-
        fined by the Methodology – the Social, Productive and Infrastructure sectors. Due to the significance of the Water and
        sanitation infrastructure, for the purposes of the PDNA, the information regarding WASH infrastructure is usually collected
        and incorporated into the Infrastructure sector of the PDNA. This includes the energy subsector for hydropower facilities.
        Consequently, water resources can be managed jointly with energy or even transport. Due to the health and hygiene
        components of the WASH Programme, this information is usually captured and treated as part of the Social sectors of


1   |   WATER & SANITATION
        Education and Health.1 Information regarding private waste disposal systems is captured by the Housing subsector of the
        Social sector. This is reflected in the following WASH assessment and response areas of the WASH:

                    •	   Hygiene Promotion;
                    •	   Water Supply;
                    •	   Sanitation – Excreta Disposal;
                    •	   Sanitation – Solid Waste Management (non-hazardous, but can include medical waste);
                    •	   Vector Control;
                    •	   Drainage.

        In addition, the water and sanitation components of WASH are composed of a set of sub-activities, which consist of
        the following:

                    •	   water supply and sanitation services (often viewed together in the same sub-sector but should be
                         considered separately);
                    •	   water resources policy and administrative management;
                    •	   water resources protection;
                    •	   education and training in water supply, sanitation and health/hygiene issues;
                    •	   hydropower and agricultural water.

        While WASH’s immediate focus is often on health and well-being, it also impacts on other quality-of-life components such
        as livelihoods, security and education. Almost all essential public services and their delivery are dependent, to some degree,
        on the good functioning of the WASH sector, making WASH one of the divisions with the most linkages to other sectors
        and subsectors to be evaluated.

        For each PDNA, a national focal point (FP) for the overall process shall be identified by the government within one of the
        relevant ministries or national authorities to oversee the assessment and the recovery framework. In the case of WASH,
        United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) will support and collaborate with the leading ministry, which should ideally be
        identified by the government. A mechanism for coordinating the PDNA WASH activities should then be established with
        the national FP, national experts, relevant national organizations and other international partners. In addition to the central
        government representation, it may be necessary that there be engagement of relevant departments within ministries and
        local authorities (e.g. municipal, small town and rural) who will be directly implicated with the affected and vulnerable areas
        in order to ensure that the plans to be implemented correspond to on-site reality.

        1	
             For an example of how WASH impacts across other sectors, see Annex I: Checklists for Roles and Responsibilities between Sectors –
             Health, Nutrition and WASH Clusters. This matrix defines the responsibilities and accountabilities of the Health, Nutrition and WASH
             Clusters during emergency response and areas of potential overlap.
2   |   WATER & SANITATION
        The WASH PDNA uses an approach to analysing disaster effects that combines quantitative data with qualitative informa-
        tion and analysis which, when combined with assessments from other sectors, contributes to providing a comprehensive
        picture of post-disaster conditions. The quantitative data are combined with qualitative information and analysis, and in-
        clude the collection of pre-disaster baseline data to compare with post-disaster conditions and evaluate disaster impact to
        determine the overall recovery needs.

        It is not easy to perform a detailed and accurate assessment of the effects of the disaster on WASH and the corresponding
        needs assessment. The degree to which existing data collection systems for secondary data are affected will dictate the
        quantity of data needed to be collected first-hand as primary data. Much of this pre-crisis data can sometimes (and ideally)
        be part of a wider collection for emergency preparedness programmes, so it is worthwhile verifying whether these pro-
        grammes were in place, even if limited in scope. These pre-crisis data provide a measure of the baseline conditions that the
        response may be trying to restore or to improve upon.

        The collection of baseline data through satellite maps, imagery, topographical data and analysis for a PDNA of the vari-
        ous aspects of WASH is needed in order to identify as a reference point the extent of pre-disaster event WASH services,
        including their quality and challenges to service provision within the sector. Comparison with fresh post-disaster remote
        sensing data can also help derive damage and losses. While this can potentially serve as a means to measure rehabilitation
        and reconstruction progress of post-disaster assistance and recovery, it should be kept in mind that recovery can include
        new responses to needs in addition – or as an alternative – to a simple rehabilitation of previous services. Identifying al-
        ready existing needs and challenges can identify opportunities to new solutions for old problems in the recovery. In order
        for baseline data to be used for a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation system, they should be disaggregated by sex,
        age, ethnicity (where relevant), rural and urban, disability, or other necessary designations that will affect the way in which
        people will ultimately respond to a recovery process.


        CHALLENGES TO DATA COLLECTION2
        LANGUAGE, GENDER, CULTURE
        Since field surveys and interviews often require being conducted in the local language, interpreters are often employed.
        One should spot check the interpreting, where possible, with back-up interpreters. In some contexts, it is more effective
        for women to interview women, since women may culturally not be allowed to collaborate or participate in a field survey
        or interview, or even be allowed to attend a meeting.

        INSTITUTIONAL IMPACT OF A DISASTER (E.G. HAITI – DESTRUCTION IN CAPITAL CITY AND SEAT
        OF GOVERNMENT)3
        A baseline desk study may be very difficult to carry out if a natural disaster has seriously compromised government or insti-
        tutional structures (including destruction of buildings or offices of authorities), or resulted in the loss of life of staff. It may
        be necessary to rely more on remote sensing, as well as on satellite mapping, photos, surveys and interviews.




        2	
             See also Logistics in section 2.6 of this report.
        3	
             To what extent has the host government’s sector capacity to respond to disaster (or at least coordinate the response) been compro-
             mised? Is this a disaster that has wiped out all government capability in the sector or a localized disaster in which the government will
             play a central part? Related to this – and no doubt covered elsewhere in non-sector sections of the PDNA – is what are the ‘politics’
             of the disaster response, who would win and who would lose?




3   |   WATER & SANITATION
        DATA INTEGRITY
        The quality of the data must always be checked for the desk study of the survey by reviewing the origin of the data, meth-
        odology and analysis, if any. Checks should be carried out on the quality of data from recent field surveys and assessments
        or from those being implemented for the PDNA – a number will have been done during emergency interventions.

        EXPECTED OUTPUTS OF SECTOR CHAPTER FOR EXAMPLE: SECTORAL REPORTS, TYPICAL TABLES
        The PDNA will produce a detailed report on the effects of the disaster on WASH activities and also a recovery plan. The
        report shall include the monetary values of the effects wherever possible to estimate such damage and loss values, and also
        the needs and costs of rebuilding the WASH sector. Information obtained through primary and secondary data collection
        and the subsequent analyses will include both quantitative and qualitative data, coherently synthesized after analyses,
        to send on to the central report writing team. Where a standardized outline for the PDNA sectoral reports is provided, it
        should be rigorously respected in order to facilitate the compilation of numerous sector reports and the speed with which
        a coherent document can be produced.

        The combined PDNA document produced at the end of damage and loss for the PDNA exercise will normally factor in the
        key recommendations and cost estimations made by the WASH Team. All data and information collected in the form of
        maps, satellite information, data sheets on water resources, services, costs, and consumption, and population figures both
        in its original and edited formats, should be archived with the relevant authorities for reference and future access.

        The PDNA WASH Team manages the day-to-day planning and implementation of the assessment as well as the devel-
        opment of the recovery strategy. This team is supported by report writer(s), who are responsible for writing the PDNA
        report and recovery strategy and works with the PDNA Report Secretariat. The team is tasked with providing coherence
        across varied institutional and sectoral approaches while ensuring that adequate focus is paid to key cross-cutting themes,
        including inter alia, gender (women and equity issues), children, youth, the environment and disaster risk reduction (DRR).
        The team works under government leadership, and with a FP in the government that has already been identified during
        the emergency phase and is available to continue with the PDNA process. The Team may also include membership or at
        least the capacity to liaise with representatives of key ministries (from cross-cutting sectors), the United Nations, the World
        Bank, the European Community (EU), and other partners, as appropriate for the context. Other partners often include
        non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and civil society organizations (CSOs), and should include, wherever possible, the
        local authorities and local government. The Team is established at the initiation of the PDNA and remains fully operational
        throughout the PDNA process. It is important for this team to ensure that coordination processes are transparent, partic-
        ipatory, impartial and useful: the team must ensure that decision-making will not, or will be perceived as being a closed,
        elite or secretive process.

        LOGISTICS
        Where institutional structures have been damaged, or their procedures for data collection and/or archiving and information
        management are weak, accessing electronic and non-electronic sources and copies of data will be difficult. Depending
        on the government’s information access or dissemination policy, there may be security issues to confront when trying to
        access information for even a simple baseline desk study. In contexts where infrastructure has been damaged, this may
        impact on transport and access to the field for surveys and field observation studies.




4   |   WATER & SANITATION
        PRE-DISASTER BASELINE INFORMATION
        The section provides guidance on how to develop the overview and pre-disaster baseline in the sector report, which
        sources and key documents to use to determine pre-disaster conditions. It should include information described in sub-
        section 3.1.	


        HOW TO PERFORM A CONTEXT ANALYSIS OF THE SECTOR FOCUSING ON THE STATE OF
        ITS HUMAN, NATURAL, CULTURAL, FINANCIAL, SOCIAL AND PHYSICAL CAPITAL4
        Disasters can also have a lasting socio-economic and human development impact that should be assessed during the PDNA
        where appropriate. The combination of safe drinking water and hygienic sanitation facilities is a precondition for health and
        for success in the fight against poverty, hunger, child deaths and gender inequality. Natural disasters that significantly affect
        water and sanitation have serious consequences for health and nutrition, particularly for small and marginal households.
        Populations affected by disasters may experience significant loss in the provision of and access to critical services and other
        negative effects that may increase the number of the population living below the poverty line (in the affected areas and
        in the country as a whole).

        The WASH PDNA uses a people-centered approach to post-disaster assessment and recovery focuses on the
        following elements:

                   •	   The impact of disasters on quality of life and potential for human development;
                   •	   stakeholder engagement in identifying the needs and priorities as well as the recovery process of
                        affected populations;
                   •	   inclusions of social-cultural cross-cutting aspects of disaster recovery in complement to economic imperatives;
                   •	   guidance and support to recovery efforts of the affected population and institutions;
                   •	   inclusion of governance with the above elements as essential to building resilient communities and societies.

        The WASH assessment should consider the medium- to long-term impact of the disaster on the country’s capability in
        achieving of its development goals and the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), particularly its target to increase the
        proportion of people with sustainable access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation. The Team should also consider
        the following, in coordination with other sector teams:

                   •	   Impact on overall levels of health;
                   •	   Impact on nutrition and food security;
                   •	   Impact on poverty (rural and urban);
                   •	   Impact on the MDGs, such as MDG 1 (eradicating poverty and hunger), MDG 4 (improving child health) and
                        MDG 5 (improving maternal health).

        The Assessment Team should estimate the effect on national and regional poverty levels over time and by rural and urban
        sectors, as well as the criteria for determining poverty levels. Higher disaster-induced poverty will affect the timeline to
        achieve the MDGs at the provincial and national levels. To estimate the human development impact of the disaster, it is
        useful to:



        4	
             Refer to the work developed by Department for International Development (DFID) on the sustainable livelihood context analysis:
             www.efls.ca/webresources/DFID_Sustainable_livelihoods_guidance_sheet.pdf

5   |   WATER & SANITATION
                 •	   analyse the performance on human development components before the disaster utilizing a pre-crisis base-
                      line (pre-disaster human development trends, including key challenges, and the salient features of the poli-
                      cies implemented pre-crisis that influenced the condition of human development for affected populations).
                 •	   project/ forecast human development performance into the future (both for the year in which the disaster
                      occurred and for the following year/s) based on past performance had the disaster not occurred utilizing
                      clearly stated assumptions.

        DESCRIPTION OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
        It is important to obtain a clear picture of the pre-disaster infrastructure and physical assets required for the provision of
        water supply and sanitation services. First, it is necessary to specify whether the population and services are rural or urban.
        While the technology level can be the same for both (e.g. latrines and shared water points), the management is usually
        different institutionally. Typically, assets are fixed point infrastructures such as tanks and piped distributions, but assets can
        also include transportation, treatment materials and spare parts.

        WATER SOURCES, WATER DISTRIBUTION AND WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
                 •	   Identify the main water sources, which can include:
                             ··   surface water sources such as rivers, lakes, ponds or dams;
                             ··   groundwater sources such as boreholes and hand-dug wells;
                             ··   rainwater harvesting: household and surface.
                 •	   Water treatment systems such as:
                             ··   large-scale treatment (including chlorine gas systems) plants;
                             ··   large- and small-scale filtration systems (sand, charcoal, other);
                             ··   treatment chemicals and materials for filtration.
                 •	   Water distribution systems, which can include:
                             ··   reservoirs, water towers or household rainwater tanks;
                             ··   pumping stations – motor, wind, solar;
                             ··   piped distribution systems;
                             ··   trucks for transporting water.




6   |   WATER & SANITATION
        SANITATION FACILITIES, INFRASTRUCTURE AND SYSTEMS 5
                    •	   Large-scale sanitation facilities such as:
                                 ··   urban and small town sewage systems;
                                 ··   storm and runoff collections systems;
                                 ··   wastewater and sewage treatment facilities such as waste treatment and settling ponds;
                                 ··   pumping systems
                    •	   Small-scale sanitation systems, often household or rural but can also be collective, such as:
                                 ··   Latrines;
                                 ··   Septic tanks;
                                 ··   French drains.

        COLLECTION AND MANAGEMENT OF SOLID WASTE
        In terms of infrastructure, this is usually only relevant in the urban and peri-urban context. Solid waste collection manage-
        ment in rural communities and villages are often of low technology and may be as simple as household waste pits but
        include communal waste management. Given the impact of solid waste on community and public health, the following
        points may be suggested:

                    •	   Urban setting
                                 ··   shared collection points such as large waste and rubbish containers;
                                 ··   collection transport such as trucks, small motor transport, donkey or hand carts;
                                 ··   waste management site for dumping, sorting, compacting or burning, with accompanying infra-
                                      structure such as road access, drainage and fencing.
                    •	   Rural setting
                                 ··   household pits or burning barrels, with fencing or protection;
                                 ··   communal collection pits with fencing protection;
                                 ··   collection with hand cart, donkey cart or small motor transport.

        HAZARDOUS WASTE
        Hazardous waste management includes waste from industrial, agricultural and health care facilities. This is usually not part
        of WASH except for, in some contexts, the safe management of waste from Health Care facilities such as clinics and hospi-
        tals, which can be managed on a small to medium scale with separation, safe storage or incineration protocols. In general,
        most hazardous waste requires specialist infrastructure for transport, storage and/or destruction, and can include waste
        from nuclear dumping, to banned toxic chemicals for agriculture and pharmaceuticals. Available information on hazardous
        waste and hazardous waste treatment facilities should be forwarded to the appropriate authorities and assessment sectors
        such as Health, Infrastructure and Agriculture.




        5	
              Information regarding the small-scale sanitation facilities associated with private dwellings, schools or health institutions are collect-
             ed by the Social Sector Team from the subsectors of Housing, Health or Education. The same holds true for the management of solid
             waste in the following sector.




7   |   WATER & SANITATION
        DESCRIPTION OF THE PRODUCTION AND DELIVERY OF GOODS AND SERVICES, AND
        ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES
        In addition to estimating the damage and losses relating to water and sanitation infrastructure, the assessment consid-
        ers the availability of WASH services and the level of access to them by the population affected, including small-scale
        community and village-level infrastructures for water and sanitation. From an infrastructure perspective, support for the
        restoration of community-based water supply and sanitation facilities will include: restoring destroyed access (e.g. roads or
        bridges); cleaning community ponds and water supply sources; re-installling water treatment plants, installing shallow or
        deep tube wells and boreholes, repairing village water supply facilities; installing/repairing rainwater harvesting; setting up
        adequate low-cost sanitary latrines for communities and restoring safe solid waste disposal systems, etc. These are priority
        interventions aimed at restoring drainage and water services to mitigate the health hazards in the affected community. It
        is also crucial to assess local resources and how the local population can cope with disasters as well as what conditions
        would be required bringing in external experts, equipment and supplies.

        The following are examples of key elements to consider in the assessment of availability and access to WASH goods
        and services.

        WATER SOURCES, WATER DISTRIBUTION AND WATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
                 •	   Identify the main water sources, water treatment systems and water distribution systems that have been
                      affected by the disaster and the causes, for example, contaminated wells, breaks in the pipelines or
                      broken reservoirs.
                 •	   Identify alternate post-disaster water supply sources used by the affected population (rivers, springs,
                      rainwater collection, water purchase, etc.) and determine if the supply is safe, reliable and sufficient over
                      the medium to long term.
                 •	   Identify obstacles to the affected population´s access to water (distance, access to roads, security, financial,
                      others) and possible solutions.
                 •	   Identify particularly vulnerable population groups with limited or no adequate access to drinking water
                      (single mothers, widows, pregnant women, the elderly, the disabled), the causes and possible solutions.
                 •	   Assess if washing facilities are available and adequate to meet demands.
                 •	   Identify current water-related beliefs and practices, including gender-specific practices, that may be limiting
                      people’s access to WASH services and that should be considered in the recovery strategy.
                 •	   Assess the level of disruption to the collection, transport and storage of water, and what is needed to
                      rehabilitate the system.
                 •	   Identify family members who currently collect and transport water from the source to the household or
                      shelter, the difficulties they face in the process, and the effect on their normal employment or role within
                      the household/community.

        SANITATION FACILITIES, INFRASTRUCTURE AND SYSTEMS
                 •	   Identify the sanitation facilities, infrastructure and systems that have been affected, such as latrines, sewage
                      systems and networks, pumping stations, sewage treatment plants, and wastewater treatment facilities, etc.
                 •	   Identify alternate post-disaster defecation practices used by the affected population and determine if these
                      are healthy, safe and reliable over the medium to long term. Consider differences in practices between
                      women and men.
                 •	   Determine if there are sufficient sanitation facilities for the population (must not be more than 20 persons
                      per latrine or toilet)


8   |   WATER & SANITATION
                    •	   Identify obstacles to the affected population´s access to sanitation facilities (distance, access to roads, securi-
                         ty, financial, others) and possible solutions.
                    •	   Identify particularly vulnerable population groups without limited or no access to sanitation (single mothers,
                         widows, pregnant women, elderly, disabled), the causes and possible solutions.
                    •	   Determine the cultural beliefs and practices, including gender-specific practices, concerning excreta practices
                         and disposal that need to be taken into account in the recovery strategy.

        WATER, SANITATION AND HYGIENE
        Assess the need for hygiene promotion related to water and sanitation, especially priority actions linked to hygiene risks
        and behaviors, and those that need to form part of the recovery response in the sanitation sector. Consider the following
        practices that may need to be addressed:

                    •	   excreta disposal practices and anal cleansing practices;
                    •	   use and maintenance of facilities (toilets, latrines, etc.);
                    •	   hand-washing practices after defecation and before food preparation and eating;
                    •	   hygienic water collection, transport, and safe storage (protection) of water;
                    •	   hand-washing practices after defecation and before food preparation and eating;
                    •	   bathing /washing facilities and practices;

        Consider also the population´s knowledge, accepted beliefs, cultural sensitivities and taboo subjects as well as their un-
        derstanding of the relationship between water, vectors and disease.


        DESCRIPTION OF GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
        These processes include people’s ability to exercise their citizenship and priority development policy objectives, etc.

        GOVERNANCE AND SOCIAL PROCESSES
        It is necessary to describe the policy climate in relation to WASH including Integrated Water Resources Management
        (IWRM)6 and the degree of governance, the existing sector capacity for recovery, the key actors and stakeholders in the
        sector, types of WASH services provision, and basic indicators of the status of WASH. An understanding of the past and
        knowledge of the current and possible future WASH policy frameworks is important in the formulation of a needs assess-


        6	
              IWRM is defined as a process aimed at ensuring that water is used more efficiently (economic dimension), promoting equitable ac-
             cess to water (social dimension) and guaranteeing sustainability (environmental dimension). The term ‘integrated’ stresses that there is
             a need to adopt a global, holistic approach that brings together different sectors such as health, agriculture and industry – horizontal
             integration – and different levels (regional, national, municipal, household, etc.) – vertical integration.,

9   |   WATER & SANITATION
         ment that will address recovery in the long term. In concert with the larger policy framework, it is important to describe the
         key partnerships at work prior to and following a crisis. Good key partnerships are marked by the following characteristics.

         CAPACITY FOR SECTOR RECOVERY
         Water and sanitation systems are commonly owned and managed by a public authority or utility, which may have local
         chapters. Identify and consult with the government authorities that have direct but also indirect responsibilities for this Sec-
         tor, such as the Ministry of Water, the Ministry of Public Works and the Ministry of Health, among other bodies, according
         to the country. To the extent possible, these government authorities should be empowered to carry-out their function
         and supported to strengthen their capacity to meet the added demands for recovery in the WASH sector. Consider the
         following during the assessment:

                  •	   the impact of disaster on their institutional infrastructure, office equipment, records, staff, projects, and
                       other relevant capacities;
                  •	   the level of their existing capacities (labour, technical expertise, equipment, etc.);
                  •	   their current and planned recovery responses;
                  •	   specific capacity-building support that can be provided, such as manpower at district and sub-district levels,
                       training, office infrastructure, etc.

         Identify the equipment, materials, expertise, labour, skills and other resources needed to repair damaged WASH infrastruc-
         ture, services and systems (e.g. bulldozers, excavating machinery, trucks, tools, construction materials, sanitation engineers,
         pipes that need replacement, and repair equipment required such as pumps).

         SOCIAL PROCESSES
         Many communities have a high level of collective responsibility for water and sanitation services and may have water com-
         mittees, communal or cooperative management structures, and women´s organizations. Also, other CSOs are also actively
         involved, such as non-governmental organizations (NGOs), church groups and charities. In some cases, these CSOs can
         operate in regions where official governments have little presence. Consider the following during the assessment:

                  •	   the impact of a disaster on these organizations, their projects and capacities;
                  •	   the particular capacities of communities and CSOs (technical knowledge, coping mechanisms, volunteer
                       networks, community organization structures, etc.);
                  •	   local availability of labour, skills, materials, equipment, technologies related to water and sanitation;
                  •	   the organization’s institutional needs and those of communities (affected populations),
                  •	   main problems and challenges, priorities and suggestions for recovery of the affected communities;
                  •	   Specific capacity-building support needed to restore/strengthen their role and functions.

         PRIVATE SECTOR CAPACITY
         Water management and operations may also be delegated to private agents who play an important role in the provision
         of services. In such cases, these private sector agents, especially small-scale operators, should be consulted because they
         could become part of the solution. Assess the activities of the local private agents, how they can improve the delivery of
         recovery services, and how their potential contributions can be best used. Consider the following:

                  •	   the degree that a sector-wide approach (SWAP) is being implemented;
                  •	   the role of civil society, public and private service providers;




10   |    WATER & SANITATION
                 •	   the presence of government, municipal or other coordination mechanisms (such as a WASH cluster);
                 •	   a nationally convened WASH Working Group or other partnerships that may be working directly on the
                      recovery process post-disaster.

         Dialogue and partnerships are critical for improving water governance reform and implementation.

         SECTOR POLICY, STRATEGY AND BUDGET
         The government sector management for water and sanitation is based on four key elements: sector policy and strategy;
         the sector budget and its medium-term expenditure perspective; the sector coordination framework; and institutional
         capacity. The assessment of the water and sanitation sectors should analyse the elements shown in the following box.


         Box. Elements for assessing the Water and Sanitation sectors

          The sector policy and strategy, including a historical review of legal/regulatory frameworks
          •	 Quality of the policy and its consistency with government’s own national strategic objectives and consistency with
             the donor’s objectives for recovery and development cooperation
          •	 Role, if any, of the water sector policies in national long-term development plans and visions
          The sector budget and its medium-term perspective
          •	 Available analytical studies that should include existing budget structure (recurrent budget, development budget,
             cost recovery, etc.)
          •	 Public expenditure reviews and similar studies
          A sector coordination framework
          Actors and coordination of the Recovery Strategy need to be linked in order that ongoing responses and the recov-
          ery strategy which are developed by the various subsectors or Sector Teams such as Social and Infrastructure (and
          Productive where necessary) are presenting coherent strategies, which can be seamlessly integrated into the various
          sectors with capacity building and adjustments.
          •	 The overall sector coordination – policy mechanisms, regulatory structures and the degree of application
          •	 The extent of stakeholder participation – platforms, shared decision-making, participation in service regulation
          •	 The extent to which roles are agreed and codified – memoranda of understanding (MOUs) between authorities and
             service providers, presence and status of regulatory agencies, consumer rights and obligations, issues of ownership
          Institutional setting and existing capacities
          •	 The present outputs from the sector – service provision (public /private);
          •	 The institutional setting and context, i.e. role of government, water boards, non-state actors in planning and
             coordination at the national, regional and local level as well as needs and socio-economic realities
          •	 The capacity of the key sector organizations to fulfil their defined or mandated role.




11   |    WATER & SANITATION
         BROADER GOVERNANCE ISSUES IN THE SECTOR
         The questions in the checklists are important in identifying issues that are essential or support sustainable recovery. These
         questions can be answered and may be measured where identified gaps are addressed through technical support, training
         or other capacity-building actions, all of which can be quantified and costed.

          Demand-driven Support
          •	 What is the priority given within national development policy to water resources, access to improved sanitation
             and their link to hygiene, including issues in which water resources are identified as critical, such as health, natural
             resources conservation or food production?
          •	 Is there adequate political support to make policy implementation feasible?
          •	 Is there adequate conformity between government policy at the national level, and the local-level problems and
             needs being tackled by local and community-based organizations?
          •	 What type of requests in the past has the government made to development partners for support in issues related to
             water resources or where water may play a significant role?
          •	 Are there indications that water, sanitation and hygiene issues are of concern to the people (through NGOs,
             media reports, pressure groups, etc.). What are they, and how is the national government responding to
             people’s concern?
          •	 Are associated issues, such as land use or pollution, predominant, and is the government committed to resolving
             constraints faced by water users in other sectors such as energy, agriculture and transport, as well as issues
             such as health?
          Country-level short and long-term view
          •	 Is the country, or some of its regions, now facing water scarcity or stress, or likely to do so in the near future? Does
             or will this affect the supply of sanitation services, especially in the urban areas?
          •	 Does the country need support (financial, capacity and/or skills) in order to manage its water resources adequately?
          •	 If there is no water policy, or if it is inadequate – e.g. poor Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) or poor
             regulation – should assistance be provided to develop or improve one?
          •	 If no sanitation policy exists either within the overall water policy or as stand-alone, or it is inadequate (e.g. does not
             address hygiene and health), should assistance be provided to develop one?
          •	 Do current government policies reflect an awareness that water resources issues may cause conflicts between users
             and do they address the needs of different sectors? Do they include future planning and estimates of need over the
             longer term for various sectors in order to mitigate sector conflict and competition? (at least a ten-year period)
          •	 To what extent are people’s needs to access water, sanitation and hygiene known and understood in the policy pro-
             cess as being critical to the social, economic and well-being of the entire country or of specific regions within it? Are
             demographic projections included in future planning and long-term policy?
          Contradictions between sector policies
          •	 Does the national government clearly demonstrate commitment to Integrated Water Resources Management
             (IWRM) by incorporating other sectors into its policy?
          •	 What is the national current level of commitment, both in policy and practice, to maintain biodiversity and protect the
             aquatic ecology in the face of the demands of agriculture, transport, energy or other sectors (e.g. mining, forestry)?
          •	 To what extent are the non-consumptive aspects of water resources, such as in-stream use for hydropower, flood
             control, recreation and transport, taken into account in water policies or proposed development plans?
          •	 Is sanitation and its accompanying wastewater management acknowledged as either a water consumer (in terms of
             quality) or as a competing sector?
          •	 Have proposed water sector programmes or plans been developed in a clearly demonstrated consultation process
             with the various sectors and their stakeholders (including non-state)?




12   |    WATER & SANITATION
          Policies established with stakeholders
          •	 Does the government policy and actions on water and sanitation benefit the poor and disadvantaged rural and
             urban populations, and are these stakeholders included in the policy development process?
          •	 Are stakeholders from other sectors consulted in the water policy process? (Stakeholders can include institutional
             actors and authorities as well as users.
          To what extent are conflicting users (both consumptive and non-consumptive) clearly addressed
          and/or included in the water policy development process?
          •	 Are transboundary issues significant to water resources management, and is the government party to treaties or
             agreements with neighbouring countries?
          •	 Are there smaller-scale issues or conflicts over water between neighbouring administrative regions (even down to the
             municipality level) within the country?
          Policies established with stakeholders
          Does the government policy and actions on water and sanitation benefit the poor and disadvantaged rural and urban	
          populations, and are these stakeholders included in the policy development process?  	

         RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES INCLUDING EXISTING PREPAREDNESS PLANS	
         A key element of the assessment is to identify immediate risks to the affected population, particularly new potential threats
         that may deteriorate living conditions. Risks can be physical /natural such as a recurrence of the natural event or other
         events, social or institutional. A list of potential indicators is available in section 4.5, Effects of Risks and Vulnerabilities.

         In terms of emergency preparedness, the existing plans should be assessed to determine to what extent they address
         the above points; whether an overall disaster risk reduction strategy was in place for the WASH sector or any relevant
         cross-cutting sectors; and the risk mitigation measures that were in place to reduce the impacts of possible disasters across
         the sector.




         ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
         The section provides guidance on how to define and describe the effects of the disaster (disaster effects are defined as
         the changes in the four dimensions of effects: (i) destruction of infrastructure and assets; (ii) disruption of service delivery,
         production; (iii) disruption of governance; and (iv) emerging risks/vulnerabilities.7

         NB: effects can be described as tangible as well as intangible.8

         These effects must be presented according to the country’s geographical divisions as presented in the census and by other
         key sociological characteristics where relevant (sex, age, ethnicity, religion, ability, disability of the given population). The
         effects can be expressed in quantitative or qualitative terms.

         GENERAL DESCRIPTION OF THE DISASTER EVENT, ITS GEOGRAPHICAL SCOPE, THE
         POPULATION AFFECTED AND EVOLUTION TO DATE
         This subsection of the PDNA will begin with a general description of the disaster (the nature and magnitude), the areas and
         population affected. Much of this is likely to be common with other sectors and could be in fact placed at the beginning of
         the overall PDNA Report. For the WASH sector, however, the evolution of the event and the assessment needs are related

         7	
               This may include information on emergency response taken to address the risks.
         8	
               All effects are actually tangible; some are quantifiable immediately in monetary terms and some are not. The latter are highly relevant
              in providing the full picture of the human development impact to inform the process of estimating needs (quantified as investments
              or resources required to compensate for those ‘intangible’ effects).
13   |        WATER & SANITATION
         closely to different types of hazards, their environmental nature and origins, and the primary and secondary impacts of the
         event. Knowing this information can assist assessors in planning their assessments and disaster response. The following is
         a list of hazards9 to be considered:

                     •	   Earthquakes;
                     •	   Volcanic eruptions;
                     •	   Land instabilities;
                     •	   Floods;
                     •	   Water hazards (e.g. tsunamis, barrier collapse such as dams and dykes);
                     •	   Storms (typhoons, hurricanes, tropical storms and tornadoes);
                     •	   Drought.

         Environmental damages overlap with and can have an effect on water resources and consequently on the WASH sector.
         Some examples are shown in the following Table:

          Type of Disaster                      Primary Environmental Effect                Secondary Environmental Effect
          Hurricane/cyclone/                    Saltwater intrusion to underground fresh    Soil contamination from saline water
          typhoon                               water reservoirs

          Tsunami                               Water pollution through sewage overflow Contamination of groundwater reservoirs
                                                Saline incursion

          Earthquake                            Subsurface geological disturbance           Displaced and contaminated groundwater
                                                Possible mass flooding if dam infrastruc-   supplies and groundwater infrastructure
                                                ture weakened or destroyed

          Flood                                 Water pollution through sewage overflow Contamination of ground water

          Volcanic eruption                     Destruction of water and sanitation         Contamination of surface water
                                                infrastructure                              Secondary flooding should rivers or valleys
                                                                                            be blocked by lava flow

          Fire                                  Destruction of water and sanitation         Destruction of watershed retention and
                                                infrastructure                              infiltration potential

         The following table illustrates the effects of manmade disasters on water resources and sanitation infrastructure.

          Manmade destruction and disaster events
          Type of Disaster                      Type of infrastructure destroyed             Other effects
          Chemical and industrial               Destruction of water and sanitation          Contamination of surface and ground
          accidents                             infrastructure                               water
          Security breakdown, civil Destruction of water and sanitation                      Reduced service provision, operation
          disturbance, war          infrastructure                                           and maintenance capacity

         The PDNA WASH will then carry out a comprehensive data analysis and validation (step 4 of the PDNA process) to de-
         termine the specific effects of the disaster on the four aspects already described in section 4, with a view to identify the
         points illustrated in subsection 4.2.


         9	
               See IFRC, Disaster Emergency Needs Assessment Module, Disaster Preparedness Training Programme.

14   |        WATER & SANITATION
         EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
         The value of destroyed physical assets (damage) must be estimated for each of the drinking water supply, wastewater
         and solid waste subsystems in urban and rural areas. This will usually include a valuation for the main individual com-
         ponents mentioned above such as dams, wells, and water-treatment plants, pumping stations, pipelines, storage tanks,
         distribution grids, sewerage facilities, latrines and septic tanks in the rural areas, and solid waste collection, treatment
         and disposal facilities.

         The replacement value of destroyed assets must be ascertained using pre-disaster construction or replacement costs, that
         can be obtained from private contractors presently involved in similar work in the affected country or area, as well as from
         the planning department of the affected utility enterprises that may have new, similar projects in the planning or construc-
         tion stages. It must be recalled that the replacement values to be adopted for the estimation of the value of damage are
         those not yet affected by scarcity or inflation that prevailed at the time just prior to the disaster, since adjustments for these
         factors are to be dealt with later on when discussing overall reconstruction needs after the disaster.

         While replacement values are used for the estimation of damage, the Assessment Team should try to ascertain the year
         when each damaged component of the individual systems were originally installed. Where the possibility exists, the Water
         and Sanitation Team can also interview local insurance companies to ascertain the degree to which actors in the sector are
         insured, and the possible amounts of insurance pay-outs that may be expected and also take advantage of their valuation
         procedures of infrastructure and other insurable costs.


         EFFECTS ON DELIVERY AND ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES
         The delivery of goods and services will be affected, and this is reflected in impacts on the production flow within the sector.

         Production flow changes are then estimated by comparing the non-disaster to the post-disaster performance of each sub-
         system, ensuring that the following issues are also valued:

                   •	   Decline in operational revenues of the sector enterprises, until services are brought back to normal levels,
                        due to the temporary total suspension of operations, and the partial supply of services while assets are
                        under repair, and due to possible temporary decrease of demand from consumers.10
                   •	   Increase in operational costs (due to use of alternative sources or means of water, wastewater and solid
                        waste supply and disposal, the temporary operation of damaged system components, or the temporary,
                        more-intensive operation of undamaged system components).11

         As mentioned in section 3, WASH does not depend on infrastructure alone, but also requires an institutional, regulatory
         and a qualified human resource capacity to ensure the delivery of goods and services. Some of the damage may include
         destruction of administrative infrastructures such as buildings and offices, and in some cases, permanent displacement of



         10	
             The operation of the services may be fully stopped during an initial short period of time immediately after the disaster (a few hours to a
             few days), to be partially resumed during the period of repairs until full system reconstruction is achieved. In addition, service demand
             may drop due to extensive destruction in cities caused by the disaster and the subsequent overall lower economic activity. These tem-
             porary interruptions or partial operations for each subsystem would result in corresponding revenue decline for the enterprises.
         11	
             Among the possible items to be considered under this heading are: temporary higher costs of chemicals required to ensure quality
             of drinking water; higher water distribution costs when temporarily using tanker trucks to reach users and/or the temporary free
             distribution of bottled water; the more intensive operation of water systems to compensate for higher water flow losses in damaged
             system components (such as distribution or conveyance water mains); cleaning of sewerage systems and treatment plants after flood-
             ing; and higher transport costs to collect and dispose of solid waste, etc. In some cases, salt-water desalination plants are installed
             and operated in coastal areas or in Small Island Developing Countries affected by disasters, which imply a very high cost of operation.
             Such higher costs of post-disaster operation translate into higher intermediate consumption for the macro-economic impact analysis.

15   |     WATER & SANITATION
         key individuals or even loss of life. The costs of bringing the institutional capacity to provide goods and services up to the
         level of the populations’ needs can include repair or reconstruction of buildings (offices, laboratories, dispatch centres, ser-
         vice and supply centres) and also replacement and training of individuals necessary for the provision of goods and services.

         Finally, the role of private sector actors in the supply of goods and services in the WASH sector must be ascertained, as
         well as costing of damage to their infrastructure, goods and capacity. The role of the private sector varies from country to
         country, but in some countries where public-private partnerships have been put into place, the private sector cannot be
         ignored in a post-disaster scenario.


         EFFECTS ON GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
         As mentioned in section 3 above, governance and decision-making processes refer to the systems for developing and
         implementing policies, enforcing regulations and implementing sector programmes for the provision of services and man-
         agement of public sector assets and infrastructure. After a disaster, the ability of the public authorities to respond to the
         emergency and plan for a long-term recovery will be affected. In subsection 4.3 above, the damages as a result of the
         disaster to buildings, structures and major equipment necessary for the proper functioning of administrative authorities, at
         central and local levels, will have been already assessed.

         In terms of decision-making and other governance capacities, both from authorities and civil society, the focus is more on
         the capacities of the public authorities and of the civil society to lead and implement the recovery. These capacities should
         be assessed in terms of management capacity for coordination and strategy, and technical professional knowledge, and
         finally on community participation and development. Depending on the degree of decentralization of authority and the
         role of the public in policy and regulatory implementation, the capacity needs will vary along this hierarchical scale.

         The effects evident on capacity and governance include the following:
                  •	   depletion of human resources, financial resources and supplies, as well as damage to equip-
                       ment, which reduce or impair the ability of the public authorities to carry out their administrative functions;
                  •	   Damage to documentation and baseline data, both in paper and electronic forms, which are es-
                       sential to manage services, operations and maintenance, but are also essential to guide the assessment and
                       recovery processes;
                  •	   Disruption of administrative functions typically exercised by the public authorities, such as quality con-
                       trol assurance and regulation of supply of goods and services, including tarification, planning of operations
                       and maintenance, and for the post-disaster context, carrying out impact assessments, and planning and
                       implementing interim measures for maintaining services;
                  •	   Disruption of key decision-making, policy and strategy formulation and coordination mechanisms
                       for the sector, due to communication or transportation difficulties or even the loss of some of key actors;
                  •	   Social disruption of community social structures, power relations (including gender roles), and rise of
                       latent conflicts (often along ethnic and cultural divides), which can be provoked by populations stressed or
                       displaced by lack of basic WASH services.

         EFFECTS ON RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
         A key element of the assessment is to identify immediate risks to the affected population, particularly new potential threats
         that may deteriorate conditions if the necessary measures are not taken in a timely manner. Priority mitigation and pre-
         paredness measures are identified to avoid another disaster or the further deterioration of current livelihood conditions.
         Below are some effects to examine:


16   |    WATER & SANITATION
                  •	   current water and sanitation practices that can have a negative effect on the population’s health, such as
                       solid waste and rubbish disposal (e.g. collection system, burning, burial);
                  •	   threats to WASH facilities, such as potential contamination of water sources nearby;
                  •	   secondary shocks, such as the potential spread of disease resulting from inappropriate supplies of clean water;
                  •	   environmental risks, such as the salinization of underground water;
                  •	   WASH practices, which may not be sustainable and that can negatively impact the environment, and ways
                       these can be avoided;
                  •	   population groups (economic, social, and geographic) who are especially vulnerable;
                  •	   additional hazards such as further landslides, an approaching hurricane season, fire risk;
                  •	   climate forecasting, such as on forthcoming seasons that may bring anticipated snow or rains, or
                       temperature extremes;
                  •	   social and political risks, such as upcoming elections, religious events or other potential conflict between
                       social groups.

         Some cross-cutting issues such as gender, environment, climate, and culture have been included here but will be dealt with
         in more detail in section 7.




         ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER
         This section gives guidance on how to estimate the value of damage and change in flows of income, extracting from ele-
         ments that have financial implications, in the following four dimensions: damage to physical infrastructure and assets; the
         provision of goods and services; governance and risks; and change in flows of income that are linked to service /produc-
         tion, governance and risks. The methodology is in line with the GFDRR Guidelines Vols 1, 2 and 3.


         DAMAGE
         The Water and Sanitation sector includes three separate sub-systems required for the provision and treatment of drinking
         water, as well as the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater and solid waste. It is important to ensure that the
         ownership of damage and losses is separated for these sub-systems and to define them as public and/or private sector.

         During the assessment process, it is important to note that changes in the flow of income as a result of changes in pro-
         duction patterns arising in water-consuming sectors (such as agriculture, industry, and trade and tourism) will be estimated
         and accounted for under each of those sectors. This is done as production losses and/or as higher production costs when
         alternative, higher-cost sources of water are necessary as interim solutions.


         ECONOMIC VALUE OF TOTAL/PARTIAL DESTRUCTION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS
         The following is a description of the main infrastructures and associated assets that need to be valued for total or partial
         destruction. A detailed template for costing of total or partial destruction is found in Annex III: Table for Estimation of Dam-
         age and Changes in Flows (Unit Costs), which contains a comprehensive list of unit items for Water and Sanitation Supply
         Services and Solid Waste Management for both urban and rural contexts. Other unit items can be added where necessary.
         A sample of the template can be seen in table below.




17   |    WATER & SANITATION
         Table

           WASH Infrastructure             No. of        Partially        Cost of       Fully         Recon-    Change           Total
           Components                      Units         Damaged          Repair        Dam-          struction in Flows         Effects
                                                                                        aged          Cost      (or loss)
           Urban Water & Sanitation

           Solid Waste Management

           Subtotal


         Major unit items that will be costed in the template are explained as follows:

                     •	   Partial or complete collapse of water supply facilities, urban or rural, which are part of the source,
                          collection, treatment and distribution of urban water supply. Care must be taken to include household
                          systems, such as rooftop rainwater harvesting tanks, backyard or communal hand dug wells or shallow
                          boreholes, which may exist outside of the main urban supply networks. Smaller systems may often occur
                          in peri-urban and informal urban periphery settlements, which may not be administratively recognized by
                          authorities and therefore unlikely registered or recorded.12
                     •	   Partial or complete collapse of sanitation facilities, urban or rural, which are part of the larger piped
                          sewage systems for the urban context. This can also include fleets of trucks, tanks and pumps for emptying
                          septic tanks and then transporting the waste to central management and treatment. Sewage treatment fa-
                          cilities, including sewage treatment plants and settling ponds, are also part of the sanitation system, which
                          can be damaged or destroyed. Where the value of household and multi-household septic tank and drain-
                          age systems have been estimated, this information, as in the previous case of water supply facilities, should
                          be passed to the housing team to ensure no double counting.
                     •	   Partial or complete collapse of solid waste management facilities, urban or rural, is often partic-
                          ularly essential to a post-disaster response. This can include destruction or damage to central collection
                          facilities such as collection and rubbish containers, central collection sites and the access to the sites, loss,
                          damage or destruction of the collection transport network such as trucks, motorized or donkey and hand-
                          carts. Donkey and hand-carts are sometimes used in rural and village settings where there are community
                          solid waste initiatives. Dumping sites may become damaged: security fences may be destroyed, waste pits
                          may be covered by landslides, or their solid waste content mobilized by flooding.
                     •	   Partial or complete collapse of administrative buildings, laboratories, storage sites and Opera-
                          tions and Maintenance (O&M) materials and supplies, which are not only essential for the adminis-
                          tration and management of delivery of services, but also for ensuring the necessary ongoing operation and
                          maintenance of facilities. The secure storage and content of chemicals for treatment facilities or spare parts
                          for repairs are essential for maintaining the delivery of services. Once again, it is important to ensure that
                          this information is shared with the infrastructure team to avoid double counting.
                     •	   Damage to physical assets pertaining to the administrative functions of the sector (buildings,
                          infrastructure and major equipment of the government agencies and NGOs, at the central and local levels).
                          This also may be captured by the Infrastructure Team, so close collaboration with this team is required.

         In assessing the damage to physical assets and infrastructure, the PDNA Team may consider different levels of gravity ac-
         cording to a given scale (e.g. from slight to severe), from infrastructure and system materials that can be easily rehabilitated,

         12	
               Data collected by WASH Experts infrastructure team should be transferred to the Housing Team. Infrastructure value is calculated
               with the Housing Sector (as part of the Social Sector).


18   |     WATER & SANITATION
         to those requiring a more in-depth structural analysis of their conditions, all the way to those beyond repair that must be
         replaced. These categorizations should be as similar as possible to existing country classification systems if available. If this
         proves difficult, a common methodology within the PDNA process is the next option, in order to facilitate the collection
         of comparable baseline data. This is also the point where the WASH PDNA team should consult with other PDNA sectors
         such as infrastructure, agriculture, health and education. At a later stage, this rapid assessment of the degree of damage
         will help to better position the sector needs within the recovery framework plan, preparing for prioritization.

         Table below shows a possible model for providing a very cursory assessment of the damage that can be sustained by assets
         and infrastructures in the WASH sector. This would need to be complemented by more detailed information on the actual
         cost for reconstruction/repair of each individual asset, as well as with information on their respective level of priority in
         terms of short, medium, and long-term importance for the population.


         Table: Rapid Assessment

          WASH                                          Damage to Assets and Infrastructure
          Sheet N.                                      Name of City / District / Site
          N.        Asset/infrastructure                        Public /      Water       Damage to Assets and
                                                                Private       Sanitation Infrastructure
                                                                              Solid Waste Slight    Partial   Complete
               1

               2

               3

               …

               N

         Depending on type of infrastructure and the nature of efforts needed for recovery, the Assessment Team, in consultation
         with local experts, locals populations and/or community members and Civil Society Organisations, should be able to define
         the thresholds of ‘partial damage’ and ‘complete damage’ for each type of infrastructure. A rule of thumb practiced in
         some countries is to consider a 0-15 percent damage as ‘slight damage’, which can be repaired by local population efforts
         or by the community while 15-60 percent damage correspond to ‘partial damage’ (moderate running up to severe) and
         60-100 percent correspond to ‘complete damage’ (severe to very severe) requiring recovery support from external sources
         for their repair and reconstruction or replacement of components if necessary (e.g. pumps, transport). The estimation of
         damages and losses should be determined by repair or replacement costs expressed in current values.

         There is no standard rule nor lists for costing WASH infrastructure, which varies with types of infrastructure, between
         countries and even between regions within countries. Since some infrastructure building can use labour-intensive meth-
         ods and locally available materials and resources, the costs of infrastructure will likely be greatly influenced by local wage
         rates and prices of locally available materials and equipment. The unit prices of common types of infrastructure (buildings,
         pumps, locally manufactured pipe and conduit) are usually available with the local government authority, particularly in the
         technical or engineering unit. In many developing countries, the engineering department or cell within the ministry of local
         government maintains an updated rate schedule of local infrastructures in different regions. Other possible source of in-
         formation could be the Public Works Department. If the price is not available for any particular infrastructure, the engineer
         (or technical expert) in the assessment mission, in consultation with community, should be able to determine the cost by
         analysing the efforts and resources required in each step of the construction method. Where specialty materials or items


19   |    WATER & SANITATION
         are not available locally, such as pumps, treatment units, laboratory units or high resistance construction materials (e.g.
         ceramic bricks for incinerators), the costs of items (including shipping on-site) must be sourced externally.

         The aim of the post-disaster assessment is not to be of utmost quantitative precision, but rather to provide a credible and
         useful estimation of the extent of the effects of the event and its impact on the economy and society. Such an assessment
         will allow for the development a recovery strategy for the socio-economic, environmental, public health and well-being,
         and of the communities and their livelihoods.


         VALUE OF EFFECTS ON SERVICE DELIVERY, PRODUCTION OF GOODS AND ACCESS TO
         SERVICES AND GOODS
         The effects of limiting access to water supply and sanitation services (WSSS), as well as management of solid waste, can be
         very quickly felt among the affected population, as follows:

                  •	   knock-on effects of increased costs of WSS services reducing disposable income for individuals
                       and households;
                  •	   increased water costs for commercial activities lead to increased costs for products;
                  •	   reduced access to or delivery of essential or public services such as education or health care due to lack of
                       water and sanitation services to these public services facilities.

         VALUE OF EFFECTS ON THE INTERRUPTION OF GOVERNANCE FUNCTIONS
         As stated in subsection 3.3, governance plays an important role within the WASH sector and involves more than just de-
         cision-making processes, but also the general health of the sector, its effectiveness, transparency and accountability. The
         PDNA WASH Team should assess these elements of the WASH sector at national and local levels, and attempt to ascertain
         to what degree they may have been affected by the disaster event. It is important to quantify to what extent the author-
         ities were capable of implementing policies and enforcing regulations in the pre-disaster context, since this will define to
         what degree institutional capacity building may be required in the recovery strategy. Part of this can be indicated by the
         ability of public authorities to respond to an emergency, including the effectiveness of the disaster response plans in place
         before the disaster, and long-term recovery plan.

         The economic costs resulting from damage or loss to buildings, structures and major equipment for the WASH sector,
         which are essential for the proper functioning of administrative authorities at central and local levels, have already been
         addressed above. These damages lead to increased economic costs related to WASH services. The effects on governance
         result in similar economic costs to the general population, since they also affect the administration of the sector. More-
         over, the loss of these facilities immediately limit the capacity and ability of administrations to function and of the general
         population to access support, be it for their WASH services or information. Effects on governance structures and processes
         that can lead to economic costs can be summarized as follows:

                  •	   disruption of human resources, minor equipment, financial resources and supplies, which reduce
                       or impair the ability of the public authorities to carry out their administrative functions;
                  •	   damage of documentation and baseline data, both in paper and electronic forms, which are essen-
                       tial to guide the assessment and recovery processes;
                  •	   disruption of administrative functions typically exercised by the public authorities, such as provision
                       of services; in the post-disaster context, this would include carrying out impact assessments, planning and
                       implementing urgent safeguarding measures, providing support to sector stakeholders and the public;



20   |    WATER & SANITATION
                      •	   disruption of key decision-making, policy and strategy formulation and coordination mechanisms
                           for the sector, due to loss of staff, and difficulty in communication and transportation;
                      •	   disruption of social and community structures, such as CSOs that normally work in parallel with the
                           authorities to assist vulnerable members of the population (the elderly, women, girls, the disabled, the ill) to
                           access services.

         VALUE OF EFFECTS DUE TO THE INCREASED RISKS
         The cost associated with increased risks and vulnerability can be measured by the cost of reducing the risk or by the in-
         crease the costs of the expected loss in future associated with increased risk. The comparison of these two types of costs
         is useful in determining the financial added value of implementing DRR strategies in the recovery process and beyond. The
         main risks for the WASH sector have been presented in subsection 4.5. The application of costs to them as changing risks,
         usually meaning increased or compounded with new risks, is usually based on effects costed for infrastructure, human
         costs such as health or displacement, and governance costs such as administrative and institutional capacity to respond to
         disaster or implement risk reduction.




         ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
         This section provides guidance on how to develop an analysis of the expected trend for the sector after a disaster and
         describes a worst case scenario should policy and programming measures are not considered. It identifies major challenges
         for the sector. This impact analysis is based on the assessment of the disaster effects, the sector development plans, lessons
         from past experiences and the emerging concerns that derive from the events. The analysis of the impact of the disaster
         provides the medium and long term projection of the effects on the sector. The impact analysis forms the basis of the
         recovery strategy.

         The information produced through this analysis should contribute to the overall Macroeconomic, and Human Development
         impact assessment.13 The WASH Team should work in close collaboration with the team responsible for developing the
         macro-economic assessment and human development report in the country.


         SECTOR TRENDS FOLLOWING A DISASTER
         To develop an analysis of how the sector trends may be progressing, it is necessary to review the results of the baseline
         study inputs, primary and secondary data, as well as the integration of the health of the WASH component sectors, includ-
         ing governance, institutional and administrative capacity. These are collectively analysed within the context of the disaster
         event, the disaster response from the authorities, and the overall effects and estimation of value of the disaster.

         While the immediate impacts on the individual will be linked to health and hygiene, they can ultimately become debilitating
         enough to evolve into economic impacts on the society in general and can include impacts such as:



         13	
                The Macroeconomic and human development aggregated impact analysis develops from a gap analysis between the pre-disaster
               scenarios in terms of economic and human development indicators (variables to be used in the assessment, such as GDP, balance of
               payments (BoP), fiscal impact, price fluctuations in the economic side, poverty and employment and human development indicators
               in terms of health, nutrition, education, access to social services, gender differentials, social development goals) and their evolution
               in the post-disaster scenarios.



21   |     WATER & SANITATION
                •	   health impacts of reduced access to services leading to increase in health problems and corresponding
                     increased health costs per capita;
                •	   economic impacts of a reduced labour force (skilled and semi-skilled);
                •	   health impacts of a reduced number of commercial actors;
                •	   displacement of populations and commercial activities due to lack of services;
                •	   economic impacts resulting from the actual cost of repair and replacement of the WASH plant and machinery.

         ADDITIONAL IMPACTS TO BE CONSIDERED
                •	   Emerging concerns arise following the disaster and are initially linked to the ability of the authorities to
                     respond to the event. In the emergency and short-term recovery phase, the capacity and the strategy of the
                     authorities will be tested by actions of clean-up and efforts to stabilize the affected populations. However,
                     as the recovery process unfolds, the longer-terms elements of a disaster response and recovery strategy will
                     also come under scrutiny. All challenges and difficulties that arise during a short-, medium- and long-term
                     continuum will ultimately be reflected back to the strategy that was developed during the pre-disaster peri-
                     od. This review process will identify elements of the disaster response strategy that require strengthening or
                     even creating. These elements are often closely linked to policy, regulation, institutional and administrative
                     capacity and governance. Consequently, the strategy cannot be improved just by re-writing it; there must
                     almost always be changes within the policy, regulatory, institutional and governance components of the
                     WASH sector.
                •	   Changing risks can be a result of the disaster event wherein the physical and social environment is altered.
                     The physical aspect such as the frequency (and the statistical probability) of disaster events such as volcanic
                     eruptions, earthquakes or flooding events will change as a result of geological and land surface impacts.
                     New volcanoes can reasonably be expected to erupt again, intensity of earthquakes will fluctuate, and new
                     flood zones can be expected to be re-visited. Socially, risks will rise as populations migrate into potentially
                     dangerous zones. Social and cultural rifts, created by a post-disaster environment, may not always be repa-
                     rable or will require special attention that was previously not necessary.

         NO POLICY OR STRATEGY CHANGE
                •	   Based on existing sector management and development plans where disaster response was challenging, the
                     possibility of incurring heavy impacts from future disasters will remain high unless the gaps and needs of
                     institutional and administrative capacity are addressed. This can include policy-related and regulatory solu-
                     tions, but can also include consolidating the human and financial resources capacity at various administra-
                     tive levels. In many developing and partner countries, the recent years of decentralization of authority have
                     been led by providing mandates to new authorities but not always supported by the necessary resources.
                     There are often governance challenges that need to be addressed, including transparency and accountabil-
                     ity, as well as the role and obligations of WASH services beneficiaries and the general public. A pre-disaster
                     situation where services were not maintained or correctly provided, and tariffs consistently remained un-
                     paid, will not be able to support a post-disaster recovery of services, even if they are built back better. Thus,
                     the sector will not advance or improve, and in a subsequent disaster will experience the same problems
                     since the sector is unable to act and to mobilize populations for an effective disaster response.
                •	   Based on the existing sector DRR strategy, there will almost always be a post-disaster adjustment to strat-
                     egies to improve the response. This is a best-case scenario. However, if the DRR strategy is firmly anchored
                     institutionally and the gaps in a weak strategy are the result of weak institutions and sector actors, the
                     strategy remains more of a written methodology that lacks the necessary willing and well-prepared actors
                     and pre-positioned resources required to implement it.



22   |   WATER & SANITATION
         MAJOR CHALLENGES
                  •	   Medium-term challenges will focus on bringing damaged or interrupted WASH services up to the level nec-
                       essary to stabilize the affected population socially and economically for a sustainable recovery.
                  •	   Long-term challenges will address the DRR strategy, put into place the institutional and administrative
                       mechanisms of policy and regulation, and execute the necessary capacity building within the WASH sector
                       necessary to build a sector that is robust enough to absorb future disaster impacts, reduce risks and thus
                       implement a disaster response strategy that is feasible.



         CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES INCLUDING
         CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
         There is a need to be aware of cross-cutting issues, their existence in other sectors and their impact on WASH and vice
         versa. It is important to know how sectors and their cross-cutting issues have addressed overlaps or shared responsibilities.
         This is well presented in the WASH Cluster matrices of Checklists of Roles and Responsibilities of WASH and other sectors
         of Education, Health and Nutrition (see Annex I).

         The WASH assessment should provide inputs that integrate disaster impacts on local economic and social activities linked
         to facilities such as:

                  •	   Public markets;
                  •	   Schools;
                  •	   Health service infrastructures.

         When the above facilities are limited due to lack of water and sanitation services, the result is restricted access to local
         economic activity, capacity building, and the health and well-being of affected populations. Ensuring the effective contri-
         bution of WASH services to the recovery and well-being of affected populations requires identifying not only the physical
         impact of the disaster, but also the underlying elements of gender, governance and disaster risk reduction (DRR). They all
         combined under a sector framework for risk reduction and social resilience, the venues for identifying key stakeholders,
         and the avenues and platforms for consultation, participation and decision-making. The following sub-sections identify
         cross-cutting themes and sectors as well as key actors and focus areas that contribute to or make up the WASH sector.
         These themes, sectors and focus areas all require assessment to evaluate:

                  •	   the extent of damages and losses during a disaster, including loss of skills and capacities to provide services;
                  •	   their role and contribution necessary for recovery;
                  •	   their technical and human resource needs and requirements in order for them to fulfill their role.

         WASH LINKS TO OTHER SECTORS
         HEALTH
         The WASH needs assessment must address the needs of health care facilities for provision of water and sanitation services
         and hygiene promotion activities. This can expand to include the specialty management of health care waste (sharps,
         softs and organic waste), and can include safe management or disposal of pharmaceuticals; it can also include providing
         assistance to implementing strategies for vector control. Outside of health care facilities, the health authorities are often
         implicated in implementing community hygiene initiatives, e.g. responses to cholera incidents.

23   |    WATER & SANITATION
         NUTRITION
         In a post-disaster context, nutrition is often viewed from a shorter-term perspective of access and reserves:

                  •	   Household access to food assistance;
                  •	   Sources and access to food supplies;
                  •	   Composition and availability of food basket;
                  •	   Food price and household purchasing power;
                  •	   Household food reserve.

         The impact of WASH on nutrition is felt at various levels. First, there is a need for water consumption for nutritional health,
         and second, water is often a key component to food preparation without which some foodstuffs cannot be accessed.
         In terms of health, good water, sanitation and hygiene help maintain barriers to diarrheal diseases, which can result very
         quickly in malnutrition, especially among young and elderly population. In a post-disaster scenario the number of persons
         vulnerable to malnutrition due to poor WASH environments increases. In the longer term, the role of water (quality and
         quantity) in nutritional food security is evident in the cross-cutting sector of agriculture.

         EDUCATION
         There are two aspects of education and educational facilities to be considered in the WASH assessment. Initially, educa-
         tional facilities should ensure that safe water and gender-segregated and appropriate sanitation facilities for learning spaces
         and schools are included. If there is a breakdown in sanitation facilities, or a limitation, it is often females who are margin-
         alized. Also, the educational facility is a key dissemination point for hygiene promotion, for students and in some cases, for
         the local community. In post-disaster settings, these facilities can also serve as rendezvous points for information, primary
         health care if normal health services are disrupted.

         ENVIRONMENT
         Existing and pre-existing environmental problems must be identified in the assessment to evaluate whether they had im-
         pact on, or were sensitive to, WASH services, ascertaining what these impacts may have been, and what their influence
         may be on recovery strategies relevant to WASH. The role of the surrounding environment in water-related diseases,
         especially for displaced or affected populations, must also be taken into account since it is often the management of the
         environmental factors that form part of the disease response.

         Rebuilding and recovery activities across sectors may have both positive and negative effects on the environment. For
         WASH, environmental impacts of rebuilding, replacement or construction of new water and sanitation facilities should
         be considered. For example, building improved sanitation systems may address some problems regarding water pollution,
         and a wastewater system may help regulate water pollution from local industry facilities. On the other hand, rebuilding
         new roads may negatively affect the local surface and subsurface hydrology or forests in the locality, and reconstruction
         of damaged irrigations systems could be a continuation for unsustainable agriculture due to soil salinity, contamination or
         over-abstraction of water.

         CULTURE
         Issues of communication and languages, gender and age, and social, religious and family dynamics, as well as other cul-
         tural aspects can influence the smooth unfolding of a WASH assessment and post-disaster response. Planning for any
         post-disaster intervention should include a systematic consideration of the cultural environment in which such interventions
         are to take place. Religion, gender, ethnicity and socio-economic status are just a few considerations to keep in mind
         when planning interventions. Poor consideration of socio-cultural contexts results in inefficiencies and low sustainability of

24   |    WATER & SANITATION
         post-disaster investments. While a WASH needs assessment may not include data collection on culture, integrating these
         elements into the structure and content of the WASH assessment contributes to ensuring the relevance and validity of the
         information collected and the response provided.

         DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
         Managing disaster risk cuts across traditional development sectors, such as health, education, infrastructure, water and
         agriculture. Due to the difference in population densities, the potential risk to populations can be higher in urban areas as
         compared to rural areas. Achieving efficient development progress requires each of these sectors to invest in risk manage-
         ment and resilience measures. Given the projected increase in the occurrence of disasters, development progress will be
         contingent more than ever before on measures to avoid disaster impacts (Mitchel, 2012). Suggested actions for WASH are
         shown below.

         POLICIES & LEGISLATION
                  •	   Policy on WATSAN Recovery includes provisions on upgrading facilities in terms of hazard-resistance design
                       and accessibility.
                  •	   DRR is integrated into watershed management programmes (river basin management) and in
                       land-use planning.

         ADVOCACY & AWARENESS
                  •	   Sustainable water use and sanitation awareness programmes and support materials are made available to
                       local communities, including appropriate training and installation of secure WASH facilities and different
                       types of emergency responses and protocols.

         COORDINATION OF ACTIONS AND CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
                  •	   Contingency plans exist for service delivery system for WASH services in post-disaster contexts (e.g. floods,
                       droughts, earthquake). Plans should reflect both chronic and extreme events, and the corresponding risks
                       considered most likely to occur.
                  •	   Sanitation teams and borehole technicians are trained, either locally or in the community, to clean wells
                       regularly, to treat stored water and to provide information for households on treating and storage of
                       domestic water.

         BUILDING BACK BETTER
                  •	   Risk-proofing and monitoring process is installed, including strategies for access to parts and tools
                       during emergencies.
                  •	   Risk assessments are performed for site-location of water pumps, supply systems, drainage and sewage
                       systems, and sanitation facilities.
                  •	   Community drainage systems, sanitation facilities, waste management systems are constructed, which are
                       risk-proof. (e.g. site selection, design and choice of materials, shared management and responsibilities).
                  •	   The local authorities and communities is engaged in training and information exchange on risk reduction
                       and how it can be implemented.
                  •	   Quality control is exercised by the community by participating in the creation of community drainage sys-
                       tems, sanitation facilities, and waste management.

         Consulting local communities, water committees, CSOs, government authorities, and national and international organiza-
         tions specializing in water and sanitation, but also in DRR can help identify potential mechanisms and techniques that can
         be applied to the recovery of the sector so as to reduce the exposure and vulnerability to future hazards of the new water
         and sanitation facilities that will be repaired or built. This may include identifying some of the following:

25   |    WATER & SANITATION
                      •	   examples of good DRR practice already used by communities, including WASH systems that may have sur-
                           vived the disaster and can serve as models;
                      •	   other local technologies, techniques, designs, and know-how that can be tapped and applied;
                      •	   locally available expertise able to provide technical assistance to authorities on DRR in the sector.

         A common point of discussion among development partners is the extent to which these measures are specifically DRR
         actions or how far they simply reflect good practice. At present, this is a grey area, with a wide range of conceptual un-
         derstanding on how to address risk reduction in the WASH sector. However, given the critical nature of the sector, there is
         clearly the need to have a more systematic focus to risk reduction (Aquaconsult, 2008).

         WASH AND CROSS-CUTTING ISSUES
         Gender

         The role of women and young girls with regard to the WASH sector is well known in general (water transporters, source
         protection, management of household health and hygiene, agricultural users), but the degree and extent of their roles in
         decision making or influencing decisions can vary from context to context. However, gender does not automatically imply
         a bias towards women; support and opportunities should remain equitable. Each assessment should be conducted with
         sufficient preparation and focus on gender participants’ respective existing and future roles and capability to influence
         decisions on the basis of informed choices. The specific role of men in decision-making processes should also be assessed.
         These assessments will indicate which elements will have impact on which transitions can be expected as a result of disas-
         ters (e.g. women or youth becoming head of households, freedom of movement).

         Climate Change

         Without adequate and sufficient data, it is difficult to measure and even more difficult to model climate change in many
         partner countries that will be implementing a PDNA. Much of the data already available tend to be for a larger geographic
         scale and not very applicable for more local contexts. What can be measured are the frequency and amplitude of incidents
         of climatic extremes, often manifested in occurrences of floods, excessive precipitation events or droughts. In the WASH
         sector, this can affect accessibility of water resources for commercial or domestic use, frequency and need for irrigation or
         effectiveness of certain sanitation activities such as sewerage and management of wastewater. It is necessary to quantify
         these events, which can often be performed in the baseline survey, in order to allow for comparison to previous events. Of
         equal interest is to evaluate how the populations have responded and adapted to these events, which usually requires field
         surveys and studies. These behaviors are climate change adaptation and are linked closely to the perceptions and resources
         of the population, defining their capacity and resilience to respond to extreme climatic events. This degree of resiliency also
         needs to be measured and included in the needs assessment and eventually into the recovery strategy.

         Governance and Social Processes

         It is necessary to acknowledge the policy climate in relation to WASH including IWRM14 and degree of governance, the
         existing sector capacity for recovery, the key actors and stakeholders in the sector, types of WASH services provision, and
         basic indicators of the status of WASH (as explained in detail in subsection 3.3). An understanding of the past and knowl-
         edge of the current and possible future WASH policy frameworks is important in the formulation of a needs assessment


         14	
                Integrated Water Resources Management (IWRM) is defined as a process aimed at ensuring that water is used more efficiently
               (economic dimension), promoting equitable access to water (social dimension) and guaranteeing sustainability (environmental dimen-
               sion). The term ‘integrated’ stresses that there is a need to adopt a global (holistic) approach which brings together different sectors
               such as health, agriculture and industry – horizontal integration – and different levels (regional, national, municipal, household etc.)
               – vertical integration.

26   |     WATER & SANITATION
         that will address recovery up to the long term. In concert with the larger policy framework, it is important to describe the
         key partnerships at work prior to and following a crisis. Good key partnerships indicated by:

                  •	   the degree that a sector-wide approach (SWAP) is being implemented;
                  •	   the role of civil society, public and private service providers;
                  •	   the presence of government, municipal or other coordination authorities.



         THE SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
         SECTOR RECOVERY VISION (RATIONALE)
         This section provides guidance on how to develop and present the vision (expected outcome for the sector) that guides its
         progress. This should be based on the country’s existing sector development plan, the post disaster conditions and stake-
         holder consultations. A sector vision and recovery objectives are aligned, where possible, to existing national development
         plans and strategies.

         In moving from an understanding of the effects and impacts of a disaster to the development of a comprehensive recovery
         strategy, it is essential to start by defining the overall vision for this recovery, that is, the desired situation at the end of the
         recovery process for WASH and the other sectors. This vision should be based on the analyses of the PDNA and a projection
         of what may be possible to achieve given the constraints and opportunities as discussed in section 6.

         In devising the vision for the WASH sector actors it will be also essential to align the recovery strategies with the country’s
         development plans (and explain how this has been done) and to build on existing local mechanisms, which is also funda-
         mental to strengthen ownership and sustainability. The vision shall also integrate a Building Back Better (BBB) component,
         i.e. considerations for strengthening the resilience and disaster risk preparedness of the sector through the recovery and
         reconstruction phases.

         The following section describes the steps required to develop a WASH recovery strategy. Experience shows that the plan-
         ning process will be made of several cyclical iterations, rather than a progressive sequence of individual steps. Consider-
         ations made on implementation arrangements, costs, assumptions and constraints (see subsections 9.4 and 9.5 below),
         might lead to a reconsideration of priorities and indeed of the overall strategy.


         STAKEHOLDERS’ CONSULTATION
         This section provides guidance on how to develop a consultation process within the sector as part of the assessment. The
         guidelines should facilitate sector experts to identify key partners from government, civil society representatives and others
         who may participate in a stakeholder consultation. It should provide guidance on stakeholder consultation process which
         is to share the effect and impact of the event and identify measures for recovery and reconstruction to be implemented in
         the short, medium and long term. Please see Annex IV on Guidance Note to Stakeholder Consultation.


         RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILDING BACK BETTER
         This section provides guidance on how to define needs for reconstruction and recovery derived from the recovery strategy,
         distinguishing the needs to restore and resume to pre-disaster levels, from needs that will improve access to services and
         goods, catalyze the economy, build livelihoods, strengthen DRM of the government and communities and reduce risks and


27   |    WATER & SANITATION
         vulnerabilities to future disasters. Such measures should, as far as possible, be by location and affected population specif-
         ic.15 Reconstruction and recovery needs can be separated into:

                     •	   needs that aim to restore, as feasibly as possible, the pre-disaster levels of access to WASH services to the
                          affected population;
                     •	   needs that will improve access to these services, Building Back Better, and by their virtue contribute to mov-
                          ing the economy but also be part of the disaster risk management (DRM) strategy that addresses risk and
                          vulnerabilities.

         These two types of needs are addressed in detail in Annex V: Types of Recovery and Reconstruction Activity.

         GOVERNANCE
         Restoring governance capacity, including DRM by the government and decision-making processes may include the
         following recovery needs:
                     •	   Restore the administrative functionality of governmental institutions, at central, regional and local levels.
                          This can include provision of additional human and financial resources to deal with backlogs and interrupted
                          WASH services from public authorities. A possibility can be to share resources from adjacent administrations
                          but this must be seen as only a temporary measure at best. There may also be needs for recovering or even
                          rebuilding lost databases and records such as financial records, service records and identity documents.
                     •	   Priority needs for BBB governance and DRM improvement must address the gaps and needs of Institutional
                          and administrative capacity to implement an effective DRM. This can include policy-related and regulatory
                          solutions, but can also include firming up the human and financial resources capacity at various administra-
                          tive levels. In many developing and partner countries, the recent years of decentralization of authority have
                          been led by providing mandates to new authorities but not always supported by the necessary resources.
                          There are often governance challenges that need to be addressed, including transparency, accountability
                          and also the role and obligations of WASH services beneficiaries and the general public.
         Risks
                     •	   Addressing pre-existing and new risks related to the disaster are strongly related to the disaster response
                          strategy and DRM already in place. This framework can be strengthened with policy-related and regulatory
                          solutions, but can also include consolidating the human and financial resources capacity at various admin-
                          istrative levels. However, as a stand-alone approach the application of the existing strategic framework is
                          limiting and new risks coming on board are best addressed by new strategies, policies and strengthening of
                          the sector rather than following the existing line
                     •	   Essentially, building back better to reduce risks and vulnerabilities to future disasters requires a combination
                          of an adapted DRM strategy that addresses the risks already identified in previous sections and also address-
                          ing the gaps and weaknesses in the WASH sector itself, in order build resilience into the sector. While some
                          of this can be addressed with capacity building and infrastructure, it remains largely a task to be addressed
                          by institutional and strategic methods and means.




         15	
               All BBB interventions contribute to resilience of government, systems and communities. Needs for BBB related should
               be aligned to/informed by pre-existing national development and/or poverty reduction strategies.




28   |     WATER & SANITATION
          THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN	
         PRIORITIZING AND SEQUENCING RECOVERY NEEDS
         This section provides guidance on developing the recovery strategy and prioritization and sequencing the recovery needs.
         Following the rational of the recovery strategy, identify key outcomes, outputs and interventions, then prioritize and se-
         quence them over time (in the short, medium and long term), and distinguish the interventions that are related to restore/
         resume from BBB interventions.


         THE SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN
         It is essential to verify that an effective consultation process has taken place and that during the stakeholder engagement
         process there has been actual collaboration and partnership with key institutional players in identifying the components
         that contribute to the building of the WASH Recovery Plan. These institutional players may come from Line Ministries
         directly responsible for implementing WASH management (e.g. Ministry housing the Department of Water Affairs) and
         services, but may also include consultation and contribution from other institutional actors such as rural and urban author-
         ities, health authorities, Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Environment or the Ministry for Culture. It is important that the
         Recovery Plan is in line with any national recovery plan being developed following the disaster and with any national devel-
         opment plan in place. However, for the long term, a WASH sector recovery plan must first demonstrate coherence with the
         authorities, institutions and policies that are representative of the WASH sector and not follow only a national strategy. The
         reason for this is that it is with the WASH Sector institutions that will apply the long-term recovery strategy relevant to the
         WASH sector. Sector Policies and Plans developed within the WASH sector should, by default, be in line with over-arching
         national plans, but if there is any conflicting content, it is the task of the institutional authorities to clarify. Therefore, as well
         as promoting ownership, the institutional actors of the WASH sector contribute to and clearly understand the rationale and
         content of their particular Sector Recovery Plan.

         In line with the PDNA guidance on the recovery framework, the WASH sector recovery strategy should be formulated fol-
         lowing the results-based model, and therefore include: (i) priority needs; (ii) interventions required; (iii) expected outputs;
         (iv) recovery costs; and (v) intended outcomes. Table below provides an example of how this may be done.


         Indicative Example of a Results-based Recovery Plan in WASH

          Priority                Interventions                    Expected Outputs                 Recovery             Intended
          Recovery Needs                                                                            Costs                Outcomes
          •	 To assist those      •	 Supply construction           •	 468 latrines built            •	 US$7,650,000 •	 65,000 affected
             affected by the         materials and sanitation      •	 4 training centres estab-                        people have re-
             disaster in X           inputs                           lished and 50 govern-                            stored access to
             province with        •	 Sanitation technical             ment staff trained.                              basic sanitation
             the rehabilitation      assistance                                                                        service delivery
             of sanitation                                         •	 10 sewage facilities
             facilities           •	 Capacity building                repaired
                                     training support




29   |    WATER & SANITATION
         INTENDED OUTCOMES
         Outcomes for the sector should be organized according to the functioning areas or focus areas of the sector. The assess-
         ment incorporates cross-cutting sectors and includes consultations of various stakeholders, and will feed into the sectors’
         focus areas. The assessment will identify needs, gaps, and objectives for recovery and improvement in each area. Below is
         a list of focus areas that are key for promoting recovery and ultimately effective development of the sector over the longer
         term. They are not too numerous or cumbersome for a PDNA, and facilitate the grouping of almost all relevant program-
         ming contexts into a short list of six broad types of activity (EU, 2012):

                     •	   Water resources, which include all activities designed to assess the availability of the natural resource,
                          protect its quality, and plan its use; including other primary resource activities such as forestry, mining and
                          fisheries (water quality protection, aquaculture) as well-applied sector activities such as agriculture;
                     •	   Basic services, which covers service provision for water and sanitation in rural areas and marginal or poor
                          urban areas,16 usually consisting of low technology, decentralized management, community-managed and
                          even informal systems;
                     •	   Municipal services, which covers major urban and industrial installations, capacities of municipal utility
                          service providers, other services, revenue systems, water operators and suppliers, urban stakeholders and
                          systems, including wastewater treatment, sewage systems, runoff from daily activities and storm events,
                          and solid waste management
                     •	   Agricultural, which covers installations and activities related to agricultural use of water, especially for irrigation
                     •	   Energy, which covers water use for energy from hydropower. Usually this is the main focus but in some cas-
                          es the impact of production of biofuels on water resources must also be considered, especially if the latter is
                          introduced into a recovery strategy.
                     •	   Sector performance, covering mainly how the national sector framework is conceived and how it functions.
                          This refers to policy and the strategies to implement that policy, institutional structures from national level
                          down to local authorities, service providers from either public or private sector.

         SEQUENCING PRIORITY NEEDS
         Recovery needs in the sector WASH will need to be prioritized and sequenced (short-term, medium-term and long term, as
         appropriate). Criteria may be developed by the sector WASH Team (or previously by the PDNA Team) to guide the prioriti-
         zation process. This should include priority to critical needs expressed by the affected population and government, but also
         priority to vulnerable population groups, geographic areas most affected conflict-prevention or peace-building objectives
         where relevant, among other.


         TIME FRAME: SHORT-, MEDIUM- AND LONG-TERM RECOVERY
         While there should be a smooth transition from emergency to recovery and development, it is important that a PDNA
         assessment does maintain the longer view of recovering from a disaster and not the shorter view of responding to an emer-
         gency. Initial objectives are a simple restoration of services for survival and health, which, at a PDNA stage, are normally
         already being addressed by humanitarian actions, actors and strategies. While this phase is expected to be short-term,
         in chronic situations or in especially destructive disasters, a PDNA should include identifying short-term needs at least for
         emergency preparedness. Long-term objectives will include improved services to promote health, nutritional security and


         16	
                In many developing contexts in partner countries the provision of WASH services is for the urban poor or peri-urban en-
               tities are rarely integrated into municipal or urban authorities and are usually by default taking advantage of proximal
               rural services or solutions.

30   |     WATER & SANITATION
         improved livelihoods which will feed into a recovery strategy. Data and information collected needs to be allocated and
         then used according to either shorter or long-term objectives – or both.

         If one views recovery as a linear process, a short-medium-long term time line may not always be the right approach. There
         are ongoing discussions on closing the emergency-to-recovery gaps and at the same time promoting sustainable strategies
         and resilience from the beginning. This can render a 3-step timeline not applicable to all contexts, depending on the inten-
         sity of a disaster, the chronic nature of the emergency and an institutional capacity to respond.


         COSTING
         COSTING LOGIC FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND BUILDING BACK BETTER
         The costs for reconstruction and BBB should be proportionate to the costs of recovery and reconstruction needs, as well
         as the type of disaster. Slow onset drought may have very low reconstruction needs, but require a higher investment to
         build in resilience to the WASH Sector. While it does facilitate the acceptance of an estimate that the costs for Reconstruc-
         tion and BBB should be comparable to the financial envelope pledged by the government and international development
         partners, the first initial costing exercise should not have any limits set, but should reflect the real costs corresponding the
         results of a comprehensive PDNA which contributes directly to an effective strategy for risk management, risk reduction
         and strengthening the WASH Sector. This allows for a more informed prioritization of actions at a later stage when budget
         realities may force a reduction in strategy implementation. Having said that, a major challenge in promoting changes in
         Sector Strategy, Governance and functioning in order to build resilience into the sector is to convince some donors to shift
         their focus from the disaster impacts at hand to the potential disaster impacts of the future.

         Historically most disaster response funds have tended to be allocated to physical reconstruction and compensation of loss-
         es, but if Human Recovery and future strategies for Risk Reduction, Risk Management and building sector resilience are to
         be reflected in the WASH Sector (and other sectors), then some financial emphasis must be shifted towards issues of policy,
         regulation, capacity building, participation and social adaptation to extreme events and disasters.

         Finally, the amount of finance is not always the limiting factor. Some countries, due to their institutional and financial
         structures, have difficulty in absorbing large amounts of finance and will simply fail to make the expenditure of available
         funds. This can be linked to administrative and bureaucratic procedures, but is also often enough linked to the capacity of
         various levels and components of the sector itself to function optimally due to a range of human resource and other issues.
         However, if a PDNA is properly executed, the capacity of the country to absorb and disburse financial resources, meaning
         their ability to convert the funds into programming and implementation, should become evident before a cost exercise
         takes place (even at the baseline evaluation of the sector). Many countries have already been evaluated on their absorption



31   |    WATER & SANITATION
         capacity by funding institutions such as the World Bank and this information is readily available.17

         In order to ensure that costs remain as realistic as possible and that recovery proceeds according to the recovery program,
         the following cost components should be regularly checked and revisited:

                     •	   Ensure costs are based on unit costs for repair and reconstruction at current value ( taking into account
                          phased reconstruction and adjusted by inflation);
                     •	   Includes the costs of interventions (management and operational costs);
                     •	   Includes costs for disaster resilient reconstruction and if necessary relocation;
                     •	   Include costs for post construction monitoring and evaluation.

         SUGGESTED STRUCTURE FOR PRESENTING COSTS FOR RECOVERY NEEDS FOR THE
         SHORT, MEDIUM AND LONG TERM
         INFRASTRUCTURE, SERVICE DELIVERY AND ACCESS TO SERVICES
         Restore
                     •	   Short-term: Activities include immediate distribution systems of water trucking, surface piping, portable
                          modular and household-scale water treatment units. Hand pumps and shallow wells shallow boreholes.
                          Portable latrines and small transport (e.g. carts) for solid waste.
                     •	   Medium-term: Activities include service materials for water and waste treatment, tanker trucks for latrine
                          waste collection and solid waste removal from temporary disposal sites.
                     •	   Long-term: Repair and reconstruct original service infrastructure.

         Building Back Better
                     •	   Short-term: Activities include installation of temporary services in configuration corresponding to future
                          improved design layout. Arrange population on-site or moving to new site.
                     •	   Medium-term: Activities include service materials for water and waste treatment, tanker trucks for latrine
                          waste collection and solid waste removal from temporary disposal sites.
                     •	   Long-term: Install new service infrastructure configuration with more efficient design and technology (e.g.
                          treatment systems, metering, valves, pumps) and disaster-proof materials.

         GOVERNANCE
         Restore
                     •	   Short-term: Ensure that all administrative and support facilities are available, including management of distri-
                          bution, minimum data collection and laboratory support.
                     •	   Medium-term: Monitor temporary services for quality, verify regulations and guidelines followed, review
                          existing data and information to ascertain if any has been lost or destroyed.
                     •	   Long-term: Put in place administrative and institutional components, reinforcement with capacity building,
                          to resume uptake of original services.

         Building Back Better
                     •	   Short-term: Install temporary administrative and institutional services, while redesigning administrative
                          and management configuration corresponding to future needs. Evaluation of shortfalls of existing
                          systems and processes.

         17	
               A good example is the cycle of Country Status Overviews (CSOs) conducted by the World Bank in collaboration with the African
               Ministers’ Council on Water (AMCOW) and the African Union for a large number of countries in Africa.

32   |     WATER & SANITATION
                 •	   Medium-term: Build new strategy for DRR and DRM, begin dialogue with institutions on adapting policy
                      and regulation.
                 •	   Long-term: Implement new strategies, policies and regulations for DRR and DRM.

         RISKS
         Address/mitigate
                 •	   Short-term: Follow up on emergency response with actions designed to renew risk responses.
                 •	   Medium-term: N/A.
                 •	   Long-term: Strengthen risk responses to address events of increasing magnitude.

         Building Back Better & Disaster Risk Reduction
                 •	   Short-term: Conduct a risk analysis to review existing DRR and DRM strategies.
                 •	   Medium-term: Expand scope of risks to be addressed by new strategies; magnitude and type.
                 •	   Long-term: Expand scope of strategies to incorporate above BBB actions and engage a wider group of
                      stakeholders.



          IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
         PARTNERSHIPS, COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT ARRANGEMENTS TO
         IMPLEMENT RECOVERY
         Partnerships and Coordination should include the key players and partners involved in the PDNA Team with specific focus
         on the country government Institutions, the relevant sector line ministries and links with beneficiaries via CSOs or exchange
         platforms. Such platforms may need to be created for the purpose of facilitating a more participative implementation of
         the recovery plan. A representative list of arrangements can include:

                 •	   partnership arrangements within the WASH cluster and intra-sectoral arrangements with other clusters;
                 •	   coordination arrangements with the government, civil society and the private sector;
                 •	   management arrangements within the government for the culture recovery process;
                 •	   inter-agency management arrangements (e.g. coordination unit or similar arrangements, support services to
                      be established, such as offices, human resources, etc.



         MONITORING TOOLS
         Post-construction monitoring is conducted to measure success of a project, and success can be two-fold:

                 •	   to meet criteria and guideline conditions and to measure the attainment of a project’s specific objectives;
                 •	   to measure the performance of a project over time. It is important to build monitoring components into the
                      final and post-project assessment phases of the project by:
                             ··   establishing pre-construction monitoring components and locations of the project starting with
                                  baseline conditions that provide a standard against which to measure improvement;




33   |    WATER & SANITATION
                             ··    paying particular attention to the components of the project that are most sensitive, weak and
                                   vulnerable. Monitor the high-risk sections early on - document their conditions before and after
                                   construction of the project;
                             ··    determining and select a methodology to monitor the objectives;
                             ··    defining monitoring parameters, sampling frequency, sampling locations and analytical pro-
                                   cedures. Documentation of structures (their size, length, slope, etc.) should also be part of the
                                   monitoring strategy.

         Good post-construction monitoring relies on data collection methodology and quality. Refer to Annex II: List of Data Col-
         lection Methods for developing a data collection plan.

         A non-exhaustive list of stakeholders that could be considered in a post-construction monitoring and evaluation
         plan include:

                 •	   project donors for recovery, such as the World Bank, State and Federal Government institutions, local
                      government authorities;
                 •	   beneficiary communities and target groups;
                 •	   NGOs;
                 •	   civil society;
                 •	   the media.

         GUIDANCE ON POSSIBLE COORDINATION MECHANISMS AND THE LINKS TO DEVELOPMENT
         AND HUMANITARIAN ASSISTANCE
         The coordination of the implementation of the recovery programme should be the responsibility of the host government
         and the relevant authorities, which, in the case of WASH, would be the partner authority already identified during the
         strategy recovery plan phase. As mentioned above, this authority (an office or individual) may have been identified as early
         as the launch of the PDNA process and formation of the PDNA Team. Ideally, it will be with someone or an office located
         within a Line Ministry that represents the WASH PDNA and recovery programme that is also recognized by the central
         authority that coordinates the overall recovery plan. Links to humanitarian assistance will have been made at the PDNA
         Baseline stage and can be continued into the recovery phase if the same actors (i.e. agencies, NGOs, others) are still pres-
         ent. The added value of linking to the humanitarian actors and assistance is to profit from continuity and the institutional
         memory of the emergency and post-disaster response. Linking to development agencies and assistance will facilitate the
         implementation of the recovery, since these organizations will bring their expertise to the process, and in some cases, may
         be actively involved in implementing parts of the recovery on behalf of the authorities.


         GUIDANCE ON POSSIBLE SOURCE MOBILIZATION MECHANISMS
         If there are no direct sources of finance or regional or international mechanisms that a country can draw on to secure
         financing, activities that cannot be tied to national development plans and the effects of the event may not receive the
         necessary attention from development partners. This shorter list may tend to focus more on reconstruction than recovery,
         with implications and consequences of implementing effective strategies for DRR, which can include building back better.
         While activities may be limited by resources, the assessment must in any case maintain its objective to develop a wider list
         of activities for comprehensive recovery and strategy.




34   |    WATER & SANITATION
         CHALLENGES: KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS
         CHALLENGES
         The following are some challenges that may be encountered during the implementation phase:

                 •	   too much funding focus on hardware and infrastructure at the expense of institutional strengthening,
                      capacity building and support to social sectors such as Culture and Education;
                 •	   small-scale disasters may not generate enough interest for government authorities to address their disaster
                      response, DRR or DRM.

         KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS
         Following are some key assumptions made to successfully complete the recovery process, and the major constraints likely
         to be encountered during the recovery process indicating how they might be overcome.

         Assumptions might include:

                 •	   Key stakeholders will be part of an open and participatory recovery process;
                 •	   All relevant sectors are present and participating in the PDNA from the outset;
                 •	   There will be no new disaster affecting the country;
                 •	   A Recovery Action Plan will be developed from the Recovery Framework.

         Constraints might include:

                 •	   limited financial and material resources;
                 •	   insufficient human resources and technical expertise to implement timely recovery.

         Constraints might be overcome by soliciting financial and technical support from international donors and partners, orga-
         nizing training for government and community staff and volunteers. The latter is evidently more effective where issues on
         governance and institutional capacity are included in the PDNA activities across all participating sectors.




35   |    WATER & SANITATION
         REFERENCES
         Aquaconsult Ltd. 2008. Evaluation of Disaster Risk Reduction, Mainstreaming in Directorate-General for Humanitarian
         Aid’s (DG ECHO) Humanitarian Actions. http://www.aguaconsult.co.uk/

         CWGER. 2008. Guidance note on Early Recovery. Cluster Working Group on Early Recovery.

         European Union. 2012. Water Project Toolkit: Water resources management for sustainable development.

         GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery), World Bank. 2010. Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment:
         Guidance Notes. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank, Washington DC.

         IFRC. 2000. Disaster Emergency Needs Assessment Module - Disaster Preparedness Training Programme. International
         Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, Geneva.

         Global WASH Cluster. 2009. WASH Cluster Coordination Handbook.

         Global WASH Cluster. 2011.Disaster Risk Reduction and Water, Sanitation and Hygiene – Comprehensive Guidance.

         Global WASH Learning Project. 2009. Implementation of the WASH Cluster Approach: Good Practice and Lessons Learned.

         WASH Cluster. 2008. Infrastructure Capacities Form.

         IASC WASH Cluster, Health Cluster, and Nutrition Cluster. 2007. Initial Rapid Assessment (IRA). Guidance Notes for Country
         Level. Geneva.

         Mitchel, Tom. 2012. Options for including disaster resilience in post-2015 development goals. ODI Technical Note. Overseas
         Development Institute, London.

         OXFAM. 1999. Managing Water Supply and Sanitation in Emergencies. London.

         NEPAD (New Partnership for Africa’s Development). 2014. Post-construction Monitoring and Evaluation (PCM&E), Training
         Module 4. West African Network of Centres of Excellence on Water. Johannesburg , South Africa. 

         Médecins Sans Frontières. 2010. Public Health Engineering in Precarious Situations. Draft. Geneva.

         Sphere Guidelines. Chapter 2: Minimum Standards in Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion

         UNDP Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery. 2010.Workshop Report, PDNA Lessons Learned and Capacity Develop-
         ment Workshop: UNDP Perspectives. New York.

         UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund) and WHO (World Health Organization) . 2006. Core Questions on Drinking Water
         and Sanitation for Household Surveys. Geneva.

         WEDC (Water, Engineering and Development Centre). 2002. Emergency Sanitation Assessment and Programme Design.




36   |    WATER & SANITATION
         ANNEXES	
         ANNEX I: CHECKLISTS FOR ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF SECTORS
         HEALTH, NUTRITION AND WASH CLUSTERS
         This matrix defines the responsibilities and accountabilities of the Health, Nutrition and WASH Clusters during emergency
         response in areas of potential overlap (WASH Cluster Coordination Handbook, 2009). The matrix has been developed
         through a broad consultative process, but can be revised as necessary at the field level following consideration of the spe-
         cific contexts and available resources.

         Objectives

         Clarify responsibilities and accountabilities in areas of potential overlap between the three clusters, especially as they relate
         to the prevention and control of infectious diseases.

         Improve coordination and collaboration among Health, WASH and Nutrition field staff during emergency operations.

         Responsibility

         Clusters at the field or national level can use this matrix as a starting point to negotiate specific responsibilities. Capacity
         across Health, WASH and Nutrition sectors may vary according to context, and therefore responsibilities for each activity
         may vary – what is important is that there is clarity of responsibilities for all activities.

         Clusters at the global level have agreed on the indicative framework, but will review and possibly update the matrix,
         following input from clusters at the field level.

         Please note that:

         Responsibility means ensuring that the job gets done, not necessarily doing it.

                  •	   For example, the Health Cluster is responsible for ensuring Health Care Waste Management, but the
                       support and implementation may be requested outside of the cluster.
                  •	   WASH Standards are set at the global level (i.e. Sphere, World Health Organization), but other standards
                       may be incorporated or take priority according to context – e.g. national standards – and should be
                       discussed by the Cluster/sector actors.
                  •	   Clusters work with and coordinate with national authorities and incorporate national standards, provided
                       that they can ensure a level of service that protects and promotes public health.




37   |    WATER & SANITATION
         Area of              Specific                   Responsibility
         Potential            Activity                   Health Cluster           Wash Cluster                Nutrition Cluster
         Overlap
         Assessment           Conduct WASH               In health facilities     Outside health facilities. At nutrition rehabilita-
                              assessments.                                        Support other clusters     tion centres and wet
                                                                                  as requested.              feeding programmes.
                                                                                                              Support WASH assess-
                                                                                                              ment in communities
                                                                                                              where malnutrition is of
                                                                                                              concern.
         Monitoring           Monitor and share         Disease status and        WASH indicators (more       Trends in hygiene and
                              WASH-related informa- trends (evidence based)       perception-based) out-      water-related illness at
                              tion with other clusters. in health facilities      side health facilities.     nutrition rehabilitation
                                                                                  Support other clusters      centres, in wet feeding
                                                                                  as requested.               programmes and at the
                                                                                                              community level (from
                                                                                                              nutritional surveys)
                                                                                                              where malnutrition is of
                                                                                                              concern
         Information          Develop and monitor        Gather, analyse and      Gather, analyse and         Gather, analyse and
         Management           the IM system.             disseminate evidence     disseminate WASH            disseminate evidence
         (IM)                                            based health informa-    information.                based nutrition infor-
                                                         tion. Share with other   Share with other clus-      mation. Share with
                                                         clusters                 ters                        other clusters

         WASH Standards Disseminate, promote             In health facilities     Outside health facilities   At nutrition rehabili-
                        and monitor                                                                           tation centres, in wet
                        application.                                                                          feeding programmes
                                                                                                              and through communi-
                                                                                                              ty- based management
                                                                                                              of malnutrition
                              Agree on indicators.       In health facilities     Responsible to coordi- At nutrition rehabilita-
                                                                                  nate agreement outside tion centres, and wet
                                                                                  health facilities      feeding programmes
         Water Quality        Identify country testing                            Fully responsible
                              capacity and facilities.
                              Ensure and test            In health facilities     Outside health facilities. At nutrition rehabilita-
                              treatment.                                          Provide training, materi- tion centres and wet
                                                                                  al and support to other feeding programmes.
                                                                                  clusters as requested       Support WASH as
                                                                                                              requested, where mal-
                                                                                                              nutrition is of concern
                              Perform monitoring.        In health facilities     Outside health facilities   At nutrition rehabilita-
                                                                                                              tion centres and wet
                                                                                                              feeding programmes
         Water quantity       Ensure quantity.           In health facilities     Outside health facilities. At nutrition rehabilita-
                                                                                  Provide support to         tion centres and wet
                                                                                  Health and Nutrition       feeding programmes.
                                                                                  Clusters as requested.      Advocate for communi-
                                                                                                              ties as necessary.




38   |   WATER & SANITATION
         Area of              Specific                   Responsibility
         Potential            Activity                   Health Cluster           Wash Cluster                 Nutrition Cluster
         Overlap
         Water facilities     Improve access.            In health facilities     External health facilities   At nutrition rehabilita-
                                                                                                               tion centres and wet
                                                                                                               feeding programmes.
                                                                                                               Advocate for communi-
                                                                                                               ties as necessary
         Hygiene              Promote and improve        In health facilities     Fully responsible to         At nutrition reha-
                              hygiene.                                            coordinate common            bilitation centres, in
                                                                                  messages between             supplementary feed-
                                                                                  clusters and to manage       ing programmes and
                                                                                  external health facilities   through community-
                                                                                                               based workers involved
                                                                                                               with management of
                                                                                                               malnutrition.
         Hygiene Promo-       Develop hygiene pro-       Provide input            Responsible to coordi-       Provide input, if rele-
         tion Outreach        motion strategy and                                 nate common messag-          vant.
         Workers (includ-     message content.                                    es between clusters.
         ing Community
         Health Workers)
                              Agree on outreach          Agree outreach strategy Agree outreach strategy Participate if relevant
                              workers’ terms and         with WASH Cluster       with Health Cluster
                              conditions
                              (e.g. paid, volunteer).
         Excreta disposal     Ensure access.             In health facilities     Outside health facilities    At nutrition rehabilita-
                                                                                                               tion centres and wet
                                                                                                               feeding programmes
         Drainage and         Disposal                   In health facilities     Outside health facilities    At nutrition rehabilita-
         Waste Water                                                                                           tion centres and wet
                                                                                                               feeding programmes

         Ensure Sanitary      Ensure sanitary environ- In health facilities       Outside health facilities    At nutrition rehabilita-
         Environment          ment.                                                                            tion centres and in wet
                                                                                                               feeding programmes

         Disease Outbreak Conduct assessments.           Fully responsible for    Participate in assess-       Input into assessment
                                                         overall coordination     ment                         tool and support as
                                                         (with input from other                                suitable.
                              Perform surveillance       clusters)                Support as requested.        Report incidence in pro-
                              and monitoring.                                     Full involvement in re-      grammatic areas and
                                                                                  sponse action plan for       support as requested.
                              Outbreak control                                    WASH-related diseases        Support communi-
                              Communication                                                                    cation strategies at
                                                                                                               nutrition rehabilitation
                                                                                                               centres and in wet
                                                                                                               feeding programmes.
         Vector Control       Identify vector and co- Fully responsible           Support as requested         Support as required.
                              ordinate control efforts.
                              Implement vector           In health facilities     Outside health facili-       At nutrition rehabilita-
                              control - provision of                              ties – responsible for       tion centres and in wet
                              materials e.g. bed nets,                            general population           feeding programmes.
                              spraying.

39   |   WATER & SANITATION
          Area of              Specific                    Responsibility
          Potential            Activity                    Health Cluster             Wash Cluster               Nutrition Cluster
          Overlap
          Waste Manage-        Maintain, construct and In health facilities           Outside health facili-     At nutrition rehabilita-
          ment                 renovate facilities                                    ties. Provide support to   tion centres and in wet
                                                                                      Health and Nutrition       feeding programmes.
                                                                                      Clusters as requested.
          WASH Infrastruc- Prioritize facilities for       In health facilities       Outside health facilities. At nutrition rehabilita-
          ture             renovation and con-                                        Provide support to         tion centres and wet
                           struction. Implement                                       Health and Nutrition       feeding programmes
                           projects.                                                  Clusters as requested
          WASH-related         Procure and share in-       Material used in health Population based ma-          Nutrition related prod-
          Stockpiles           formation on stockpiles     facilities, and Oral Rehy- terial (bed nets, water    ucts such as anthro-
                               between clusters.           dration Salts (ORS).       treatment chemicals        pometric equipment,
                                                           Support WASH as            (e.g. chlorine), water     specially designed food
                                                           requested, particularly    testing equipment,         commodities, micronu-
                                                           for bed net needs and      soap)                      trient supplements, etc
                                                           distribution                                          used in the assessment
                                                                                                                 and management of
                                                                                                                 malnutrition

         PROPOSED RESPONSIBILITIES AND ACCOUNTABILITIES MATRIX
         WASH-ED (EDUCATION) CLUSTERS
         This matrix defines the responsibilities and accountabilities of the WASH and Education Clusters during emergency re-
         sponse in order to maximize coordination/impact and prevent any overlap. The matrix has been developed through a
         broad consultative process, but can be revised as necessary at field level, following consideration of the specific contexts
         and available resources.

         Background
                 •	   WASH Sector Response Areas
                             ··     Hygiene Promotion
                             ··     Water Supply
                             ··     Excreta Disposal
                             ··     Vector Control
                             ··     Solid Waste Management
                             ··     Drainage
                 •	   Education Cluster Response Areas
                             ··     Permanent educational facilities, e.g. schools
                             ··     Temporary educational facilities, e.g. temporary learning spaces, child-friendly spaces
                             ··     Quality learning
                             ··     Curriculum development




40   |    WATER & SANITATION
         Objectives
                 •	   Clarify responsibilities and accountabilities between the two clusters in areas where both clusters are
                      operational, to maximize impact of both.
                 •	   Improve coordination and collaboration between Education and WASH field staff during
                      emergency operations.

         Responsibility
                 •	   Clusters at the field or national level can use this matrix as a starting point to negotiate specific responsibili-
                      ties, as well as to identify respective areas of operation.
                 •	   Clusters at global level have agreed on this indicative framework, but will welcome feedback and review/
                      update the matrix following input from clusters at field level. Cluster contacts at global level are: WASH:
                      Jean McCluskey (jmccluskey@unicef.org), Education: Roger Wright (rwright@unicef.org) and Susan Nicolai
                      (susan@savethechildren.ch)

         Please note that:

         Responsibility means ensuring that the job gets done, not necessarily doing it.

                 •	   For example, the Education Cluster is responsible for identifying the need, organizing and ensuring that an
                      intervention takes place and meets the needs. However the actual work may be completed by a local NGO
                      or a contractor, or the WASH Cluster by proxy. This ensures that the need is not overlooked, and the inter-
                      vention makes an impact.
                 •	   WASH and Education Standards exist at a global level (i.e. Sphere and INEE - Minimum Standards), but other
                      standards may be incorporated or take priority according to context – for example national standards – and
                      should be discussed by the cluster/sector actors. Similarly, specific indicators can be agreed at the field level.
                 •	   Wherever feasible, clusters collaborate with national authorities and incorporate national standards, provid-
                      ed that these can ensure a level of service that protects and promotes public health/education. If needed/
                      relevant clusters could promote suitably revisions to such standards. Where possible, Clusters could be led
                      by National Governments.
                 •	   The principles of consultation, participation and non-discrimination should be applied to every activity. In
                      particular, the people affected by an emergency should play an active role in the design and implementa-
                      tion of emergency WASH and education activities.
                 •	   In both emergency and reconstruction/rehabilitation/recovery phases, ensure that all water/sanitation
                      systems and educational facilities are appropriate to local culture, are appropriate for all users (e.g. children,
                      disabled students and staff), are safe (located in secure areas, well-lit at night, etc.), and provide separate
                      facilities for male and female students, and male and female staff.
                 •	   Comments and experiences from the field are welcome and will be included in future revisions of the matrix.




41   |    WATER & SANITATION
         Area of              Specific Activity                 Responsibilities
         Potential Synergy                                      Education Cluster                  WASH Cluster
         Standards
         WASH –ED             Ensure agreement on               For education facilities, as per Outside education facilities, as
         Standards            WASH–ED standards and             national Ministry of Education per context-specific national/
                              indicators.                       (MoE)/ international (especially international standards.
                                                                INEE) standards.
                              Ensure the dissemination and      For education facilities           Outside education facilities.
                              the promotion of standards.
                              Ensure that service providers     For education facilities, as per   Outside education facilities, as
                              subscribe to the agreed stan-     national MoE/ international        per identified context-specific
                              dards and that their perfor-      standards.                         national/ international
                              mance is monitored.                                                  standards.
         Hygiene
         Promotion
         Hygiene              Ensure that teachers are pro- For education facilities               Coordinate relevant training for
         Promotion (HP)       vided with adequate training.                                        teachers as requested.
                              Ensure teachers are provided      For education facilities           Coordinate common messages
                              with adequate resources.                                             between clusters, and conduct
                                                                                                   HP outside education facilities,
                                                                                                   e.g. by providing hygiene pro-
                                                                                                   motion material.
                              Monitor hygiene promotion     For education facilities               Outside education facilities.
                              practices and support schools                                        Inform Education Cluster about
                              where necessary.                                                     prevalent WASH related diseases
                                                                                                   in the community.
                              Support schools with addi-        Responsible – identify sources     Support the Education Cluster
                              tional capacity and financially   of potential support/resource      as requested.
                              for hygiene promotion.            mobilization.
         All Facilities
         Needs Assessment     Ensure WASH needs are             For education facilities           Support coordinated design
                              assessed (as per identified                                          and/ or conduct of WASH-ED
                              context-specific standards;                                          assessments
                              see 1.2 above).
         Community            Ensure that designs meet          For education facilities (with     Outside education facilities.
         Consultation /       community needs, are child-       technical input from WASH).        Provide support to Education
         System Design        friendly, address gender                                             Clusters on appropriateness of
                              and teacher/student issues,                                          systems
                              are safe, are appropriate in
                              terms of ongoing costs and
                              operation & maintenance,
                              and will be maintained in the
                              long term.
         Construction/        Ensure that a quality contrac- For education facilities              Support joint consultation and
         Rehabilitation       tor is engaged and managed,                                          design to ensure appropriate-
                              in collaboration with the                                            ness for all population
                              Ministry of Education.                                               sub-groups.
                              Ensure that quality control       For education facilities           Outside education facilities.
                              system is in place.
         Maintenance          Ensure that facilities are        For education facilities           Outside education facilities.
                              maintained.

42   |   WATER & SANITATION
         Area of               Specific Activity                Responsibilities
         Potential Synergy                                      Education Cluster                   WASH Cluster
         Use                   Ensure that facilities are used. For education facilities            Support the Education Cluster
                                                                                                    as requested.
         Water
         Water Quality         Identify country testing ca-     Involve educational facilities in   Coordinate
                               pacity and facilities.           water quality assessment.
                               Ensure testing capacity.         For Education facilities            Outside education facilities.
                               Ensure testing conducted.        For Education facilities            Outside education facilities
                                                                                                    (including source, storage and
                                                                                                    distribution).
                                                                                                    Provide training to other
                                                                                                    Clusters as required.
                               Ensure that a monitoring         For education facilities            Outside education facilities
                               system is in place for water
                               quality tests.
         Water Quantity        Ensure adequate quantity         For education facilities            Outside education facilities.
         Water Facilities      Ensure adequate access           For education facilities            Outside education facilities.
         Water Treatment       Provision of chemicals           For education facilities            Provide advice and support
                                                                                                    to the Education Cluster as
                                                                                                    requested.
         Others
         Excreta disposal      Ensure adequate and suffi-       For education facilities            Outside education facilities.
                               cient access.
         Drainage and waste-   Ensure adequate disposal.        For education facilities            Outside education facilities.
         water
         Waste Management      Ensure maintained, construct- For education facilities               Outside education facilities.
                               ed and renovated as required.
         Improve sanitary      Ensure a sanitary                For education facilities            Outside education facilities.
         environment           environment
                               (e.g. removing
                               standing water).
         Vector Control        Ensure adequate vector           For education facilities            Outside education facilities.
                               control.
         Emergency Pre-        Ensure that schools are          Responsible                         Support the Education
         paredness             supported in the training                                            Cluster as requested.
                               of teachers and pupils for
                               emergency preparedness.




43   |   WATER & SANITATION
         ANNEX II: LIST OF DATA COLLECTION METHODS
         DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR INITIAL ASSESSMENTS
         Name           Description                                        Purpose                                     Material /Tools
         Desk Study,    Collection, reading and synthesis of relevant      •	 To gain an insight of the situation •	 Reports (e.g. min-
         Literature &   information that is already available in:             before the primary data collection     utes of meetings,
         Reports        •	 documents (e.g. studies, government                and assessment on the field is         SitReps)
         review for        reports, sector reports, water, hygiene            started (this review can already    •	 Sector policy,
         Secondary         and sanitation).                                   start in the headquarters or on the    regulations
         Data                                                                 way to the study site).
         Collection     •	 sector management data sheets, maps,                                                   •	 Books guidelines
                           photos, remote sensing source info.             •	 To identify gaps in secondary data
                                                                              and, if time and resources are lim- •	 Media reports
                        •	 books / guidelines / manuals published by          ited which primary data content
                           local / state authorities, professionals, ex-      must be prioritized.
                           ternal sources (e.g. sector reviews, donor
                           reports, emergency preparedness plans).
         Key            Interviewing informally anyone who can             •	 To gain a good overview of               •	 List of topics to
         informant      provide detailed information, on the basis            the relevant (water and                     cover (based on
         interview      of his special expertise or knowledge of a            sanitation) issues.                         checklists)
                        particular issue: e.g. a village leader, a local   •	 To feed and orient a potential           •	 Basic survey form
                        authority, a head of services provision,              in-depth assessment.                     •	 Notebook and
                        NB: Women and children can often be                •	 To identify issues to cover / validate      pencil
                        key-informants in water, hygiene and                  in (structured) observations which
                        sanitation matters.                                   can form content of checklist
         Mapping        Drawing of a map of the study site or collec- •	 Where there are gaps in map data              •	 Compass /GPS
         and area       tion of map information on ground showing        from the desk study, different                •	 Long tape, mea-
         sampling       sites or features that are important for the     maps can be made of areas and                    suring cable
                        affected population: e.g. water sources, def-    used for orientation and planning
                        ecation areas, service provision facilities for  purposes, depending on scale and              •	 Hand clicker
                        distribution, treatment, waste management.       detail required.                              •	 Graph Note
                        Area sampling permits a good estimation of         •	 The estimation of the population            book, pencils,
                        the population number, the household size             living in a closed setting helps to         scale rulers
                        and the average available space per person            determine important data such            •	 Calculator
                        as well as spatial distribution of affected           as water, sanitation and hygiene
                                                                                                                       •	 Digital camera
                        population in relation to services                    needs in a representative area.
                        and facilities.                                    •	 To refine and expand checklists
                                                                           •	 To feed the potential in-depth
                                                                              assessment.
         A transact     A walk through the primary data site(s) in a       •	 To familiarize yourself with the         •	 List of topics to
         walk           meandering fashion, to gather information             physical context in which people            cover (based on
                        through (unstructured) observations and               access water and sanitation and             checklists)
                        informal talks with the population.                   hygiene practices occur.                 •	 Map (if available)
                        NB: Most effective when carried out at     •	 To investigate how people behave                    /GPS
                        dawn or dusk, when most hygiene practices     culturally and socially in their daily           •	 Basic survey form
                        and water collection occur and people move    routines
                        to and from economic activity.                                                                 •	 Graph Note book
                                                                   •	 To refine and expand checklists                     and pencil
                                                                           •	 To orient and feed the potential         •	 Digital Camera
                                                                              in-depth assessment.




44   |   WATER & SANITATION
         Spot-check Record information (defined on a clear but       •	 To investigate the presence or           •	 Spot-check list
         observation very short list of topics) during the first mo-    absence of some clearly defined             (based on previ-
                     ments of observation (e.g. quick observation       hygiene / health behaviour and              ous data collec-
                     of the issues on the spot-check list when          practices                                   tion / checklists)
                     entering a household, infrastructure, local     •	 To identify technical needs or           •	 Basic survey form
                     offices).                                          capacity needs of infrastructures,       •	 Graph notebook
                     NB: A rapid method particularly useful when        service providers, public services          and pencil
                     time is a major constraint.                     •	 To orient and feed the potential
                                                                          in-depth assessment.

         DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR IN-DEPTH ASSESSMENTS
         Name              Description                                Purpose                                   Material / Tools
         Structured        •	 Continuous observation to collect       •	 Identify location of water and         •	 Observation
         observation          information defined on a clear but         sanitation-related facilities.            checklist (based
                              short list of topics.                   •	 To obtain information on water,           on previous data
                           •	 Continuous structured observation          hygiene and sanitation issues and         collection/
                              (e.g. each time an action listed on        practices in and around these             checklists)
                              the observation sheet is done; it is       facilities, at people’s homes or       •	 Ticketing schedule
                              marked on the sheet).                      working environment, in health            and or Graph Note
                           •	 Ticketing (e.g. each time person           structures, schools (e.g. regularity      Book
                              collects water, a mark is put on the       of hand washing, gender or age         •	 Pencil
                              ticketing sheet).                          roles in water collection or waste
                                                                         management).
         Structured        Interviewing people based on a             •	 To collect mainly factual and quan- •	 Written interview
         interview         questionnaire with closed ended               titative data (data is relatively easy with closed ques-
                           questions on predetermined topics             to collect and to interpret as it is   tions on prede-
                           (e.g. the answer can only be yes or           a preconceived questionnaire,          termined topics
                           no, or an option within a multiple            which on the other hand is             based on previous
                           choice question).                             difficult to prepare).                 data collection /
                                                                                                                checklists)
                                                                                                                •	 Pencil, Note Book
         Semi-structured   Interviewing people based on a ques-       •	 To investigate general as well as    •	 Written interview
         interview         tionnaire with open ended questions           specific issues by asking questions,    with open-ended
                           on predetermined topics (e.g. person          informally but systematically.          questions on pre-
                           being interviewed can answer with          •	 To investigate which hygiene /          determined topics
                           his/her own words).                           health practices are ideal /            (based on previous
                           NB: It is useful to have an assistant to      acceptable, and why.                    data collection/
                           take notes.                                                                           checklists)
                                                                      •	 Collection of qualitative data.
                                                                                                              •	 Notebook
                                                                                                                 and pencil
         Focus group       Discuss a specific topic of interest to    To investigate:                           •	 Written open
         discussion        the investigator with a small group of     •	 A range of opinions / points of           ended questions
                           people having similar backgrounds or          views on the topic of interest.           and/or pictures to
                           experiences.                                                                            introduce the topic
                                                                      •	 The wide variety of local terms           of interest
                           NB: It is necessary to be at least two        and expressions linked to the
                           for the focus group discussion: 1 mod-        topic of interest.                     •	 Notebook and
                           erator and 1 person taking notes.                                                       pencil (and/or
                                                                      •	 The meanings of survey                    tape recorder)
                                                                         findings that cannot be
                                                                         explained (statistically).




45   |   WATER & SANITATION
         PARTICIPATORY DATA COLLECTION METHODS FOR IN-DEPTH ASSESSMENTS
         Name                                   Description                Purpose                               Material / Tools
         Community Mapping                      The participants are       •	 To find out what facilities relat- •	 Blackboard and
                                                asked to make a map of        ed to health and hygiene exist        chalk or
                                                their community struc-        and to which the community         •	 Poster paper,
                                                ture, showing places          has access.                           sheets and
                                                that are important for     •	 To find out about hygiene and         markers
                                                them (e.g. market place,      sanitation resources in peo-
                                                health centre, schools)                                          •	 Local materials,
                                                                              ple’s homes, health struc-            clear ground or
                                                and to include fea-           tures, schools or other public
                                                tures of interest to the                                            table space
                                                                              services (e.g. latrines).
                                                investigator (e.g. water                                         •	 Digital camera
                                                sources, latrines).        •	 To find out how the commu-
                                                                              nity perceives its surrounding
                                                                              / working environment and
                                                                              what it prioritizes within it.
         Three pile                             Participants have to      •	 To break down social                •	 Sets of pictures
         Sorting                                discuss and decide if        barriers and establish good            showing water-
                                                water, hygiene and           communication.                         and sanitation-
                                                sanitation related activ- •	 To introduce potentially               related activities
                                                ities presented on the       sensitive / personal topics (e.g.   •	 Good, bad and
                                                pictures are good, bad       latrine use) that need to be           in-between
                                                or in-between, and why.      investigated (knowledge / per-         signs
                                                Once consensus is            ception of the participants).       •	 Notebook and
                                                reached, the picture is   •	 To choose improved hygiene             pencil
                                                placed in the appropri-      behaviour based on people’s
                                                ate good, in-between         perceptions and needs.
                                                or bad pile. The dis-
                                                cussions between the
                                                participants will provide
                                                essential information to
                                                the investigator.


         Pocket       The participants can      •	 To investigate which    •	 Sets of pictures showing water, hygiene
         chart        indicate individually and    resource /method           and sanitation activities.
                      secretly which water,        is actually used, for   •	 Voting cards
                      hygiene and sanitation       what purpose, or by
                      resources/ methods,          which population        •	 Pocket chart
                      depicted on a matrix,        group (e.g. investi-    •	 Notebook and pen
                      they are using. The          gation on defecation
                      discussions between          methods used by
                      the participants af-         women, or children,
                      terwards will provide        or at home environ-
                      essential information to     ment or marketplace).
                      the investigator on the
                      actual water, hygiene
                      and sanitation
                      practices.
                      NB: Each picture should
                      be defined and its
                      meaning agreed upon
                      before a vote on a pre-
                      defined aspect of the
                      picture takes place.


46   |   WATER & SANITATION
         ANNEX III: TABLE FOR ESTIMATION DAMAGE & LOSS UNIT COSTS

         WASH Infrastructure             Unit Partially   Cost of Fully  Reconstruc-   Indirect     Total
         Components                           damaged     repair damaged tion cost     effect (or   damage
                                                                                       loss)        and loss
         Urban Water &
         Sanitation
         Source Intake (ground /
         surface water)
         Reservoirs & Water
         Towers
         Water Treatment Facilities
         Distribution Networks &
         Water Points
         O & M Transport &
         Supplies
         Household Systems
         (Wells, Rainwater)
         Wastewater Collection
         Network
         Sewage Network
         Sewage Treatment
         Facilities
         Septic Tanks/ Fields/
         French Drains
         Household Latrines /
         Septic Tanks
         Subtotal


         Urban Solid Waste
         Collection Point Facilities /
         Containers
         Waste Transport Facilities
         Waste Management Site
         Facilities
         Subtotal


         Rural Water & Sanitation
         Source Intake (Ground /
         Surface Water)
         Reservoirs & Water Tanks
         Water Treatment Facilities
         Distribution Networks &
         Water Points
         O & M Spares & Supplies
         Household Systems
         (Wells, Rainwater)


47   |   WATER & SANITATION
          Hand Dug Wells
          Boreholes
          Pumps – Solar, Motor,
          Hand
          Subtotal


          Rural Solid Waste
          Community Waste Pit
          Waste Collection System
          (if any)
          Household Waste Pits
          Household Burning
          Barrels
          Household Burning
          Barrels
          Subtotal


          Total

         ANNEX IV: GUIDANCE NOTE FOR STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION
         STAKEHOLDERS FOR WASH SECTOR ASSESSMENT
         The identification of possible stakeholders is a precondition for any participatory assessment and planning process. If
         stakeholders are not identified, they cannot be invited to participate. Stakeholder identification and analysis should not
         only be performed in the beginning by the Assessment Team, but should be repeated with representatives of the involved
         stakeholder groups. This ensures a deeper understanding of the exercise by the stakeholders (and Team members) and
         also prevents the exclusion of stakeholders at the early stage. It may not be possible for all members of the affected
         population to participate in an assessment process or collaborate in a recovery process, but all individuals and key groups
         that will be affected (positively and negatively) and therefore hold a stake in these processes should be identified as being
         stakeholders. Stakeholders can be members of the affected population but can equally include local authorities, agencies
         or other government entities. There are many ways to classify stakeholders, but they generally can be divided into primary,
         secondary and external stakeholders.

         Primary stakeholders come from within the affected population and will usually be the direct beneficiaries and end users
         of recovery (e.g. urban/rural populations, farmers, social sectors such as women, children and the elderly).

         Secondary stakeholders are usually intermediaries in the process of delivering services and/or support to primary stakehold-
         ers, e.g. consultants, experts, local government and agencies, governmental organizations (NGOs), service providers and
         private sector organizations.

         External stakeholders such as decision and policy makers (politicians, senior civil servants, district-level bodies, governmen-
         tal bodies, etc.). In the recovery process, development agencies may exert enough influence to merit being included as
         external stakeholders in the process.

         Choosing stakeholders from the wide range of primary, secondary and external actors first requires the drawing up of a
         long list from which choices will be made. For primary stakeholders, the parameters of the affected population as end-us-


48   |    WATER & SANITATION
         ers and final beneficiaries should be relatively evident, but there is often a challenge in engaging this level of stakeholder
         because they often have the least resources or capacity to fill a stakeholder role. Also, representativeness of this potentially
         large sector is important, not only in the numerical sense, but also to ensure that marginalized groups among the affected
         populations are represented.

         For secondary and external stakeholders, these represent the actors that normally constitute the WASH sector, as has been
         presented in subsections 2.2 and 3.3 above. While the direct government counterpart at the national level may already
         have been identified during the emergency response process, it is important to determine who the key sector actors are in
         terms of sector policy and regulation-making at the national level, sector policy implementation at the regional and district
         levels, regulation implementation by authorities or regulatory bodies, and finally administration and oversight of service
         provision at the local level. In addition to authorities, there may be local or international NGOs, and private sector actors
         implicated in the provision of goods, supplies and services from the WASH sector. A short list of potential stakeholders is
         presented below:

                  •	   representatives from the line ministry (ies) responsible for Water Resources management, provision of water
                       services, sanitation services, rural water supply and urban water supply;
                  •	   representatives from cross-sector line ministries of infrastructure (this may be Transport and Energy), Envi-
                       ronment, Agriculture, Health and Education. It is likely that these sectors may be implicated to some degree
                       in a WASH recovery strategy;
                  •	   district, municipal, rural and urban authorities, including Water Boards;
                  •	   regulatory agencies or bodies (if any);
                  •	   the traditional authorities (where relevant);
                  •	   private sector actors involved in the Water and Sanitation goods, supplies and services; provision;
                  •	   local NGOs and CSOs, especially those representing marginalized groups;
                  •	   affected population.

         The role of stakeholders must be clear first for the Team and then for the invited stakeholders. While the title of this section
         implies consultation, there is also a call for stakeholders to be engaged as partners; however, consultation and partnerships
         are not the same thing, and the difference must be clearly understood by the team to prevent confusion, false expectations
         and disappointments among stakeholders. In the PDNA process, there will be clearly defined official roles of government
         authorities already established, and specific definitions of partner collaboration at a higher level. At the lower level of sector
         PDNAs and primary beneficiaries, consultations should certainly take place, but the degree to which this is one-way or an
         ongoing exchange process, and the amount of ownership that can be awarded to primary beneficiaries must be constantly
         referenced and integrated into the agenda of local authorities and the higher multi-sectoral PDNA process and the national
         government agenda. If it is observed that the role of stakeholders appears to be marginalized by the official process, this
         should be recorded into baseline analysis under cross-cutting issues such as governance, which may have an impact on the
         recovery strategy.


         ANNEX V: TYPES OF RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY
         INFRASTRUCTURE AND ASSETS
         Restore access to water and sanitation services to pre-disaster levels by repairing or replacing damaged infrastructure fa-
         cilities essential for providing urban water and sanitation, urban solid waste management, rural water and sanitation and
         rural solid waste management. This also includes replacing supporting assets and materials such as transport, spare parts


49   |    WATER & SANITATION
         and chemicals which may have been lost or irreparably damaged. There may be a need to rebuild or collaborate with other
         sectors in the re-building of key administration buildings. It should be kept in mind that restoring to pre-disaster levels must
         be kept relevant to the needs of the affected population, and never automatically put into effect, since the needs of the
         population – and the population themselves – may have changed.

         Infrastructure needs for Building Back Better (BBB) are reflected in the results of the PDNA, which identify which elements
         of infrastructure and assets can be improved by design and technology. This can include more efficient pumping sys-
         tems, more easily maintained distribution networks (types of pipes, valves, joints), and lightweight construction materials.
         Improved technology can be used in water and waste treatment, even down to the level of household latrine design or
         rainwater harvesting techniques. Equitable costing of services can also be improved with new metering technologies and
         their distribution closer to the consumer level.

         RESTORE SERVICE DELIVERY AND ACCESS TO SERVICES
         Restoring service delivery and ensuring access to services are initially addressed by the emergency response, but are not
         necessarily oriented to social and economic stability. Unless the habitat environment of the affected population has been
         completely destroyed, there will be expectations for services to resume on-site. Much of this is addressed by the infrastruc-
         ture and assets reconstruction or replacement. However, to ensure the ongoing delivery and access to water and sanitation
         services, the process of Operation and Maintenance must be re-launched as quickly as possible. It will also be required to
         rapidly resume administrative management and other support services, which may have been affected by destruction of
         offices, laboratories or damage to access roads. This can require an initial financial outlay to kick-start the process that is
         above normal operating costs and may also require discussions with other sectors such as transport and infrastructure.

         Access to services is a priority need for BBB service delivery and includes benefitting from improved technology and mate-
         rials. It can also include a wider implication of stakeholders in the overall service delivery and management process. Private
         sector actors can be encouraged to participate as sub-contractors of services, to specialist support services for Operation
         and Maintenance. Consumers and beneficiaries can also be integrated into the regulation of services by participating in
         quality control, thus according an ownership role with responsibility and allowing for more timely responses to problems
         and improved service.




50   |    WATER & SANITATION
