      PRODUCTIVE SECTOR




       COMMERCE




PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
2 | COMMERCE
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION	2

n ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                        3

n PRE-DISASTER SITUATION	                                    4

n FIELD VISITS FOR POST-DISASTER DATA COLLECTION	            5

n ESTIMATION OF DISASTER'S EFFECTS	                          5

n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                             8

n ESTIMATION OF POST-DISASTER ECONOMIC RECOVERY AND 	        10
  RECONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS OR NEEDS

n ESTIMATION OF POST-DISASTER HUMAN DEVELOPMENT RECOVERY 	   11
  REQUIREMENTS OR NEEDS
  INTRODUCTION
  The commerce sector, in accordance with the most recent International Standard Industrial Classification of All Economic
  Activities of the world-wide System of National Accounts (United Nations, International Standard Industrial Classification of
  All Economic Activities, Rev.4, New York, 2008. (http://unstats.org/unsd/cr/registry/), includes wholesale trade, retail
  trade, sales and maintenance of vehicles, and hotel and restaurant services.

  These above may be sub-divided further into:
           •	   Wholesale sales in exchange for a retribution;
           •	   Wholesale sales of agriculture inputs, live animals, food, drinks and tobacco;
           •	   Wholesale of household goods;
           •	   Wholesale sales of intermediate products, waste including agriculture waste;
           •	   Wholesale of machinery, equipment and materials;
           •	   General retail sales of non-specialized goods in shops;
           •	   Retails sales of food, drinks and tobacco in specialized shops;
           •	   Retails trade of other new products in non-specialized shops;
           •	   Retail sales of used goods shops;
           •	   Retails trade outside shops;
           •	   Repair of personal and household goods;
           •	   Sales of motor vehicles;
           •	   Maintenance and repair of motor vehicles;
           •	   Sales of parts and accessories of motor vehicles;
           •	   Sales, maintenance and repair of motorcycles and their parts and accessories;
           •	   Retail sales of motor vehicle fuel;
           •	   Hotels, camping and other temporary lodging; and
           •	   Restaurants, bars and canteens.

  The relevance of each activity, and its inclusion in the assessment, for each country needs to be determined by the com-
  merce sector assessment team.

  In countries where tourism activities – which include hotels, camping facilities and other lodging facilities, and restaurants,
  bars and canteens – are an important part of economic activities, a separate analysis of disaster's effects and impact on the
  tourism sector may be required (see separate chapter on tourism sector).

2 | COMMERCE
  The commerce or trade sector may be affected by disasters of every kind, sustaining destruction of its physical assets (dam-
  age) and changes in the flows of sales. The latter may include both a decline in sales as well as higher cost of operation of
  commercial establishments.

  As is customary, damages in commerce establishments–including premises, furniture, equipment and stocks of goods–is
  measured initially in physical terms and subsequently converted into monetary terms by using the construction cost or re-
  placement value of the destroyed physical assets, to the same quality and quantity standards they had prior to the disaster.
  The possibility of reconstruction or replacement using improved, disaster-resilient standards, as part of a possible strategy
  of “building back better,” would be considered at the time of estimating needs for recovery and reconstruction.

  Changes in the flows of sales in the commerce or trade sector refer to possible decline in the sales of goods and services
  and to increases in operational costs that may arise after–and as a consequence of–the disaster. During the post-di-
  saster reconstruction stage, however, demand for sales of construction materials and equipment may increase and
  compensate–and sometimes exceed–the losses in sales caused by the disaster. However, these are to be estimated and
  considered afterwards, and the initial estimation of disaster's effects should not consider such positive indirect impact
  of post-disaster reconstruction.

  The assessment of disaster's effects for this sector is more complex than in other sectors in view of the usually large num-
  ber of existing commercial and service shops of different types and sizes, which may exist in the disaster-affected areas.
  Therefore, a special sample survey of representative, affected commercial establishments is to be carried out in parallel to
  the assessment and its results combined with the existing baseline information and data collected during field visits by the
  commerce sector assessment team in order to cover the entire universe of the sector. In fact, a joint sample survey is usually
  conducted for the industry and commerce sectors, since most of the information required is quite similar for both sectors.

  For the estimation of damages in this sector, civil engineers are required to be part of the commerce assessment team,
  while economists are required for the estimation of sales flows changes.



  ASSESSMENT PROCESS
  This chapter describes the procedure to assess the effects of a disaster on the trade or commerce sector, using the
  time-proven methodology originally developed by the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the
  Caribbean (UN-ECLAC) (Handbook for estimating the socio-economic and environmental impact of disasters, 4 volumes,
  United Nations, 2003), further developed by the World Bank´s Global Facility for Disaster Recovery and Reduction (GFDRR)
  (Guidance Notes for Damage, Loss and Needs Assessment, 3 volumes, The World Bank, Washington, D.C., 2010), and now
  expanded and adopted by the PDNA. Application of the methodology enables the assessment of disasters’ economic and
  social impact on the trade or commerce sector, and the estimation of post-disaster needs for recovery and reconstruction.

  After a disaster, the trade sector may sustain the destruction of its assets (damage) that may include premises and equip-
  ment as well as stocks of goods for sale. In addition, after a disaster the sector may face changes in its production flows,
  including sales decline and possible higher costs of trade arising from the fact that the sector assets are destroyed or to
  other causes associated to the disaster (such as lack of goods to sell, strategic inputs of water and electricity, temporary
  absence of labor, lack of working capital, etc.).

  As in the case of other sectors, the value of damage in trade is measured initially in physical terms and is subsequently
  converted into monetary terms by using the reconstruction or replacement cost of the destroyed physical assets, to the
  same quality and quantity standards and using unit replacement costs that prevailed prior to the disaster. The possibility of
3 | COMMERCE
  reconstruction or replacement using improved, disaster-resilient standards, as part of a possible strategy of “building back
  better,” is to be introduced later when estimating financial requirements for recovery and reconstruction.

  Changes in flows in the trade sector refer to the value of the decline in sales and to possible increases in production costs
  that may arise after, and as a consequence of, the disaster. Increases in trade costs in fact represent increases in intermedi-
  ate consumption for the sector, and are to be treated accordingly when estimating macroeconomic impact. Post-disaster
  reconstruction activities, on the other hand, may actually produce an increase in the demand and production of certain
  goods, which case is analyzed later on in the assessment when estimating the possible positive impact of reconstruction.

  The assessment of disaster's effects in the trade sector is more difficult than in other sectors of economic activity in view of
  the usually large number of existing trade establishments, of different types and sizes, which are usually spread over large
  areas of a country. Furthermore, there exist many trade activities that are not formally registered in the national accounts,
  since such activities are informally conducted by individual persons. Therefore, as mentioned above, a special sample survey
  of affected trade establishments is to be carried out parallel to the field visits to be made by the trade sector assessment
  team, and its results are to be combined with the existing baseline information in order to cover the entire universe of the
  sector. In addition, during the assessment, efforts are to be made to enlist the cooperation of trade associations of the
  private sector which usually have direct access to information from its associated individual members and which have a
  vested interest in obtaining post-disaster assistance. Moreover, advantage is to be taken of the presence of informal traders
  in temporary shelters during the emergency stage, to conduct a sample survey of informal trading whereby the value of
  damage and of losses in sales are obtained for the informal sector.

  The trade sector assessment team should keep in mind that in some countries the public sector may actually own and
  operate public markets which may also be affected by the disaster.

  For the estimation of damage in this sector, civil engineers and architects are required to be part of the trade or commerce
  sector assessment team, while economists are required for the estimation of possible changes in the flows of sales.



  PRE-DISASTER SITUATION
  The following baseline information on the characteristics and capacity of the trade or commerce sector must be obtained
  to provide the quantitative basis required for the assessment:

           •	   Number and size of commercial establishments, by type of commerce, existing in the affected area;
           •	   Typical physical facilities in each of the above, including a description of the usual furniture, equipment and
                storage of goods to sell, as well as required for the provision of services;
           •	   Information on the value of annual or monthly gross sales for each type of commercial establishment; and
           •	   Quantitative information on the usual destination of sales, whether it is for domestic consumption and/or
                for export to other countries.

  This type of information is normally available in the country’s most recent commerce sector survey or census, conducted
  either by its Ministry of Trade or Commerce and/or by the Statistical Office. Further information may be obtained from the
  national accounts handled by the national Statistical Office. Since this information may already be out of date at the time
  of the assessment, projections to the current year must be made based on recent growth rates for the sector.

  Additional information may be obtained through direct contacts with private sector Chambers of Commerce representa-
  tives, who would normally have detailed information on the capacities and sales of their associates. In fact, such private

4 | COMMERCE
  sector bodies should become partners in conducting the assessment, since they are normally very keen to define post-
  disaster needs for recovery and reconstruction.

  Further quantitative baseline information may be obtained from the municipalities where the commerce or trade shops
  are located, since they usually present reports of their stocks and facilities for tax payment purposes. Similar data may be
  available from insurance companies for those commerce or trade shops that carry infrastructure and/or sales insurance,
  although it is recognized that in developing countries the degree of insurance penetration is low.

  The assessment team for the commerce or trade sector should be aware that large commercial establishments make
  the highest percentage of sales in any given country or area. This fact should facilitate planning for field visits and sample
  surveys. However, micro-sized to medium-sized commercial establishments are always more numerous and usually gen-
  erate more employment of personnel, and their analysis requires special attention. The latter consideration is very rele-
  vant for the case of informal traders, usually the most affected by disasters, whose sales are not necessarily included in
  the national accounts; in this case, use may be made of special sample surveys conducted in temporary shelter camps
  during the assessment.

  On the basis of the previously listed information, a typology of commercial shops, under private or public ownership, is to
  be defined for purposes of the assessment.



  FIELD VISITS FOR POST-DISASTER DATA COLLECTION
  Field visits to determine the effects of the disaster in the affected trade or commerce shops must be carried out by the trade
  sector assessment team, in combination with sample surveys of typical commercial establishments and informal traders.

  Any data from existing reports from the emergency phase – however partial in coverage – must be used in conjunction
  with the information obtained during the field visits and the sample survey mentioned above, to estimate the number of
  commerce establishments of each pre-defined type that may have sustained total or partial destruction and whose sales
  may be affected directly or indirectly by the disaster.

  The field visits by the assessment team, coupled with information obtained from the sample survey questionnaire respons-
  es, should enable the commerce sector team to define the average type and value of damage for each commerce estab-
  lishment type; the time of sales stoppage or decline due to different reasons such as destruction of premises, equipment
  and machinery; temporary unavailability of inputs such as electricity and water; temporary unavailability of sufficient labor
  and of goods to sell; and the likely requirements for recovery and reconstruction. During the same field visit, unit recon-
  struction and replacement costs for rebuilding physical assets as well as replacement of equipment and stock of goods are
  to be obtained, through interviews with traders. Any difficulties and limitations foreseen by the owners of such establish-
  ments–for instance, in terms of financial and credit requirements, availability of goods to sell, availability of labor, etc.–are
  to be identified.

  On the basis of the information thus collected and in combination with the baseline data on existing physical capacities
  and normal or non-disaster volume of sales, it will be possible to develop a scenario of how the sector will likely function
  after the disaster until full recovery and reconstruction is achieved. This would include developing separate calendars for
  the repair and reconstruction of buildings and other facilities, replacement of equipment and goods to sell and for the
  resumption of normal or non-disaster sales levels over time.


  1	A copy of the questionnaire developed for this type of sample survey of industrial and trade shops is attached; it requires only minor adaptation in order to capture information on specific, different
     types of commerce.

5 | COMMERCE
  ESTIMATION OF DISASTER'S EFFECTS
  EFFECTS ON INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
  The value of the destroyed assets (damage) in the commerce or trade sector is to be estimated on the basis of the cost
  to rebuild or repair the buildings and other associated premises that were totally or partially destroyed, as well as the
  replacement cost of the furniture, equipment and stocks of goods to sell that were destroyed, assuming that they are
  being replaced with the same capacity and quality they had prior to the disaster. The higher costs involved in building
  back to improved, disaster-resilient standards and in retrofitting existing structures are to be included as part of the
  subsequent estimation of needs in the assessment. If the equipment and machinery that was destroyed can only be
  substituted by more modern and capable machinery, the additional costs involved should be taken into consideration
  during the estimation of needs.

  Since the affected area is likely to have a very large number, size and type of commerce establishments, the damage as-
  sessment must rely on information obtained from the already-mentioned parallel sample survey to define average values
  of damage for each type of commerce, and on counts of the number of each commerce type that were either totally or
  partially destroyed. Then, an extrapolation of the value of damage to cover the entire universe of trade establishments
  in the affected area or country must be made based on an assumed ratio of destroyed versus total number of shops. In
  some instances, for the estimation of the ratio of micro- and small-to-medium size trade shops, use has been made of the
  ratio of destroyed to existing housing units, whenever an actual ratio has not been possible to obtain. The accuracy of this
  extrapolation of course is of paramount importance, and the assessment team should devote sufficient time in order to
  discuss and agree on such ratio, so that results are reliable.

  In addition to the estimation of the value of damage, the commerce sector assessment team must obtain the average age
  of the destroyed infrastructure, and deliver this data to the macroeconomic assessment team. Note, however, that the
  estimated value of destroyed assets is that of their replacement cost, and not that of their depreciated or “book value.”

  In addition to the above, despite the low penetration of insurance in developing countries, the commerce sector assess-
  ment team must obtain information on the possible existence of insurance on both the destroyed premises and on sales.
  For this purpose, the questionnaire on the sample survey of commerce shops includes space to clarify this issue, and the
  commerce sector assessment team should also visit local insurance companies to ascertain the overall coverage of insurance
  on the sector, the percentage of covered assets and sales and the likely delay in the delivery of insurance proceeds to the
  insured trade or commerce shops. The commerce sector assessment team should be aware that the value of damage is
  not to be reduced by the amount of possible insurance, and that the availability of insurance is to be used only to estimate
  recovery and reconstruction requirements.

6 | COMMERCE
  EFFECTS ON SALES OF GOODS
  The estimation of trade sales flow changes must be made on the basis of several considerations, of which the time frame
  for their occurrence is paramount. Sales flow changes will normally occur over the time period required to achieve full
  reconstruction of premises, replacement of destroyed furniture and equipment, and resumption of normal availability and
  flow of goods to sell. Therefore, sales flow changes are likely to occur due to:

           •	   Destruction of sector assets, in terms of destruction of buildings, equipment, furniture and stock
                of goods to sell;
           •	   Temporary stoppage of sales due to lack of electricity or water;
           •	   Temporary disruption of goods availability and inflow;
           •	   Temporary unavailability or shortage of labor;
           •	   Future unavailability of goods to sell that may be due to future losses expected in agriculture, livestock
                and fishery production (This refers to the case of food products obtained from the food processing industry,
                but is also applicable to goods from other agro-industry enterprises that may face future shortages of
                raw materials due to future losses in primary agriculture, livestock and fishery production);
           •	   Insufficiency or non-existence of working capital at the commercial enterprise; and
           •	   Possible changes (declines or increases) in demand that may arise from possible generalized income decline
                of the population and from anticipated or foreseen high demand for construction materials for the recon-
                struction, respectively.

  Therefore, it is essential for the commerce sector assessment team to develop a comprehensive calendar of how and
  when the above-mentioned limiting factors would be overcome, giving due consideration to the availability and ease of
  adequate financing.

  The changes in sales flows to be estimated should include both possible sales decline and operational cost increases. The
  value of possible sales decline is to be estimated on the basis of the expected time frames necessary to achieve normal or
  non-disaster levels of sales, after overcoming the possible problems described above. Increased operational costs may arise
  from the following possible reasons:

           •	   Payment of overtime to staff to attend and solve urgent problems immediately after the disaster occurs;
           •	   Rental of alternative premises, furniture and equipment while the destroyed or damaged ones are being
                rebuilt or repaired;
           •	   Temporary acquisition of electricity and water from alternative sources, such as renting or acquiring portable
                power generators; and
           •	   Temporary acquisition of goods to sell from alternative sources that may be more costly and/or located in
                far-away locations including other countries.

  The estimated figures of damage and changes in sales flows should be broken down according to ownership by private
  and public sector. In this regard, it should be recalled that trade enterprises may be publicly, privately, or jointly owned.


  EFFECTS ON GOVERNANCE
  Depending on the individual characteristics of the disaster-affected country, the trade or commerce sector is usually in the
  domain of the private sector, although there are many cases where the public sector may own and operate some trade or
  commerce facilities. Due to any disaster, the function of governance in the trade sector may be negatively affected, and an
  analysis of such disaster's effects must be carried out as part of the assessment.

7 | COMMERCE
  GOVERNANCE IS AFFECTED IN FIVE POSSIBLE AREAS:
      1	 Knowledge and skills: technical expertise and institutional information for the sector;

      2	 Resources: human, material and financial, including availability of skilled labor, raw materials for processing,
         cost and price structure, etc.;

      3	 Systems, information management, communications and basic inputs; and

      4	 Legal authority, monitoring, oversight and reporting.

  In the assessment of disaster's effects, an analysis must be made to determine how the capacity of the public sector to
  oversee the functioning of the sector may have been affected (including damage to Ministry of Commerce facilities, loss
  of registries, lack of sufficient commerce inspectors, etc.). Furthermore, analysis is necessary of how the disaster may have
  altered the structure of costs and possible increase in unit prices of the goods to sell; and how the disaster may have caused
  traders to be unable to continue servicing pre-existing loans, etc. The last factor is of special relevance to informal traders,
  but is also relevant to larger trading units.


  EFFECTS ON RISK AND VULNERABILITIES
  Risks for both formal and informal traders may increase after a disaster. While disaster risk may have been high before the
  disaster due to the absence or insufficiency of human settlement plans and land zoning, the disaster may bring about a
  higher degree of risk and vulnerability for the sector, due to instability of sloping terrains where trade shops may be located,
  the possible occurrence of aftershocks following an earthquake, increased fire risk and lower availability of goods to sell
  after a prolonged drought, etc.

  This kind of higher risk and vulnerability must be duly assessed and schemes to reduce such risk should be identified and
  included in the needs for recovery and reconstruction under disaster-resilient standards.




  ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
  The trade or commerce sector assessment team must make additional estimations in this sector that may have an impact
  at both the macro-economic and personal or household levels, and deliver them to the appropriate assessment teams
  handling disaster impact analysis.

  For the macroeconomic impact analysis, the following values must be estimated by the trade sector assessment team
  and delivered to the macroeconomic impact assessment team:

           •	   The estimated value and calendar of changes in the flows of sales (including lower sales levels, and possible
                higher cost of sales (higher values of intermediate consumption), expressed in current value, to be used for
                the analysis of disaster impact on gross domestic product and growth;
           •	   The estimated value of goods that will not be exported to other countries due to shortages of production,
                and/or the estimated value of goods that may need to be imported due to shortages in their domestic or
                local production, since this would have a bearing on the balance of trade and payments of the country;
           •	   The estimated imported component of the commerce sector reconstruction costs (including the items that
                are not produced locally in the affected country and that will have to be imported from abroad), expressed
                in percentage (%) terms of reconstruction needs once they have been assessed, to be used for the impact
                analysis on the balance of payments;

8 | COMMERCE
           •	   Estimated values of tax revenues (sales taxes or value added taxes, depending on the country´s tax scheme)
                that will not be accrued by the government due to the decline in commerce sector sales, to be used for
                fiscal sector impact analysis; and
           •	   Values of decline in sales and higher production costs arising from the disaster in the case of government-
                owned commerce enterprises, to be used in the analysis of disaster impact on the fiscal sector.

  For the estimation of disaster impact on personal well-being and on human development, the following values
  must be estimated by the trade sector assessment team and delivered to the human development impact assessment team:

           •	   The estimated value of sales that will not be made by trade enterprises after the disaster, which may trans-
                late into possible employment and personal income losses for the commerce sector labor force; and
           •	   The estimated value of informal-sector sales obtained from the separate sample survey of informal traders
                conducted in the shelter camps, which would translate into livelihood and income losses.

  The assessment team for the trade sector should be aware that any losses in personal or household income are not to be
  added to the value of losses in trade sales; otherwise, double accounting of disaster's effects would occur. Instead, the
  team must keep in mind that these losses in personal or household income are disaster's effects measured at a different
  level of analysis.


  CROSS-SECTORAL LINKAGES AND ISSUES
  During the assessment, several cross-cutting issues must be given due consideration. These include the differential impact
  of the disaster on gender and the possible impact on the environment.

  For the trade sector, the gender breakdown of the labor force – whether skilled or not – is an essential part of the baseline
  information gathered at the start of the assessment, together with information on wages and salaries. Once the estimated
  values of losses in sales for the sector are made, separate estimates are to be made of the number of jobs temporarily or
  permanently lost due to the disaster for both men and women, together with how their personal income may have de-
  clined. This should be done for both the formal and informal parts of the trade sector.

  The trade sector usually discharges waste into the environment. Due to a disaster, the flows and manner of waste disposal
  may change and the environment may sustain damage to its natural or built assets. Environmental services may decrease.
  Any such changes must be quantified by the assessment team with assistance from environmental economists, and ex-
  pressed in monetary terms for inclusion in the assessment.




9 | COMMERCE
  ESTIMATION OF POST-DISASTER ECONOMIC RECOVERY
  AND RECONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS OR NEEDS
  The estimation of the value of post-disaster financial requirements to ensure recovery and disaster-resilient reconstruction
  of the sector must not be initiated and undertaken until after the results of the estimation of the value of destroyed assets
  (damage) and of changes in sales flows for the commerce or trade sector have been completed by the sectoral assessment
  team and delivered to the macroeconomic or global assessment team. The commerce or trade sector assessment team
  should be aware that the above is essential to ensure the accuracy and consistency of the entire assessment and to guar-
  antee that no undue influence is exerted in the estimation of post-disaster needs.

  Financial requirements or needs to ensure the economic recovery of the commerce or trade sector are defined as the
  amounts of funding required to ensure returning the sector to its normal level of functioning and sales. In most cases,
  these needs would include the availability of financing to ensure sufficient working capital for the affected enterprises to
  re-start operations, and possibly refinance or reschedule non-performing loans arising from the disaster. Such financing
  may be channeled to the entrepreneurs through different ways, depending on their size and credit-worthiness: cash
  grants for micro-sized entrepreneurs, to avoid their resorting to use informal credits from loan sharks; and soft-term credit
  for small-to-medium sized enterprises (SMEs) channeled through the development or private bank systems, with low-
  er-than-normal interest rates and longer repayment periods. Large enterprises that are usually at least partly insured may
  require temporary tax relief during recovery. The amounts of financing required for these recovery schemes may be esti-
  mated by trade economists on the basis of the estimated value of disaster-induced sales decline for each type and level of
  trading enterprise, since they normally have a typical value of stocks to sell in their premises that may have been destroyed.
  Experience acquired in the past 40 years of disaster assessment has revealed that the usual range of such recovery needs
  ranges between 25 to 35 per cent of the value of losses in sales; the detailed results of the commerce sample survey, how-
  ever, would provide information on which to more firmly define this range or working capital needs.

  The above values are to be decreased by the amounts of possible insurance on sales proceeds that some of the commercial
  enterprises may actually have, in order to obtain the net amounts of financing required for disaster-affected enterprises.

  Financial requirements or needs for reconstruction under a “building-back-better” strategy are estimated by taking the
  estimated value of replacement of destroyed assets and increasing it by a certain percentage whose magnitude depends
  on the degree of quality and technological improvement as well as disaster-risk reduction defined in the strategy for re-
  construction. In short, reconstruction requirements will always have a larger value than the estimated value of damage.

  Experience acquired in the past 40 years of disaster assessment in many countries of the world shows that the range to
  increase the value of damage to obtain disaster-resilient reconstruction needs is between 10 to 25 per cent, depending on
  the degree of disaster-resilient features that the destroyed infrastructure had prior to the disaster. The exact increase to be
  adopted must be defined by civil and structural engineers who are part of the commerce sector assessment team, who
  have had relevant experience in this type of work.

  The estimated gross value of reconstruction requirements must be reduced by the expected amount of insurance-on-assets
  proceeds that are to be received by those commercial enterprises that had such insurance.




10 | COMMERCE
  ESTIMATION OF POST-DISASTER HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
  RECOVERY REQUIREMENTS OR NEEDS
  For the analysis of human development impact, estimated values of commerce sector sales losses are to be delivered to the
  separate team in charge of estimating personal or household impact analysis, for the subsequent estimation of employ-
  ment and personal or household income losses. This will in turn enable the estimation of requirements for the funding of
  temporary “cash-for-work” employment schemes.

  In addition to the above, results of the sample survey of informal traders which may have been conducted in temporary
  shelter camps to estimate their income losses due to the disaster should also be delivered to the assessment team in charge
  of estimating human development impact, and for defining additional financial requirements in terms of possible cash
  grants or other assistance for informal male and female traders.




11 | COMMERCE
