SENEGAL: URBAN FLOODS




Recovery and Reconstruction since 2009
Recovery Framework Case Study
August 2014
CONTENTS
n INTRODUCTION TO CASE STUDIES SERIES	                                       i

n LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS	                                                    iii

n OVERVIEW OF URBAN FLOODS IN SENEGAL, 2009 AND 2012	                        1

n POLICY FOR FLOOD PREVENTION AND RECOVERY	                                  4
    CONCEPT OF RECOVERY	                                                     4
    PRE-2009 POLICIES	                                                       5

n INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR FLOOD MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY	       8
    INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK	                                                 8
    ADVISORY LEVEL	                                                          8
    EXECUTIVE LEVEL	                                                         9
    THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK	                                                    11
    DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS	                                                   11
    COORDINATION PLATFORM WITH INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES	                      11
    INVOLVEMENT OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR	                                      12

n PROGRESS AND INNOVATIONS IN FLOOD MANAGEMENT AND RECOVERY POLICY	         13
    PROGRESS IN SUSTAINABLE FLOOD MANAGEMENT INITIATED IN SEPTEMBER 2012	   13
    ORGANIZATIONAL INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RECOVERY FRAMEWORK	    16
    ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES	                            19
    A COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION PLAN	                                         19

n RECOVERY FINANCING	                                                       21
    NATIONAL COMMITMENT AND PARTNERSHIPS	                                   21
    TRANSPARENCY, ANTI-CORRUPTION MEASURES AND PROCUREMENT	                 22

n MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING OF RECOVERY OPERATIONS THROUGH PDGI	            23
    COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES	                                               23
    REPORTING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION	                                   23

n ASSESSMENT OF CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS	                            24
    RELEVANCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF FLOOD PREVENTION AND RECOVERY POLICY	    24
    EFFORTS NEEDED TO CONSOLIDATE ACHIEVEMENTS	                             26

n CONCLUSION	33
    ESSENTIAL INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS THAT NEED TO BE READJUSTED
    FOR EFFICIENT COORDINATION	                                             33
    A NATIONAL COMMUNICATION PLAN FOR EFFECTIVE PREVENTION AND RECOVERY	    34

n ANNEX 1: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED FOR CASE STUDY	                   35
       Conference Version




       INTRODUCTION TO CASE STUDIES SERIES
       The World Bank’s Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), the United Nations
       Development Program (UNDP) and the European Union (EU) are collaborating on a guide for Disaster Recovery
       Framework (DRF). This guide aims to help governments and partners plan for resilient post disaster recovery
       while contributing to longer-term sustainable development. It is based on practices gleaned from country
       experiences in disaster recovery around the world. Hence, the development of the DRF Guide entailed the
       development of country-level case studies as well as thematic case studies on disaster recovery.
       These case studies have been designed to collect and analyze information on: i) disaster recovery standards
       and principles adapted by countries for specific disasters; ii) planning efforts for making such recovery
       efficient, equitable, and resilient; iii) policies, institutions and capacities to implement and monitor
       disaster recovery; and iv) ways and means for translating the gains of resilient recovery into longer-term
       risk reduction and resilient development.
       The methodology for developing the case studies consist of five steps:
             1.	 Desk review of available documentation and literature regarding the specific disaster and recovery;
             2.	 Field visit to complete and validate findings from the first step, including a workshop with government
                 officials and other partners who have been involved in the disaster recovery process; and in-depth
                 interviews with key partners in central and local government, international organizations and civil society;



i Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
     3.	 Preparation of the document to be part of the GFDRR country case study series;
     4.	 Review of document by GFDRR, World Bank country office, peers and partner agencies;
     5.	 Validation of final case study document through in-country workshop.
Importantly, these case studies aim to learn from, and not evaluate, country reconstruction initiatives. Practices
learned from each country’s experience will inform the contents of the guide for developing a DRF. Additionally,
the case studies examine the planning processes and not the implementation details of recovery experiences. As
such, they do not seek to offer a comprehensive account of the post-disaster recovery program, but instead provide
details and insight into the decision-making processes for reconstruction policies and programs.
Following the 2009 floods, the Government of Senegal elaborated its first recovery plan after a post-disaster
needs assessment (PDNA) was conducted with the support of the international community. This case study thus
uses the 2009 exercise as the point of departure for examining Senegal’s policies for recovery and prevention of
urban floods.




This document is the product of work performed by GFDRR staff, based on information provided by GFDRR’s partners. The findings, analysis and
conclusions expressed in this document do not necessarily reflect the views of any individual partner organization of GFDRR, including, for example,
the World Bank, the Executive Directors of the World Bank, UNDP, the European Union, or the governments they represent. Although GFDRR makes
reasonable efforts to ensure all the information presented in this document is correct, its accuracy and integrity cannot be guaranteed. Use of any
data or information from this document is at the user’s own risk and under no circumstances shall GFDRR or any of its partners be liable for any loss,
damage, liability or expense incurred or suffered which is claimed to result from reliance on the data contained in this document.


                                                                       Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   ii
       LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
       	 ADM	               Municipal Development Agency
       	 AFDB	              African Development Bank
       	 DPC	               Directorate of Civil Defense
       	 DRR	               Disaster Risk Reduction
       	 FCFA	              West African franc
       	 GFDRR	             Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
       	 HFA	               Hyogo Framework for Action
       	 JICA	              Japan International Cooperation Agency
       	 MATCL	             Ministry of Territorial Planning and Local Communities
       	 MEF	               Ministry of Economy and Finance
       	 MHA	               Ministry for Hydraulics and Sanitation
       	 MINT	              Interior Ministry
       	 MRAZI	             Ministry in charge of Restructuring and Managing Flood Zones
       	 MUH	               Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
       	 ONAS	              Senegalese National Sanitation Office
       	 ORSEC	             National Relief Organization Plan
       	 PDGI	              Ten-Year Flood Management Program
       	 PDNA	              Post Disaster Needs Assessment
       	 PDU	               Land-Use Master Plan
       	 PGRC-ACC	 Program for Disaster Risk Management and Climate Change Adaptation
       	 PNRRMC	            National Platform for Reduction of Major Disaster Risks
       	 PROGEP	            Project for Rain Water Management and Climate Change Adaptation
       	 SONES	             Senegalese National Water Supply Company
       	 UNDP	              United Nations Development Program
       	 UNISDR	            United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction




iii Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   iv
       OVERVIEW OF URBAN FLOODS IN SENEGAL, 2009 AND 2012
       Senegal is located in the Sahel region of West Africa. Between 1970 and 2000, the country suffered
       prolonged droughts that contributed to rural exodus. Today, almost half of Senegal’s population lives in
       urban areas; over 76 percent of these areas are classified as unplanned settlements. The capital of the
       country, Dakar, occupies only 0.3 percent of the territory of Senegal (2011) yet concentrates 21 percent of          1



       the country’s population, as well as most public services and economic activity .                                            2




       Communities in these peri-urban areas—already among the poorest in the country—are the most vulnerable
       to episodes of heavy rainfall and subsequent flooding. The impact of floods in this situation of uncontrolled
       urban growth is exacerbated by the lack of a functional storm water drainage system, ineffective land-use
       policies and non-compliance with the urban planning and development master plan.
       The negative impact of flooding during the first decade of this century, especially those of 2005, 2009 and
       2012, continue to be reflected in existing socio-economic conditions. Aside from the tragic loss of human
       lives, infrastructure—roads, bridges, houses and other property—was destroyed. The agricultural sector
       has also suffered from destruction of irrigation networks and loss of crops. Between 2008 and 2012, the                  3



       Government of Senegal invested over 70 billion FCFA, excluding external support, to reduce urban flooding
       but without satisfactory results.                 4




       2009 FLOODS
       In 2009, the Post- Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA), funded through the Global Facility for Disaster
       Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR), estimated damage and losses to total 44.5 billion FCFA nationwide,
       of which 35.5 billion FCFA was for damage and loss in the Dakar region alone (see Table 1) . Also, an                                                5



       estimated 30,000 houses were affected in the Dakar region, most of which are now uninhabitable and
       often abandoned.             6




       1	
            Information from National Statistics Directorate, in GFDRR/World Bank, funding to the Republic of Senegal as part of the first phase of the Risk and Disaster
            Management and Climate Change Adaptation, January 15, 2012.
       2	
            National Statistics Directorate (ANSD), draft document for a GFDRR funding to the Republic of Senegal as part of the first phase of the Risk and Disaster
            Management and Climate Change Adaptation, January 15, 2012.
       3	
            DRR National Program Report.
       4	
            Republic of Senegal , AWF, EAA, Donor Roundtable aimed at financing the emergency phase of the Ten-Year Flood Program , Programs for Integrated Water
            Resources Management and Access to Drinking Water and Sanitation, December 2012.
       5	
            “Assessment report on post-disaster needs, urban floods in Dakar 2009”, Government of the Republic of Senegal, World Bank, the United Nations System and
            the European Commission, June 2010.
       6	
            Republic of Senegal, AWF, EAA, Donor Roundtable aimed at financing the emergency phase of the Ten-Year Flood Program , Programs for Integrated Water
            Resources Management and Access to Drinking Water and Sanitation, December 2012.

1 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
Peri-urban areas of Dakar were the most affected in 2009. Most of the 21 sub-divisions (known as “communes
d’arrondissement) in Pikine and Guédiawaye were affected. Nearly 360,000 people or 44 percent of the
population were affected in Pikine and 22,000 people in Guédiawaye, 7.2 percent of the population in
those areas. Some 125,000 people were also affected in rural areas and inland cities including St. Louis,
Dagana, Kaolack, Kaffrine, Mbour, Kolda, Thies, Tambacounda and Sédhiou .                                        7




Table 1: Impact of the 2009 floods in peri-urban areas of Dakar, in FCFA and USD
                                                                                                                                Total                 Total
     Sectorial areas                                                             Damage                   Loss
                                                                                                                     (millions FCFA)        (millions USD)
     Infrastructure                                                                 2 230               6 247                   8 477                    20.0
     Transport                                                                      2 038                2 767                  4 805                     11.0
     Water and sanitation
                                                                                       190                 572                     762                        2.0
     (including solid waste)
     Energy                                                                               2             2 908                   2 910                         8.0
     Social sectors                                                               14 353               6 766                   21 119                    49.0
     Housing                                                                       11 088               3 140                  14 228                     33.0
     Urban community infrastructure                                                    142              3 070                    3 212                        7.0
     Health                                                                         1 850                  556                  2 406                         6.0
     Education                                                                       1 273                 0*                    1 273                        3.0
     Productive sectors                                                             1 305              4 060                    5 365                    12.0
     Agriculture, breeding and fisheries                                                  0                 61                      61                  0.141
     Industry/Trade, SME,
                                                                                    1 305               3 999                   5 304                     12.0
     Informal sector
     Environment                                                                      261                 295                     556                         1.0
     Protected areas and national parks (natural capital
                                                                                       261                 295                     556                        1.0
     plus infrastructure and services)
     TOTAL (millions FCFA)                                                        18 149              17 368                   35 517
     TOTAL (millions USD)                                                               42                 40                                                 82


Housing, transport, and health sectors suffered the most damage; followed by education (7 percent),
industry and trade (7 percent). The trade sector suffered the most losses, with 23 percent (mostly informal
trade), followed by housing (18 percent), urban community infrastructure (18 percent), energy (17 percent),
and transport (16 percent) sectors.
The 2009 PDNA concluded that there was an urgent need to address the underlying causes of recurrent
floods. A strategy for the medium and long-term reduction of flood risks was recommended, based on a
combination of structural and non-structural measures.




7	
      Republic of Senegal, African Water Facility, EAA, Donor Roundtable aimed at financing the emergency phase of the Ten-Year Flood Program, Programs for
      Integrated Water Resources Management and Access to Drinking Water and Sanitation, December 2012.

                                                                              Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014      2
       Priority actions identified in the report include:
               1.	 Preparing a master plan for storm water management;
               2.	 Establishing a system for storm water drainage in priority areas on the outskirts of Dakar; and
               3.	 Preventing and mitigating disasters by a) developing an urban development plan containing
                   the mapping of flood risks, b) strengthening the management of flood risks, and c) educating
                   affected communities.
       Following this assessment, the Government developed a project for rainwater management and climate
       change adaptation (PROGEP) with the support of the World Bank. This project (discussed later in detail)
       aims to support the implementation of priority measures of the PDNA .                                    8




       2012 FLOODS
       In 2012, the emergency relief plan (ORSEC) was activated after the heavy rains of August 26. Due to
       heavy flooding, 26 deaths, 264,000 people and 7,737 damaged houses were reported . In addition, floods                              9



       displaced over 5,000 families (over half from the regions of Dakar and Matam) and contaminated 7,700
       drinking water sources .           10




       With most urban areas of the country affected by flooding, the government of Senegal adopted strong
       measures, starting with a ten-year program for flood management whose total cost is estimated at more
       than 700 billion FCFA (USD 1,4 billion) in 2014.




       8	
             World Bank, Project Appraisal Document, PROGEP, February 2012.
       9	
             Mare Lo, National Consultation on the Post-2015 Framework for Action to reduce disaster risks, UNISDR, CAH, September 2013.
       10	
             UNOCHA, Summary on the impact of floods in West and Central Africa, 15 September 2012.

3 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
POLICY FOR FLOOD PREVENTION AND RECOVERY
CONCEPT OF RECOVERY
To help populations affected by disasters to resume their daily lives, and to mitigate the effects of disasters,
governments have developed “recovery” policies. This recognizes that disasters are events that disrupt
normal life, and requiring exceptional and specific actions that extend beyond emergency relief. This means
that governments, communities and civil society have an established framework that is recognized by all,
which situates post-disaster recovery and reconstruction. This framework permits the definition of recovery
needs as well as the respective responsibilities of stakeholders, in order to avert ad-hoc actions and instead
promote good coordination and efficient use of available resources.
The recovery phase and recovery planning get underway even as emergency programs. This is a transition
period that bridges to normal development, but is a time when concrete measures for the mitigation of
future risk should be included in the management of the cause and effects of disasters.

Figure 1: Overlapping Operational Phases after a Disaster

                      Relief
                      Phase
                   /Humanitarian
                       Help
                                     Framework for
                                      Operational     Reconstruction
                                     Rehabilitation       Phase
      Disaster

                                                                    Recovery
                                                                     Phase


       Phase 1             Phase 2         Phase 3                                                                      Time
     Disaster...                                                                                             Development

In Senegal, recovery and reconstruction policies are difficult to dissociate. Experience has shown that the only
effective post-disaster strategies that have permitted affected populations to recovery from the series of floods
were reconstruction activities, such as drainage systems, restructuring of flood zones, and new housing. Flooding
has occurred for more than fifteen years without government support to livelihoods of affected populations.
Also, the phases of recovery and reconstruction in Senegal often coincide in providing concrete solutions.

                                                         Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   4
       PRE-2009 POLICIES
       Faced with recurring floods in most cities across the country and especially in the Dakar region, public
       authorities felt the urgent need to find a solution in 2009. In earlier years, the response consisted of
       emergency pumping operations in neighborhoods and the temporary resettlement of the victims in public
       buildings, such as schools. This strategy proved to be very expensive (for fuel and maintenance of pumping
       equipment, deploying field teams, sheltering flood victims and repairing the buildings where victims had
       been sheltered). Besides, such a strategy was not sustainable because similar actions were being repeated
       each year at the same sites with huge losses, unforeseen expenses and reorganization in the state budget.
       The project for construction of social housing and the fight against floods and slums was created by
                                                                                   11



       ministerial decree No. 003409 on May 31, 2006. The project was charged with implementing the “Jaxaay
       Plan” and the “One Family, One House” program, and was hosted by the Ministry of Architectural Heritage,
       Housing and Construction, following the dissolution of the National Agency against Floods and Slums
       (ANLIB). The Jaxaay plan, implemented from 2006 to 2012, aimed to build houses for flood victims as well
       as water drainage systems using emergency pumps. The plan has helped build more than 3000 housing
       units in Dakar and other regions of the country, as well as retention ponds, as part of PROGEP, along with
       gravity-based drainage systems.
       The 2009 floods appear to mark a new start for the Government, with three steps to commit permanently
       to a sustainable recovery and flood management policy. These three steps were:
               1.	 	Assessing damage, losses and post disaster needs (PDNA) for 2009;
               2.	 The storm water management and climate change adaptation project;
               3.	 The ten-year flood management program (2012-2022).

       PROJECT FOR RAIN WATER MANAGEMENT AND CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION (PROGEP)

       1. Assessing damages, losses and needs in 2009
       The PDNA that was conducted in 2009 provided Senegal with a detailed economic and multi-sectoral
                         12



       estimate of flood impact as well as recovery and reconstruction needs. This assessment estimated the
       costs of priority recovery and reconstruction needs mainly in Dakar to exceed USD 204.5 million, of which
       USD 40.7 million were earmarked for recovery and rehabilitation and USD 163.8 million for reconstruction
       and disaster risk reduction.
       This assessment prompted sectoral actors to ponder a lasting solution to the recurrent floods, and resulted
       in the identification of a strategic action plan for recovery and reconstruction in the short, medium
       and long terms. The needs assessment involved the priority sectors of social protection, infrastructure,
       basic social services and livelihood activities . The government consequently elaborated PROGEP with the
                                                                              13



       support of the World Bank, on the basis of recommendations made in the PDNA.


       11	
             Social Housing: the principle of social housing in Senegal is for people who have been displaced from flood zones and settled into housing constructed and
             subsidized by the State. The inhabitants become owners after paying a sum representing 15 percent of the value of the residence, over a period of several years.
       12	
             Jointly conducted in 2009 by the Government of Senegal, technical and financial partners and (NGOs, the PDNA was funded by GFDRR/ World Bank, June 2010.
       13	
             Social protection includes health, food security, education and housing sectors. Infrastructure and basic services include transportation and urban roadwork,
             energy, water, sanitation and solid waste management and urban community infrastructure. Livelihood activities include trade, industry and the informal
             sector as well as agriculture. For each action plan, the crosscutting themes of the environment, gender and the protection of vulnerable groups have been taken
             into account. PDNA, June 2010.




5 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
2. Project for Rain Water Management and Climate Change Adaptation
In August 2010, the Government of Senegal decided to prepare an urban development project for rainwater
management and climate change adaptation, known as PROGEP, with the support of the World Bank.
PROGEP is derived directly from the PDNA action plan, and aims to reduce floods through an integrated and
sustainable approach. It is being implemented together with priority measures such as: 1) the preparation of
a master plan for storm water drainage and the construction of drainage structures; 2) construction of storm
water drainage on the outskirts of Dakar; 3) mapping of flood risks and within detailed urban plans (PUD);
4) developing a flood prevention Geographic Information System (GIS); 5) involving communities in flood
reduction and climate change adaptation through information campaigns to raise public awareness and
support micro-projects for reducing local flood risks.
The Government designated the Municipal Development Agency (ADM) with PROGEP preparation and
implementation, PROGEP was officially launched in November 2012, but preparation of the master plan for
                                              ​​
storm water drainage in the outlying areas of Dakar and the preparation of technical drainage studies began
in 2011.
The five-year project (2013-2017) is funded for USD 72, 9 million, of which USD 55.6 million through the World
Bank; USD 10.6 million from the Senegalese government, USD 4.1 million from the Nordic Development Fund
and USD 2.6 million by ADM. Additional funding was being negotiated with the World Bank, IDB and AfDB .                                                   14




POST 2012 FLOOD RECOVERY AND THE LAUNCH OF THE TEN-YEAR PROGRAM FOR
FLOOD MANAGEMENT
Following the floods of August 2012, the Government of Senegal was committed to significantly strengthen
its post-flood recovery policy. The strong political commitment and key actions that enabled the Government
to launch the Ten-Year Flood Management Program (PDGI) are described below.
Ten strategic decisions to deal with floods
At the Presidential Council of 19 September 2012, and based on conclusions and recommendations of the
meeting attended by all stakeholders involved in flood management, the President of the Republic took
ten strategic decisions to progressively and definitively eradicate recurring floods in Senegal. The Ten
Commandments articulated in the Council report for developing resilience to flooding are the following:
        1.	 Implement a ten-year special program: The President of the Republic approved PDGI which
            comprises three phases; an emergency phase from 2012 to 2013; a short-term phase from 2014
            to 2016 and a medium to long term phase from 2017 to 2022;
        2.	 Make sufficient financial resources available: The President of the Republic approved the
            budget for the 2012-2013 emergency phase, amounting to 66 billion FCFA, and asked for further
            studies to more accurately assess the budget for the entire program, estimated at 766 billion CFA;
        3.	 Mobilize funds for the emergency phase within in the 2013 budget: This directive instructs
            the government to integrate the emergency budget within the 2013 Finance Act, and urges
            committed development partners to contribute, particularly for the construction of pipes for
            storm water drainage;
        4.	 Organize a donor round table: the President of the Republic requested the Ministry of Economy
            and Finance to organize a donor conference to raise funds for PDGI;
14	
      Sources: 1. General presentation of PROGEP, workshop aimed at coordinating and harmonizing state actions in flood management, March 27, 2013; 2. World
      Bank, PROGEP Appraisal Document, February 2012.



                                                                             Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   6
               5.	 Update the National Land Use Planning Policy: The President requested the Government to take
                   the necessary steps for updating and validating the National Land Use Planning Policy before
                   the 2013 rainy season;
               6.	 Finalize Master Plans for Town Planning of Communities: the Government was tasked with
                   finalizing and validating the master plans for town planning by June 2013, for twelve priority
                   municipalities and rural communities, and ensure consistency between the Master Plans for
                   Drainage and Town Planning;
               7.	 Further involve Local Authorities: The President requested greater and more effective
                   involvement of local authorities, as privileged partners of the Government in the implementation
                   of PDGI;
               8.	 Revitalize the social housing policy through greater involvement of the private sector, the
                   Deposit and Consignment Office, the Social Security Fund and Senegalese Pension Fund (IPRES);
               9.	 Establish a national Observatory on floods. The President of the Republic recommended the
                   establishment of a National Observatory on floods that will monitor this phenomenon and involve
                   locally elected councilors, academics and experts.
               10.	Establish a mechanism for interdepartmental coordination: The President requested the Prime
                   Minister to supervise, by mid-November 2012, an interdepartmental structure charged with
                   coordinating interventions related to floods .                    15




       Further evidence by the government to make flood management a national priority was the creation of the
       Ministry in charge of Restructuring and Managing Flood Zones (MRAZI) in November 2012, the first ever
       ministry in the history of Senegal exclusively dedicated to addressing floods.
       It is worth mentioning that the Senate of Senegal was dissolved in 2012 by the President of the Republic
       with a view to reallocating funds from this institution to the funding of PDGI.

       Donor Roundtable of December 2012
       A donor roundtable was held in December 2012 to raise funds earmarked for the emergency phase of
       PDGI, and other priority programs of the government, such as the Program for Integrated Water Resources
       Management and Access to Drinking Water and the Ziguinchor Sanitation Action Plan. Soon thereafter,
       the Minister of Economy and Finance announced the attainment of funding of 66.375 billion FCFA for the
       emergency phase of PDGI to which the government contributed 17 billion FCFA. For the 2014-2016 period,
       Senegal has planned investments worth 112.736 billion FCFA of which 76 percent were secured and the
       remaining 24 percent is under negotiation with the African Development Bank (AfDB) for implementing the
       Water and Sanitation Sector Project.




       15	
             Mare Lo, September 2013, National Consultation on the Post-2015 Framework for Action to reduce disaster risks, UNISDR, CAH, September 2013.

7 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
INSTITUTIONAL AND LEGAL FRAMEWORK FOR FLOOD MANAGEMENT
AND RECOVERY
Disaster risk management (DRM) is a declared priority of the Senegalese Government, which has multiplied
its efforts to integrate this within national development policies. These efforts include most notably the
signing of the Hyogo Framework for Action (HFA) , the integration of DRM as a priority in the National
                                                                                16



Development Strategy of Senegal (SNDS), and the adoption in 2011 of a national program for disaster risk
reduction that strengthens national capacity in all areas of DRM.

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
The institutional framework has evolved through changing policy priorities and strategies developed by the
government. This framework is composed of several structures with diverse statutes, which are sometimes
redundant; it is divided into an advisory level and executive level of intervention.                                           17




ADVISORY LEVEL
The advisory level provides risk and disaster management stakeholders and partners with the forum for
consultation, dialogue, and participation. It is characterized by the coexistence of crosscutting and sectoral
frameworks. For example, the High Commission of Civil Protection (CPSC) is responsible for advising the
Minister of the Interior on all civil protection issues and for contributing to the coordination of sectoral
activities in disaster prevention and relief organization. There is also the National Platform for Reduction
of Major Disaster Risks (PNRRMC) established in 2008 by Presidential Decree, pursuant to the HFA
recommendations. CPSC and PNRRMC have similar roles at the advisory level. Established before the High
Commission for Civil Protection (CSPC), PNRRMC has experienced operational difficulties that the Risk
and Disaster Management and Climate Change Adaptation project attempts to resolve through revitalizing
activities. CPSC no longer seems to be operational.
Other advisory structures include:
                •	 A National Unit for Flood Prevention chaired by the Minister of the Interior and established by
                   Decree No. 2004 - 1153 of August 18, 2004 amending Decree No. 2003-685 of November 13, 2003.

16	
      “The Hyogo Framework for Action (2005-2015): Building the Resilience of Nations and Communities to Disasters” was adopted by 168 States during the World
      Conference for Disaster Reduction in Kobe, Japan, 18-22 January 2005. HFA outlines five priorities for action for each State signatory by 2015, in the areas of
      prevention (including information, awareness-raising and training), preparation, and response to disasters.)
17	
      Michel Seck, Review of the institutional framework for the risk and disaster management in Senegal, July 2013.



                                                                                Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014        8
                       •	 A National Committee on Flood Prevention, Supervision and Monitoring established in
                          2007 under the authority of the Prime Minister and aimed at enhancing flood management
                          policy. The fact that advisory structures are created without dissolving pre-existing one and
                          those with similar mandates complicates the situation and exacerbates the lack of clarity in
                          the institutional set up of risk management in general and flood management in particular.

       EXECUTIVE LEVEL
       The executive level meets the need for operational structures to implement state policies on Disaster Risk
       Reduction (DRR) and for ensuring consistency of interventions. Regarding preparation, disaster response
       and recovery, the Directorate of Civil Protection (DPC) within the Ministry of Interior coordinates the
       committee for the National Relief Organization Plan (ORSEC) that is responsible for logistical support
       to the Administrative Staff, operational groups and support units . It can requisition private national
                                                                                                      18



       resources, according to regulatory procedures. The National Brigade of Firefighters (BNSP) is also part
                         19                                                       20



       of the same ministry, and is an operational arm for emergency response.
       The National Relief Organization Plan (ORSEC) is the crisis and disaster management tool in Senegal.
       Adopted in anticipation of serious events likely to endanger human lives, ORSEC provides a framework
       to quickly and efficiently mobilize in advance public and private relief resources. The Minister of the
       Interior decrees the arrangements for releasing and implementing ORSEC, which comprises (i) an      21



       established chain of command, (ii) operational groups and (iii) the afore-mentioned support units22
       ORSEC was launched several times since the year 2000 to respond to floods. In June 2010, DPC developed
       an emergency action plan for optimizing the pumping of storm water and drainage for the benefit of
       ORSEC operations, supported by ADM with funding from the Local Authorities Development Program
       (PRECOL). This plan has enabled the emergency pumping system to be installed in the outskirts of Dakar,
       based on surveys and watershed studies.
       The creation of the Ministry for Restructuring and Managing Flood Zones (MRAZI) in 2012 aimed
       to promote consistent flood management, based on mobilizing all stakeholders to jointly develop
       a real strategy for flood risk management. The role of MRAZI is also to facilitate flood management
       and prevention, by bringing stakeholders together to reduce negative impacts and to coordinate the
       implementation of action plans resulting from the national strategy 23 .The National Flood Committee
       (NILC), originally established after the 2009 floods under the aegis of the Ministry of Housing and
       Construction, was placed under the supervision of the Ministry of Water and Sanitation in 2012 and is
       coordinated by MRAZI since 2013. Actions for mitigating the impact of floods are also supervised by the
       Prime Minister through meetings that increase in frequency with the approach of the rainy season. These
       meetings chaired by the Prime Minister were held on a weekly basis from January 2013 to September
       2013 to monitor progress in the implementation of PDGI.
       Since the MRAZI was established in 2012, it hosts the program for “construction of social housing to
       prevent slums” (PCLSLB) and is committed to implementing the “Jaxaay plan” (in Keur Massar), building
       2,000 social houses on 68 hectares in Tivaouane Peul (1,200 social housing units are scheduled for
       construction on 39 hectares), and constructing 800 units on 29 hectares in Niaga (department of
       Rufisque, Dakar region). As of March 13, 2014, the implementation rate of the project aimed at building
       18	
             Decree N° 99-172 of March 4, 1999.
       19	
             ORDER N° 04387 /M.MT/DPC of JUNE 22, 1999.
       20	
             It can equally appoint any person or institution whose support is deemed necessary.
       21	
             ORDER N° 4386/MINT/DPC OF JUNE 4, 1999.
       22	
             DRM, Country Note, December 2009.
       23	
             MRAZI presentation at the stakeholder consultation workshop held on February 17, 2014.



9 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
2,000 social houses was 86 percent 24 . The MRAZI also plans to establish a National Flood Prevention
Office (ONPI) to coordinate the management of storm water drainage systems. The draft decree for
establishing the Office is following the administrative process for approval.
The Ministry of Water and Sanitation also has an important role in flood prevention policy. The
national office for sanitation in Senegal (ONAS) and the sanitation department implement construction
projects, rehabilitate and maintain drainage systems. Both offices are promoting the development of
an institutional framework and financial viability, with technical and financial support from PROGEP,
the EU and BAD.
The Ministry of Urban Development and Housing (MUH) maintains the prerogative in matters of urban
planning and use of land. Given one of the major causes of urban flooding in Senegal is uncontrolled
urban growth, this ministry is also involved in flood management policies.
To address more specific needs arising from disasters, other specialized institutions may be involved
in disaster response and recovery: these include the Food Security Commission; ANACIM or the civil
aviation agency for security at airports; ANAMS for meteorology; ARSN for radio protection and nuclear
security; and HASSMAR created after the sinking of boat Le Joola in 2000 to manage maritime security.
Other semi-public agencies, such as SENELEC (the national electric utility), SONES and SDE (water
utilities), the Autonomous port of Dakar, ICS (chemicals), SAR (refinery), HAALSS (airport authority),
AGEROUTE (road works authority), APIX (invest promotion), La Nouvelle Prévention Routière (NGO for
road accident prevention), CETUD (urban transport) are other central level actors for DRM.
At the local and decentralized level, there are regional and auxiliary commissions of emergency
preparedness, respectively chaired by Regional Governors and Department Prefects.
Associations of women, youth, and flood prevention tend to represent civil society. These non-
governmental organizations (NGOs) invest in advocacy and local level monitoring during crisis and
recovery periods. These actors are often involved in the planning and implementation of projects funded
and managed by afford-mentioned organizations.
Last but not least, the local authorities are key decentralized stakeholders of the DRM framework,
including flood management. Their capacities in terms of human, financial and logistical resources are
very limited however and hinder their prevention and planning.
This institutional framework has been constructed from various emergency response plans, tools, training
on risk awareness and crisis funding mechanisms.
Operationally, several bodies suffer overlaps of mandates and competencies, in terms of risk reduction
and disaster management. This results in fragmented and competitive disaster response; whereas
frameworks based on complementarity and comparative advantage would encourage better organization
of activities. A tendency for isolated acts of flood management also duplicates mechanisms, instead of
                     25



building upon those already established in the common disaster risk management framework (national
platform for disaster risk reduction, early alert system, national plan for emergency, etc.)




24	
      MRAZI.
25	
      Mare Lo, National Consultation on the Framework for Action Post-2015 to reduce disaster risk, UNISDR, CAH, September 2013.



                                                                            Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   10
       THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
       The legal framework to support DRM policy in Senegal should be clarified and strengthened, as much as
       that of flood management, even if the creation of a ministry exclusively dedicated to flood management
       helped improve coordination. However, the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders, especially
       those of other ministries, should be clarified in the flood management policy of the government.
       In the meantime, the DRM framework exists only in the form of disparate legislation, decrees and resolutions
       supported by different sectors without clear connections to DRM objectives (let alone DRM policy) and
       of which the oldest date back to 1964. The legal architecture is abundant with texts, of which most are
       ignored, not applied, or are obsolete. There are also gaps in the legislation on land use, transportation and
       use of hazardous materials, management of flood risks, preparation, response, rehabilitation and post-
       disaster reconstruction.
       Hence the relevance of the main recommendations taken from an assessment of national platforms for
       DRR, under the aegis of UNDP in May 2008, in line with the adoption of legal text concerning prevention
                                                                            26



       strategy and risk management. Indeed, in the absence of binding documents, the overlapping mandates of
       some sector ministries create inertia starting at highest political level. The existence of a legal framework
       would help develop new legislation, planning instruments or revise existing laws overall.

       DEVELOPMENT PARTNERS
       Flood management and DRR policies in Senegal have the support of partners in multilateral cooperation. This
       includes the European Union, World Bank, Islamic Development Bank, African Development Bank, and United
       Nations agencies (FAO, WFP, UNOCHA UNICEF, UNFPA, WHO) among multilateral partners. France, Japan,
       Norway, the Netherlands, the United States and Spain also provide bilateral support to the Government of
       Senegal, either through contributions during emergencies or funding of capacity building projects.
       Non-governmental organizations have supported emergency response or implement community resilience
       projects. Caritas, Oxfam, World Vision Senegal, Plan International, Save the Children, Aid Transparency,
       Christian Relief Services, French Islamic Relief, and SOS Children’s Village are the most active NGOs in this
       area. The Senegalese Red Cross – with the support of USAID, DFID, SNU, Irish Cooperation, Spanish Red
       Cross and Japanese Red Cross – has been able to launch a project for “strengthening resilience of the people
       affected by the 2012 floods” in Sinthiou Garba (Matam region, Northern Senegal) with UNDP funding. This
       project aims to “reduce the impact of floods of 2012 among vulnerable households”, particularly in the most
       affected regions of Matam, Kaffrine and Diourbel .                          27




       COORDINATION PLATFORM WITH INTERNATIONAL AGENCIES
       The national platform for DRR is an advisory and consultative body for stakeholders in risk and disaster
       management, including floods. It integrates international partners who are involved in DRR strategies and
       policy, and is coordinated by the Prime Minister’s office. DPC acts as the secretariat. In practice, this platform
       has barely functioned since its creation in 2008; coordination with international partners takes place within
       respective sectors rather than for DRR development. For example, networks of development partners in
       fields such as environment, water and sanitation, health, agriculture, meet regularly to share experiences
       and opinions on the sector policies and formulate recommendations to the government ministries.

       26	
             National Program for Risk and Disaster Management Support Project (DPC-UNDP). Institutional Analysis of National Platforms and referents organs of Risk and
             Disaster Risk Reduction - Third part: Summary of lessons learnt by Country, May 2008.
       27	
             UNDP Senegal news on website, “UNDP and Senegalese Red Cross strengthen resilience among flood victims in Sinthio Garba in 2012, May 23, 2013.




11 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
It is also important to recall here, as mentioned in the preceding section, that the Government of Senegal
organized a donor roundtable in December 2012 to raise funds for PDGI.

INVOLVEMENT OF THE PRIVATE SECTOR
Private sector involvement in DRR policy in Senegal has not been specifically assessed, although some
major industrial risks such as the transport of hazardous materials are mainly generated by private sector
activities. Meanwhile, the State is often obliged to use the services of the private sector during emergency
and recovery periods, including post flood situations, for the provision of equipment or services to build
or repair infrastructure such as drainage systems, roads, schools, health centers. Like Senegalese citizens
both within and outside of the country, the private sector also participates in acts of national solidarity
during emergencies – even if they are not always well coordinated nor recorded. Information in this area
is rarely available or accessible.




                                                  Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   12
       PROGRESS AND INNOVATIONS IN FLOOD MANAGEMENT AND
       RECOVERY POLICY
       PROGRESS IN SUSTAINABLE FLOOD MANAGEMENT INITIATED IN SEPTEMBER 2012
       The priority actions, which followed the Presidential Council meeting of September 19, 2012, have been
       fully or partially implemented. Progress to date is summarized in Table 2.

       Table 2: Progress on priority actions identified by Government in September 2012
        Priority actions of the government validated during the       State of implementation of the priority action plan
        Presidential Council of September 19, 2012                    (as of February 2014)
        1. Implement a special program over ten years                 PDGI 2012-2022 was adopted and initiated.
        2. Prepare in-depth technical studies for more accurate       Studies conducted under PROGEP and ONAS (for drainage
        financial calculations of PDGI, initially estimated at 766    work). Further evaluation studies of the overall budget of
        billion FCFA.                                                 the PDGI have not yet been achieved.

        3. Mobilize emergency funds required for storm                Emergency phase partly funded from the State budget
        water drainage.                                               (2013 Finance Act).
        4. Organize a donor round table in December 2012 to           Funding of the emergency phase was partially completed
        mobilize funding for PDGI.                                    through government financing and the donor round table.
                                                                      Since 2012, the state continues to allocate 10 to 20 billion
                                                                      FCFA (equivalent to USD 20 and 40 million) in its annual
                                                                      budget for funding PDGI.
                                                                      Complementary funding is still sought for its short, medium
                                                                      and long-term projects.
        5. Update the National Land Use Plan before 2013 rainy season In progress
        6. Finalize urban development master plans (PDU)              PDU are being developed in some municipalities, like
        of locations by June 2013 and align with Drainage             Pikine and Guediawaye, with PROGEP financing.
        Master Plans.                                                 Master plans for storm water drainage in Guediawaye and
                                                                      Pikine were finalized in May 2012 under PROGEP, that of
                                                                      Dakar was updated in 2013 by ONAS and that of Kaolack
                                                                      (integrated PDD, storm water, waste water, solid waste)
                                                                      since 2013 with JICA support.
                                                                      19 other plans for drainage and sanitation – some of
                                                                      which include storm water management – exist for regions
                                                                      outside of Dakar.
        7. Involve local authorities in PDGI implementation.          In 2013, MRAZI initiated community forums and set up a
                                                                      network of local observers who are given small emergency
                                                                      equipment and materials.


13 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
  Priority actions of the government validated during the                           State of implementation of the priority action plan
  Presidential Council of September 19, 2012                                        (as of February 2014)
  8. Revitalize social housing policy with greater involvement The revitalization of the social housing policy
  of the private sector, Deposit and Consignment Office,        (which depends on MUH) has not yet started, as
  Social Security Office and the national pension fund (IPRES). no budget is available.
  9. Establish a National Observatory on flooding.                                  In progress. The draft decree establishing the Observatory
                                                                                    was transmitted to the General Secretary of the Government.
  10. Establish an inter-departmental coordination        Periodic meetings regularly coordinated by the Prime
  mechanism for flood management under the supervision of Minister and MRAZI.
  the Prime Minister’s Office by mid-November 2012.


Five of the actions in the above table (1, 3, 4, 8 and 10) are further detailed in the following:

Action 1 - Implementation a special program over ten years
In order to find a sustainable solution to recurrent flooding, the Government of Senegal initiated the Ten-
Year Flood Management Program for 2012 to 2022, known as PDGI, which was approved at the Presidential
Council of September 19, 2012. This program was managed by MRAZI, with an estimated cost of 767 billion
FCFA, and includes a 2012-2013 emergency phase, a short-term phase in 2014-2016 and a medium and
long-term phase 2017-2022 (see Table 3 below).
Thus, it can be seen that the highest level of government is now committed to searching for sustainable
solutions to recurrent flooding. This program has four main components:
        1.	 resettlement of flood victims in furnished and equipped areas, providing an improved
            living environment;
        2.	 installation of storm water drainage;
        3.	 restructuring of urban areas and flood-prone districts;
        4.	 improvement of land-use planning policy and development of new urban centers.

Table 3: PDGI’s short, medium and long-term phases28
                                                            Time
  PDGI's phases                                                                                     Amount (in billion FCFA)
                                                           Horizon
                                                                            Total                     2012                                2013
  Emergency phase                                        2013-2014          66,375                                  5415                            60,960
  Territory planning                                                           500                                                                         500
  Urban restructuring and relocation                                        17,000                                 4000                              13000
  Management of storm water                                                 48,875                                  1415                             47,460
                                                                            Total              2014                     2015                    2016
  Short-­term Phase                                      2014-2016        250,604                    75,018                  88,225                      87,361
  Territory planning                                                          2500                    10,00                      750                       750
  Urban restructuring and relocation                                        86,301                   21,576                   21,576                     43,151
  Management of storm water                                               161,801                    52,442                  65,899                  43,460

28	
      Republic of Senegal, FAE, EAA, Background paper for the Round table of donors to finance the Ten Year Flood Management Program, programs for the
      integrated management of water resources and access to drinking water and sanitation, 2012.
                                                                            Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014      14
                                                                     Time
         PDGI's phases                                                                                        Amount (in billion FCFA)
                                                                    Horizon
                                                                                     Total         2017         2018         2019        2020        2021         2022
         Medium and Long Term Phase                               2017-2022        450009          71494        81858        81954      69934 75684              69084
         Territory planning                                                            2500           500          500          500         500         250           50
         Urban restructuring and relocation                                         380385         63398        63398        63397       63397       63397        63397
         Management of storm water                                                    67124          7596       17961        18056        6036       12036         5436
         TOTAL                                                    2012-2022         766988        151927 231043 169315                  69934 75684              69084

       Action 3 - Mobilization of emergency funds for storm water drainage
       The total cost of the emergency plan for combating floods has been estimated at 66.375 billion FCFA, broken
       down as follows:

                                               Table 4: Total cost of the Emergency plan
                                                                                                                  (in billion FCFA)
                                                Territorial planning                                                               500
                                                Management of storm water                                                      48,875
                                                GEP-ONAS                                                                     (30,100)
                                                GEP- Matrix of Priority Actions - Suburb                                       (5,150)
                                                Reassignment of boreholes, Thioroye - SONES                                   (6,000)
                                                Matrix of Priority Actions-GNSP/MINT                                           (7,625)
                                                Urban restructuring and relocation                                             17,000
                                                Total cost                                                                     66,375

       The government was able to mobilize most of the emergency phase funding, which enabled drainage work
       as well as the building of housing units in Dakar, Touba, Bambey and Matam. This work had a positive
       impact during the 2013 rainy season, suggesting that the drainage solutions have been effective. The
       government has also included in the MRAZI budget an additional 11 billion FCFA (USD 22 million) for
       additional drainage work in preparation for the 2014 rainy season.

       Action 4 - The organization of a round table of donors
       The donor round table was held on December 12, 2012 with the financial support of the African Water Facility
       (FAE). This meeting brought together technical and financial partners, such as the French Development
       Agency (AFD), the African Development Bank (AfDB), the Islamic Development Bank (IDB) the European
       Union (EU), the World Bank, the West African development Bank, the Japan International Cooperation
       Agency (JICA), the West African Economic and Monetary Union (ECOWAS), and diplomatic representation
       to meet with the Government of Senegal . It helped confirm (i) the financing of 17 billion FCFA (USD 34
                                                                        29



       million) by the Islamic Development Bank for social housing, and (ii) World Bank funding for drainage works
       planned within the emergency phase of PROGEP.
       In a message to the government during this meeting, donors insisted on the need for an institutional
       and financial viability framework to support operations and regular maintenance of drainage facilities.
       Such mechanisms would need to be financed for efficient and continued rainwater drainage into the sea.
       These donor conditions for additional program funds were accepted by the Government, which has strived

       29	
             Birane Hady Cissé, “Sénégal-Assainissement. Lutte contre les inondations : le financement de la phase d’urgence bouclé (ministre),” Dakar, 13 déc 2012 (APS).

15 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
since 2012 with the support of PROGEP, to establish the institutional framework as well as funding for the
operation and maintenance of drainage facilities. The funding mechanism for the entire program has not
been clearly defined and stabilized by the government; as a result, the program’s financing gap estimated at
more than CFA francs 700 billion (U.S. $ 1.4 billion) has not yet been resolved. The Government continues
to allocate funds from its own budget and, at the same time, appeal to donors for financial support.
The implementation of reforms needed to sustain what has been achieved should encourage donors to fund
rainwater and flood management. The government’s goal is to establish an entity that is responsible for the
operation and maintenance of drainage facilities by end 2015.

Action 8 - Revitalize the social housing policy
Revitalizing the social housing policy has been entrusted to the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing
(MUH) through the building of 5,000 houses. These works have not started in the absence of a budget, but
is complemented by the housing program for relocating populations living in flood-prone lowland areas.
The program is run directly by the MRAZI, which plans to complete 2,000 houses by the end of the 2014.
The government has planned to create an urban development center in Diamniadio (about 40 kilometers
outside of Dakar), which is expected to both increase opportunities for housing in pre-developed areas and
decongest Dakar whose uncontrolled growth is one of the root causes of flooding.

Action 10 - Creation of an interdepartmental coordination mechanism
An interdepartmental coordination mechanism has been created by the (previous) Prime Minister who
established a weekly coordinating meeting system he used to preside personally to ensure the monitoring
of the implementation of activities of PDGI. Weekly meetings are now coordinated by the MRAZI to monitor
the implementation of the program. Regular meetings are also organized by the Prime Minister’s office
to monitor progress in the implementation of PGDI. A mechanism for coordinating among ministries thus
exists, although more efforts are required to involve and empower government departments concerned
with flood management.

ORGANIZATIONAL INNOVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF THE RECOVERY FRAMEWORK

Ministry for Restructuring and Managing Flood Zones
Creation of the Ministry for Restructuring and Managing Flood Zones (MRAZI) in 2012 is considered a
major political innovation. Such an entity should promote coordination among all stakeholders, in itself
an innovation for the government.

The Ten-Year Program for Flood Management (PDGI)
The PDGI is also considered a big innovation for the government. The recovery framework is illustrated through
the implementation of PDGI, which includes the project for management of storm water and adaptation to
climate change (PROGEP), an innovative and integrated project of sustainable flood management, as well as
ONAS projects for building a drainage network.
In its strategy document, MRAZI set the following priorities for 2013-2014:
         •	 identification of critical flooded areas and the inventory of all affected areas;
         •	 relocation of the populations living in flood ones (low-lying areas, waterways, lake beds
            and pond beds);


                                                   Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   16
                       •	 studies for restructuring and planning of flooded areas;
                       •	 sustainable drainage infrastructure and storage of rain water in priority areas.
       Figure 2 below illustrates PDGI objectives, actions and timetable.

       Figure 2: The Ten-Year Program for Floods Management                                30




                                PDGI IS AN ADAPTED RESPONSE, BEFORE ADDRESSING EMERGENCIES
                                             AND CONSTRUCTING FOR THE LONG TERM
                   Urgent	                                   Short Term	                                                Medium and Long Term
                   2013	2014-2016	                                                                                           2017-2022

              Knowledge for prevention and effectiveness;

                    Inventory                                          Better understanding and mastery of flooded areas



              Relocation of affected populations
                   Emergency
                                                                        Restore value and security through social housing
                   relocation


               Restructuring areas subject to flood
                   Studies for                                                  Development of flood-prone areas
                  restructuring                                        (creating demand for infrastructure and equipment)


               Anticipating and preventing floods

               Drainage and rain                                         Developing spatial planning documents
                 water storage                       Construct sustainable infrastructure for drainage and rainwater storage in cities




       The other strategic objectives in medium and long term of PDGI are:
                       •	 improved knowledge and mastery of flooded areas;
                       •	 relocation of all current and potential victims living in flood zones within ten years;
                       •	 restructuring flood-prone areas for “spontaneous” housing throughout the country;
                       •	 requalification and development of low-lying areas for their integration into the urban landscape;
                       •	 building structurally sustainable storm water drainage and rainwater storage.
       These objectives are implemented today through ONAS and PROGEP, executed by ADM.



       30	
             MRAZI, Policy of management of flooded areas presented to the Advisory Group, Paris Club, February 2014.



17 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
PROGEP, executed by the Municipal Development Agency (ADM) consists of four components:
         •	 Component A: Integration of flood risk in urban planning (USD 3.9 million) divided into three
            sub-components: (i) urban management and development; (ii) institutional capacity building of
            national facilities (particularly DAU, DUA, DSCOS, DPC, ONAS) and the municipality of Pikine
            and Guediawaye; and (iii) development of an integrated program of storm water management
            and climate change adaptation for suburban Dakar, as well as a national strategy of integrated
            management of storm water and adaptation to climate change in larger urban areas.
         •	 Component B: Building and management of drainage facilities (USD55.8 million) consisting
            of two sub-components: investment in drainage facilities, and operational maintenance of
            drainage systems.
         •	 Component C: Community involvement in reducing the risk of floods in urban areas and
            adaptation to climate change (USD 4.4 million) consisting of two sub-components: Advocacy,
            communication and capacity building for community adaptation to flooding and Community
            involvement to reduce flood risks.
         •	 Component D: Coordination, management and monitoring and evaluation of the project
            (USD 8.8 million).
In component B, the project plans the construction of 28 km-long channels for the drainage of rainwater
into the sea, based on the Drainage Master Plan (DMP) of the Departments of Pikine and Guédiawaye. This
DMP is used today to coordinate interventions in the areas of Pikine and Guédiawaye.
The rainwater management project (PROGEP) is being implemented in two phases:
         •	 phase 1: Dalifort and Thiourour basins
         •	 phase 2: Northern Yeumbeul and Mbeubeuss Basins
Phase 1 of the work was divided into (i) priority work carried out from February to December 2013;
and (ii) work launched after February 2014.
Emergency interventions enabled, some 88 hectares of inhabited zones in the districts of Dalifort and
Cheikh Sy (southern Yeumbeul) to be drained, relieving more than 18.500 inhabitants during the 2013
rainy season.
Moreover, PROGEP finances activities to clarify institutional and financial viability mechanisms and the
operational maintenance of nationwide drainage infrastructure, update detailed community plans of Pikine
and Guédiawaye, map flood-prone areas in these zones with a geographic information system (GIS) for
flood prevention, define construction standards for flood-prone areas, and small community projects for
reducing the risk of floods and adapting to climate change.
The total cost of the PROGEP is USD 72.9 million, financed by IDA (USD 55.6 million), the Norwegian
Development Fund (EUR 3 million) and the Government (USD 13,2 million). The project is implemented by
ADM, and a Steering Committee involving all key stakeholders and chaired by the Prime Minister’s office
oversees the preparation and implementation of the project.
PDGI Activities of the National Sanitation Office of Senegal (ONAS):
ONAS is involved in building and rehabilitating drainage facilities in the departments of Dakar, Pikine,
and Guediawaye. The office also builds drainage channels in the secondary cities of Touba, Tambacounda,
Nioro, Kolda and Fatick.



                                                     Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   18
       The main projects conducted by ONAS within the PDGI framework are:
                     •	 Construction of rainwater drainage systems in the CICES-FOIRE and Yoff districts (discharging
                        to the sea and Philippe M. Senghor Dispensary)
                     •	 Drainage of the low-lying areas on national highway 1 (RN1) at the level of Patte D’Oie
                        (e.g. Station ELTON)
                     •	 Construction of rain water drainage systems in the town of Touba
                     •	 Construction of rain water drainage systems in the town of Bambey
                     •	 Rehabilitation and reinforcement of the pumping stations of Grand-Yoff, Bourguiba and the
                        Catchment Area
                     •	 Clearing and development of the catchment area basin
                     •	 Rehabilitation and reinforcement of the existing network and pumping stations and construction
                        of new stations in the regions of Thiès, Kaolack and Saint Louis.
                     •	 Works to rehabilitate and improve stations in Dakar and relocation of the TGBT (general low-
                        voltage panel) of Cambérène
       ONAS succeeded in draining an area of 7639 hectares, and provided protection for nearly 1,460,000 people
       in February 2014. With regard to drainage systems in flood zones, the length of the functional channels
                                31



       increased from 310 km in 2013 to 334 km in February 2014; and the number of pumping stations increased
       from 44 to 67.
       Within Dakar’s drainage master plan, a special focus was placed on developing the niayes (geographical
       depressions subject to flooding) for leisure and recreational activities in addition to the storm water storage
       function. Along the drainage lines around the niayes, a paved road network will be prepared to protect the
       facilities and to facilitate movement in those areas. Moreover, these facilities are anticipated to buffer the
       spread of housing in these areas.

       ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARD MEASURES
       The implementation of PDGI is accompanied by environmental and social safeguard measures. For
       example, under PROGEP, a Policy Framework for Relocation of Populations (CPRP) has been prepared in
       accordance with World Bank operational policy OP/BP 4.12 on indemnities for relocation. The document
       includes guidelines for compensation and measures for resettlement assistance, as well as provisions for
       consultation and grievance redressal.
       An Environmental and Social Management Framework (CGES) as well as Environmental and Social Impact
       Studies (EIES) have also been prepared and validated by national procedures, under the auspices of the
       Environment Department. These instruments help identify the environmental and social impacts likely to be
       generated by the activities of the project and define a mitigation plan for the project. These environmental
       and social safeguards instruments have been reviewed and validated by stakeholders, under the coordination
       of the Environment Department, which has the prerogative to validate such documents and monitor the
       implementation of environmental and social safeguards measures prescribed therein. The latter has been
       subject to consultation with affected communities and is publically accessible on the websites of PROGEP
       and the World Bank via “Infoshop”.

       31	
             ONAS.




19 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
A COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION PLAN
Through PROGEP, the ten-year management plan incorporates community activities for risk reduction.
Component C is for “community involvement in the prevention of flood risk and adaptation to climate change,” as
discussed in section (b) above. It includes information, education and communication activities for mitigating
community-level risks. It also includes community initiatives for maintenance of drainage facilities, and the
preservation of areas that are “off limits” for construction due to flood risk. The Community dimension of
flood prevention policy in the PROGEP can be extended to other areas, because their involvement in flood
prevention is the first measure of success and sustainability in this type of program.
The PDGI does not yet include specific strategies for community participation in the implementation of its
program. Local authorities were often invited to share with the Ministry the issue of flood management,
but without a formal partnership for community involvement in the implementation of PDGI . A community                                 32



engagement strategy could be included in the PDGI to capitalize upon their experiences in flood prevention
and mitigation, as well as the small community projects of PROGEP. This would undoubtedly help assure active
community involvement in reaching PDGI objectives, including drainage, maintenance and preservation of
non-aedificandi (off limit) areas.




32	
      Interview with a technical advisor to the Minister for Restructuring and Managing Flooded Areas (MRAZI).

                                                                             Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   20
       RECOVERY FINANCING
       NATIONAL COMMITMENT AND PARTNERSHIPS
       The State contributes substantially to the funding of post-flood recovery, and the PDGI budget also seems,
       for the moment, to be provided largely by the Government. These funds are invested in drainage, housing
       and emergency operations, and are centrally managed by MRAZI.
       Technical and financial partners have allocated credits for the financing of PDGI projects, namely the World
       Bank (USD 55.6 million) for PROGEP, the Islamic Development Bank (USD 38 million USD) for social housing
       of displaced population groups, and the French Development Agency, AFD (USD 19 million) for redirecting
       rain and storm water in flood zones of Pikine, and the European Investment Bank, BEI (EUR 800,000)
       for updating the master water and sanitation plans for Dakar, Pikine and Guediawaye. Grants were also
       received from the Nordic Development Fund (EUR 3 million) for PROGEP, GFDRR (USD 1.1 million) for the
       program for disaster risk management and climate change adaptation (PGRC-ACC), UNDP (USD 700,000)
       in 2007 to finance the national program for disaster risk management (PAPNGRC), and JICA which donated
       materials for emergency response to the Senegalese Fire Brigade and DPC, as well financing the rain water-
       waste water-sanitation master plan for the town of Kaolack.

       Table 5: Technical and Financial Partners
                                                                               Amount of Financing
        Partner Agency                            Area of financing
                                                                               Credits               Gifts in-kind
        World Bank                                PROGEP                       USD 55.6 million
                                                  Social housing for flood
        Islamic Development Bank                                               USD 38 million
                                                  victims
                                                  Redirecting rain and storm
        French Agency for Development             water in flood zones of      USD 19 million
                                                  Pikine
                                                  Updating water &
        European Investment Bank                                               EUR 800,000
                                                  sanitation plans in Dakar
        Norwegian Development Fund                PROGEP                                             EUR 3 million
        GFDRR                                     PGRC-APP                     USD 1.1 million
        UNDP                                      PAPNGRC                      USD 700,000
                                                  Master water & sanitation
        JICA                                                                   Value not specified   Value not specified
                                                  plan for Kaolack




21 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
The financing of emergency rescue operations and humanitarian assistance is largely provided by the State,
although assistance and contributions (cash and in supplies) has also been received from technical and financial
partners (United Nations agencies, IFRC and the Senegalese Red Cross, World Bank, diplomatic missions,
NGOs, International Civil Defense Organization), local authorities, the private sector, and Senegalese citizens.
The information obtained from the Directorate of Economic and Financial Cooperation in the Ministry of
Finance reveals the absence of budget provisions made a priori for emergency assistance operations. In the
event of a disaster, budgets are reallocated to help finance emergency assistance; unfortunately the funds
are often received one to two months after the outbreak of the disaster and this reduces the effectiveness
and speed of the assistance provided to the population, as was the case in 2012. The management of floods
in 2013 was more pro-active since part of the budget for emergency response was received by MRAZI prior
to the start of the 2013 rainy season.
The procedures for disbursement and spending of public emergency funds are complex, and reduce the
effectiveness of interventions on the ground. It should be noted that the Ministry of Interior has recently
adopted a manual of procedures for the mobilization and use of funds for emergency operations. This manual,
validated by ministerial decision, should help to clarify the roles and responsibilities in accounting operations,
procedures and expedited access to emergency funds. This experiment could be replicated by the ministry in
charge of flood management, which currently centralizes the use of emergency funds for flood management.
With regards to insurance for disaster victims, the Senegalese government joined the initiative of the
Pan-African Mutual Insurance Company for disaster risk management (African Risk Capacity) to benefit from
agricultural insurance premiums in the event of severe drought. The mechanism is being formulated and needs
more regulation and support at top decision-making levels in order to be operational in the near future.
Senegal lists all the projects and programs of the government in the Triennial Public Investment Program
(PTIP) for a period of three years.
Within the sub-sector of urban water and sanitation, an investment program amounting to 129.171 billion
FCFA is planned to generalize access to potable water, improve access to sanitation services, and efficiently
                          33



manage flood risks. The emergency phase of PDGI (storm water management sector) and PROGEP are
                                   34



part of twenty projects planned in this section of the PTIP.

TRANSPARENCY, ANTI-CORRUPTION MEASURES AND PROCUREMENT
Senegal is a country where both civil society and the private sector are involved in monitoring public
procurement. Representatives of the government, the private sector and the civil society manage the Public
Procurement Regulatory Agency (ARMP), established in early 2008, on a tripartite basis. It is responsible
for policy definition, reviewing the claims of bidders and audits on procurement.
The government has significantly improved control over public procurement to comply with the Guidelines of
ECOWAS markets and international standards. It has also developed standard bidding documents for national
and international calls for tender. Various measures for building private sector and donor confidence are being
implemented within the national financial management system. These actions reflect the commitment of the
Senegalese government to modernize and ensure the transparency in procurement operations.
The work initiated for the emergency phase of PDGI required the use direct contracting with several types
of markets to enable rapid action and impact on affected populations. Better PGDI business planning
(including PROGEP) should reduce direct contract agreements in the future, to give greater flexibility to the
State, especially in negotiations of contracts with selected companies.
33	
      Distributed as follows: 2014: 33.001 billion FCFA, or 25.6 percent; 2015: 47.9 billion FCFA, or 37.1 percent; 2016: 48.2 billion FCFA, or 37.3 percent. On this
      funding, 120 billion FCFA are received, or 92.9 percent and an amount of 9.1 billion FCFA, or 7.1 percentis being negotiated.
34	
      PTIP (Triennial Public Investment Program) 2014-2016.

                                                                                Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014        22
       MANAGEMENT AND MONITORING OF RECOVERY OPERATIONS
       THROUGH PDGI
       COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES
       It is difficult to identify a formal communication strategy within the flood management policy of Senegal.
       PDGI does not yet have a communication strategy; the plans for information-education-communication on
       DRM in general are not sufficiently developed and operational on the ground. Nonetheless, the Senegalese
       media has become more developed and diversified in recent years, and the sector plays an important
       communication role, especially in times of disaster. Public opinion is regularly informed in times of disaster
       by both State-owned and private media.
       This press played a significant role in the national solidarity campaign launched after the 2012 floods.
       Indeed, the telethons organized to assist disaster victims resulted in the collection of substantial funds.
       However, the media could be more involved in prevention activities – such as educating citizens about
       their roles and responsibilities in risk prevention and promoting a culture of risk management. The media
       today do not sufficiently deal with these prevention and communication aspects, despite the existence of a
       journalist-based disaster risk reduction network within the national DRR platform.

       REPORTING, MONITORING AND EVALUATION
       At national level, the reporting, monitoring and evaluation system often depends upon technical
       and steering committees of programs and projects. These committees generally regroup all the key
       institutional stakeholders.
       It is observed however that PDGI projects (including PROGEP), in addition to being provided with technical
       and steering committees, are monitored at the highest level, by the offices of the President of the Republic
       and Prime Minister. Since early 2014, a results framework has been set up within the Emerging Senegal Plan
       (PSE), to monitor the accomplishments of priority projects, which include PDGI and the DRM project. The
       system has World Bank backing, and is managed by the Office of Organization and Methods (BOM) within
       the Presidency. A coordinator for PSE monitoring was appointed in March 2014. This Office is an alert
       mechanism to help make mid-course corrections in the implementation of the 27 projects and 17 reforms
       around which the PSE is structured.
       MRAZI had been regularly monitoring PDGI project implementation. However PDGI’s overall monitoring-
       evaluation system could be strengthened by the preparation of a program document that includes a clear
       results framework for all PDGI-related projects.



23 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
ASSESSMENT OF CONSULTATIONS WITH STAKEHOLDERS

This part presents the results of consultations that were held collectively and individually with a variety of
flood management stakeholders in Senegal.
A consultation meeting with key actors was organized on February 17, 2014, at the offices of the World Bank
in Dakar. This one-day workshop provided the opportunity to present the initiative for preparation a guide
for disaster recovery frameworks based on case studies. The case of Senegal is interesting for the country’s
experience in flood prevention and recovery policies. The workshop was attended by representatives of
ministerial departments, NGOs, community-based organizations, and local communities (see annex 1). The
consultations were broadened and completed by individual discussions targeting expertise in flood prevention
and management and, in particular, those who did not participate in the workshop (also in annex 1).
These discussions shed light on the relevance and effectiveness of the policy adopted by the Senegalese
government to manage floods, and the perceptions of stakeholders with regard to persisting shortcomings
and gaps.

RELEVANCE AND EFFECTIVENESS OF FLOOD PREVENTION AND RECOVERY POLICY
Efforts deployed by the government to manage floods has led to notable progress, as characterized by
the following:

(i) At the institutional level
    A.	 The establishment of a national framework to coordinate the implementation of flood management
        policy in 2010 (National Committee for Flood Management), periodically regroups actors involved
        in flood management (local authorities, services responsible for town planning, sanitation, road
        infrastructure, civil protection etc.). It is a step forward in coordinating the definition of flood
        management strategies. However, this framework should be extended to all actors concerned with
        regional planning, town planning, and rural floods who are not sufficiently involved in a nation-
        wide integrated policy.
    B.	 The creation, in 2012, of a Ministry (MRAZI) specifically dedicated to the implementation of the
        flood management policy, was appropriate for the coordination of governmental policy on flood
        management and the many actors involved, a weakness that had been observed in past policies.
        MRAZI is evidence of the Government’s stated desire to find a sustainable and effective solution
        to recurrent flooding. The ministry in charge of flood management must henceforth strive to

                                                   Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   24
                  (i) strengthen its coordination role of actors involved in the implementation of the PDGI,
                  (ii) develop the overall and strategic vision of the PDGI, and (iii) monitor and evaluate PDGI projects.

       (ii) At the political and strategic level
             A.	 The preparation of PDGI as well an accompanying annual budget is proof that the State of Senegal
                 has the political will to move forward in a sustainable flood management policy. The experiment
                 seems new in sub-Saharan Africa and could serve as an example to other African countries
                 confronted with similar problems of recurrent floods, once these recommendations for optimization
                 are addressed.
             B.	 The policy for restructuring flood zones and relocating the populations living in the low-lying areas
                 is viewed positively by stakeholders, reflecting the government’s objective of vulnerability reduction
                 (Jaxaay and Yakaar). The relocation program should be consistent with the drainage master plans
                 (DMP) that have been implemented or are in progress as they clearly indicates the locations of
                 rainwater storage and/or evacuation systems that should be free of human settlement.
             C.	 The preparation of Drainage Master Plans (DMP) and the construction of rainwater drainage in
                 flood-prone districts have effectively reduced flooding. The construction of these networks where
                 there had been no drainage systems has already had an observable and positive impact in several
                 neighborhoods of Dakar and other regions, in recent years.
             D.	 The implementation of projects for the reorganization of flood-prone zones has improved the
                 quality of life in ‘spontaneous’ districts of Saint Louis and Dakar.
             E.	 On-going implementation of integrated flood management projects such as PROGEP, which seeks to
                 manage floods through an integrated approach, takes into account risk prevention in town planning,
                 the construction of drainage facilities and the involvement of communities.
             F.	 Mapping flood-risk areas and updating the detailed land-use plan with this information. The
                 first generation of detailed land-use plans that include flood risks maps is being developed for
                 Pikine and Guédiawaye. These legal documents, once finalized and validated, will be effective
                 against third parties.

       (iii) Community and private sector involvement
             A.	 Local authorities were able to develop their organizational skills with a view to assisting flood-
                 affected populations during the emergencies. Many of them had to organize themselves for the
                 relocation of their disaster-stricken populations, given as a backing to the limited State means of
                 government. Their crisis management efforts could be made more effective with the development
                 of their capacities to prepare and organize emergency response. This could be supported by the
                 PDGI, at least for the most flood-prone communes.
             B.	 Since 2009, local actors (such as neighborhood and mayors) have become more interested in
                 pooling resources for flood management. Several neighborhood associations have been formed in
                 affected zones, with activities centered on flood management. Most of them are not well organized
                 however and often take ad-hoc action during the rainy season.
             C.	 The effective involvement of local authorities in the implementation of the national emergency
                 plan (ORSEC).
             D.	 The involvement of the private sector, which provides supplementary material and logistical support
                 for the implementation of ORSEC. This outpouring solidarity with disaster victims was particularly

25 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
        remarkable in 2012, when media groups, sensitized public opinion about the needs for assistance
        to disaster victims. In the future, this spirit of solidarity should be better organized in the interest
        of transparency and effective coordination with governmental actions.
This progress, recognized by the stakeholders in flood management, does not yet suffice however for Senegal
to manage flood risks serenely. Efforts are still needed at the institutional, legal and operational levels.

EFFORTS NEEDED TO CONSOLIDATE ACHIEVEMENTS
Efforts made since 2012 to manage floods should be strengthened further. Analysis of these experiences
since 2009 has highlighted several gaps, notably with regard to the preparedness, prevention and recovery
aspects that have not yet been sufficiently addressed to manage future floods.
The discussions identified gaps and efforts that need to be pursued and structured around the following axes:

(i) At the institutional and legal level
    A.	 Lack of clarity in the distribution of roles for implementing PDGI: need for better distribution
        and definition of the roles of each institution, public services and local authorities
         •	 Lack of clarity reduces the effectiveness and efficiency of actions undertaken. It would be
            appropriate for the Government to clarify the roles, and for State structures to be empowered
            and even delegated to implement the sectoral PDGI projects. Through this strategy correction,
            technical expertise can be tapped, capacities in the prevention of flood risks strengthened and
            the sustainability of gains ensured, especially at the national level.
    B.	 Need for coordination of government stakeholders to ensure effective PDGI implementation.
         •	 Senegal’s flood management policy is relevant, but its implementation raises concern especially
            with regard to coordination. Indeed, the actions and initiatives lack synergy; they are dispersed
            and not coordinated, thus reducing the effectiveness policy implementation.
         •	 By way of example, for the implementation of PDGI, MRAZI coordinated a steering committee that
            regrouped some stakeholder organizations, such as the national fire brigade, ONAS, DPC, and
            the Municipal Development Agency. This framework should be extended to all actors concerned
            with flood management, notably, regional planning, town planning, stakeholders in urban,
            rural and hydrological flood management, who do not seem to be sufficiently involved and
            empowered in a national integrated policy.
         •	 The MRAZI should henceforth strive to strengthen its role of (i) coordination of actors involved
            in the implementation of the PDGI, (ii) development of the overall and strategic vision of the
            PDGI as well as (iii) the monitoring-evaluation of projects that form an integral part of the PDGI.
    C.	 Absence of leadership for the broader policy of risk prevention, the management of disasters
        and common tools for DRM at the national level
         •	 DPC is not currently configured to be able to fully assume its role of coordinator and DRM
            policy manager at national level. Common risk and disaster management tools - such as an
            early warning system, a crisis coordination center, the platform for risk prevention and disaster
            reduction, the emergency response plan - should all be developed and kept operational by DPC
            at national level. Most of these mechanisms were defined at the strategic level with the support
            of the project on Risk and Disaster Management and adaptation to Climate Change (PGRC-ACC),
            financed by GFDRR. What remains is to make them operational. Senegal has already agreed
            to finance from its own budget the construction of a new head office for the DPC that would

                                                    Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   26
                       meet international standards. Development partners would be called upon to provide additional
                       support for making the system operational. The creation of an agency in charge of DRM has
                       been recommended within the review of institutional frameworks for DRM in Senegal.
             D.	 Need to update the legal and regulatory framework for flood prevention and more generally,
                 for the prevention of disaster risks
                    •	 The obsolescence of existing legislation attests to the fact that regulations and legislation are
                       not adapted to the real causes of flood, their control mechanisms and prevention policy. This
                       legislation as well as more general risk prevention and disaster management policy should be
                       reviewed and updated for a more effective vulnerability reduction policy.

       (ii) At the political and strategic level
             A.	 Need to capitalize on experiences and studies before launching new initiatives
                    •	 Before launching of any new initiative (risk mapping, among others), the government should
                       capitalize and pool the data and information already available, especially to draw lessons
                       from past experiences. Several institutions have databases that could be shared. MRAZI or
                       the ministry in charge of flood management should consolidate this information in a central
                       database that is accessible at any time. This would enable more accelerated decision-making
                       in post-disaster emergency response and recovery. For example, interesting risk maps exist,
                       including the low-lying suburbs of Dakar and the no-go zones suggested by the Ecological
                       Monitoring Centre (CSE) in 2011, large-scale maps (at a scale of 2/1000th ) drawn by the
                       National Regional Planning Agency (ANAT) as well as maps of no-go zones envisaged within
                       the detailed land use plans financed by PROGEP.
             B.	 Need to strengthen the integrated flood management approach particularly with regard to
                 town and regional planning in the PDGI
                    •	 Regional and town planning need to be taken into account in the policy for flood prevention in
                       the urban areas since they help pre-empt the proliferation of vulnerabilities caused by lack of
                       drainage facilities, misuse of land and failure to make allowance for risks in urban development.
                    •	 The urban master plan and existing detailed land-use plans do not sufficiently integrate the
                       flood risk dimension and are not systematically applied on the ground.
                    •	 Flood management should be conducted in an integrated manner by including risk management
                       in regional planning and town planning, managing rain water/waste water/solid waste,
                       constructing and operating (upkeep and maintenance) of developmental structures for rainwater
                       drainage, and developing community commitment to the reduction of flood risks.
                    •	 The PDGI should develop a component dedicated to the integration of the risk within regional
                       and urban planning, especially tools and mechanisms to “Build Back Better”, which can prevent
                       the repetition of past errors in the future urban areas.
             C.	 Need to formalize and better organize the involvement of local authorities and communities in
                 the implementation of PDGI
                    •	 The involvement of local authorities and communities should be systematic, especially with
                       regard to population displacement, local planning or the development of projects related to the
                       ten-year plan. The conditions of dialogue with these local authorities must be mutually defined,
                       formalized and made operational.


27 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
    •	 Communities have a vital responsibility in the reduction of flood risks and the sustainability of
       investments, namely caring for drainage and preventing blockage by solid waste or pollution by
       wastewater. It would be advisable for PDGI to work with communities to develop local strategies
       for the preservation of no-go areas and maintenance of the drainage systems. These aspects
       do not seem to be sufficiently integrated. The accomplishments of PDGI might be compromised
       unless “soft” measures are developed to ensure that the populations take ownership of the
       drainage systems, fight against urbanization and uncontrolled land-use.
    •	 PROGEP has a component dedicated to community activities that could be used as an
       experimental framework for strategies to be replicated nationally.
    •	 Local authorities are not sufficiently equipped to manage post-disaster recovery. Their technical
       and organizational capacities with regard to preparedness, post-disaster response and recovery
       should be strengthened within the framework of the PDGI.
D.	 Need to integrate river flooding management into PDGI
    •	 PDGI does not sufficiently address risks generated by the river and, in particular, the stakeholders
       in charge of monitoring water resources, the Directorate of Water Resource Management and
       Planning (DGPRE) and its decentralized services. Senegal is affected by both urban and rural
       floods, which touch large cities like Saint-Louis, Tambacounda, Kolda, Kaolack, Fatick. The
       ORSEC Plan in the region of Fatick was launched in 2013 following the overflow of a river
       resulting in the isolation of whole villages in the area for several days. There is need to integrate
       at least the main watersheds of Senegal in PDGI together with DGPRE.
E.	 Need to raise awareness, communication and training in the culture of prevention
    •	 Myths regarding the contents and issues of the prevention policy may delay the effectiveness
       of action. For example, backfill embankments may help settle individual sanitation problems
       but can create more serious problems in the flow of water. Furthermore, embankments made
       with household refuse, which is current practice, results in the waterproofing of the soil. PDGI
       should strengthen activities for raising awareness in the culture of prevention.
    •	 Lack of counseling and psychological support to the affected populations is also identified
       as a source of aggravation of vulnerabilities. PDGI should reinforce emergency response and
       recovery with effective counseling and support.
F.	 Need for an operational mechanism to maintain the drainage systems
    •	 The construction of rainwater drainage networks should go hand in hand with a formal system
       for the operation and maintenance of the facilities, which usually does not exist. There is thus
       the need to ensure that its operationalization is given priority in the current ten-year program.
       Action must be taken to guarantee the financial viability of rainwater drainage and ensure the
       management of drainage channels under construction or finalized.
G.	 Need to ensure that preparatory and emergency response mechanisms remain operational
    •	 PDGI neglects the integration of preparatory and emergency response measures. The country
       needs to ensure that its early warning mechanisms are operational and strengthened; it needs
       preparedness and response, primarily to floods and more generally to natural disasters, assuming
       that sustainable solutions (the construction of rain water drainage in particular) will take several
       years to be realized nation-wide. Since zero risk does not exist, and despite the construction of
       drainage facilities, the country will continue to be vulnerable to extreme events such as the heavy
       rains registered in Dakar on August 26, 2012, which caused enormous damage and left several
       districts under water for several days.
                                               Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   28
                    •	 Post-flood recovery and reconstruction should be the occasion to put in place a meteorological
                       monitoring and reinforced early warning system. The needs of meteorological services should be
                       taken into account within PDGI, in terms of equipment for weather surveillance and staff training.
             H.	 Need to integrate the strategic framework and results framework in one document, to enable
                 monitoring and evaluation of PDGI and its affiliated projects.
                    •	 It is difficult to confirm the existence of an official document that defines global and sectoral
                       strategy, monitoring-evaluation mechanisms, the results framework and the PDGI performance
                       indicators. Such document should be prepared to enable the ministry in charge of flood
                       management to better coordinate, monitor and evaluate the implementation of PDGI.

       (iii) At the financial level
             A.	 Sustainable financial mechanisms need to be established for efficient implementation of PDGI
                    •	 The government has made immense efforts, particularly since 2012, to finance a sustainable flood
                       management policy. However, the system used to raise funds for PDGI does not seem secure or
                       sustainable; the funds are mobilized annually, subject to available budget. A planning horizon and
                       budget of at least three to five years would put program implementation on firm footing.
                    •	 Mobilizing funding in times of crisis is still a long and complicated process. The Ministry of
                       Interior recently prepared and adopted a manual of procedures for the mobilization and use
                       of emergency funds, with the support of GFDRR and implemented by the DPC. This manual is
                       intended to clarify and expedite the procedures for the mobilization and use of funds in case of
                       emergency. It should operate constantly, notably through PDGI in order to improve emergency
                       response. The experience should also be replicated by other structures having recourse to
                       emergency funds, the ideal being however that only one manual with a harmonized content
                       on the mobilization and use of emergency funds is jointly used by all the structures and actors
                       involved in emergency operations.
             B.	 Creation of emergency and recovery fund: ideally dedicated uniquely to emergency assistance
                 in case of a disaster, that could be quickly accessible to emergency stakeholders.

       SUMMARY OF KEY RECOMMENDATIONS RESULTING FROM THE CONSULTATIONS
       The consultations held with diverse actors in the area of risk prevention and recovery provided an opportunity
       to list their recommendations, for government and decision-makers to draw upon in the implementation of
       PDGI and future flood management strategies. These key recommendations already discussed in preceding
       paragraphs are summarized in the table below.




29 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
                                        Nature of                               Responsible Institutions
              Actions
                                         action               Institution                            Responsibility
                                                Very Short Term (6 months)
1. Clarify the roles and
   responsibilities of each
                                                                                     Issue a decree that clearly defines
   state structure and local                            Prime Minister's
                                       Institutional                                 institutional roles and responsibilities
   administration involved                              Office
                                                                                     for PDGI implementation
   in the implementation of
   PDGI activities
                                                                                     Update the decree that created the
2. Support the Ministry in                                                           Ministry for Flood Management (MRAZI),
   charge of flood management                           Presidency and               in function of the above decree and
   in:a) coordination of PDGI                           Prime Minister's             its definitions
   stakeholders; b) development        Institutional    Offices
   of strategic vision for PDGI;                        Ministry for flood
   c) monitoring and evaluating                                                      Introduce operational tools for stakeholder
                                                        management
   PDGI projects                                                                     coordination and PDGI monitoring

                                                        Ministry for flood           Organize preparation of the
                                                        management                   PDGI document
                                                        Water & Sanitation
                                                        Ministry (MHA)
                                                        Ministry for Urban
3. Prepare an integrated document
                                                        Development and
   on PDGI that includes a) the
                                                        Housing (MUH)
   strategic framework and b) a
                                       Policy
   results framework to enable M&E                      Ministry of the      Provide inputs to this PDGI document
   of related projects. Initiate the                    Interior (MINT), for (e.g. activities planned, schedule, costs,
   exercise with all stakeholders                       DPC and Fire Brigade results, etc)
                                                        Ministry of
                                                        Territorial Planning
                                                        and Local
                                                        Administration
                                                        (MATCL)

4. Identify a sustainable financing                                                  Transmit financial needs and plans to MEF
   mechanisms for the ten-year
   program, and secure funding                          Ministry for flood
   for at least 3 to 5 years, to                        management
                                       Financial                                     Program the PDGI budget in a triennial
   enable the ministry in charge of                     Ministry of Economy
   flood management to plan and                                                      cycle to enable the ministry for flood
                                                        and Finance (MEF)            management to improve planning and
   organize drainage construction
   and other PDGI activities                                                         implementation of program components

                                                                                     Finalize institutional mechanisms and
                                                                                     financial viability studies to draft a decree
                                                        MHA                          for government approval
5. Enable the water and sanitation
                                                        MATCL                        Participate in the process for defining
   sector to take charge of drainage   Policy
   construction and maintenance                         Ministère en charge          the above
                                                        des inondations
                                                                                     Catalog existing DRM tools (e.g. early
                                                                                     warning system and emergency plans)

6. Avoid duplication of existing DRM
                                                        Ministry for flood           Catalog existing DRM tools (e.g. early
   tools (e.g. early warning system
                                                        management                   warning system and emergency plans)
   and emergency plans)


                                                         Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   30
                                                         Nature of                          Responsible Institutions
                          Actions
                                                          action              Institution                    Responsibility
                                                                  Short Term (One Year)

         7. Elaborate political and legal
            frameworks for mitigating
                                                                                               Update the national DRR strategy. Conduct
            disaster risk, including 1) a
                                                        Policy         MINT                    a diagnostic study on the legal framework.
            national strategy and 2) a legal
                                                                                               Draft legal framework for DRR.
            framework for DRR, recovery and
            reconstruction

                                                                                               Update urban planning tools to include
                                                                                               risk mapping. Update the national urban
         8. Integrate the challenges of flood                                                  strategy to include risk mitigation.
                                                                       MUH
            management into strategies for              Policy
                                                                       MATCL                   Update tools for urban management
            territorial and urban planning
                                                                                               to include risk mitigation; similarly
                                                                                               update national strategy for territorial
                                                                                               management.
                                                                       Ministry for flood
         9. Public awareness-raising                                   management              Integrate and implement IEC
            and training on the culture of
                                                                       Local                   strategy together
            prevention in the context of PDGI
                                                                       Administrations
                                                                                               Finalize the updating of the operational
                                                                       MINT                    framework of the national emergency
         10. Maintain response mechanisms                                                      plan. Organize annual simulation
             for emergency operations                                  Ministry for flood      exercises. Prepare annual contingency
                                                                       management              plans for flooding with emergency
                                                                                               response stakeholders.

         11. Capitalize on experiences and                                                     Construct and update database on projects,
                                                                       Ministry for flood
             studies by stakeholders before                                                    studies and experiences on risk mitigation,
                                                                       management
             launching new PDGI initiatives                                                    focussing on flood management

         12. Institutionalize simple
              and accessible financial
              mechanisms that enable rapid                             MEF                     Create an emergency recovery fund
              mobilization of funding for
              emergency response

                                                                                               Adopt procedures already approved by
                                                                                               the Minister (and disseminate internally)
                                                                       MINT                    Introduce a procedures manual for
         13. Adopt the procedures manual
             for mobilzing and disbursing                              MEF                     mobilizing and disbursing emergency
             emergency funds, prepared by                                                      funds to all public institutions involved in
                                                                       Ministry for flood      emergency management operations.
             the Ministry of Interior
                                                                       management
                                                                                               Adopt procedures manual already
                                                                                               elaborated by MINT and MEF

         14. Reinforce DPC in its                                                              Ensure progressive approval of the draft
             coordination role to implement                                                    decree that modifies the status of DPC.
             DRM nationally. Make DRM                                                          Ensure that DPC has the budget and human
                                                                       MINT
             more effective and operational                                                    resources necessary for DRM mechanisms.
             by involving all institutional                                                    Coordinate with all stakeholder institutions
             stakeholders                                                                      for DRM at national level



31 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
                                        Nature of                          Responsible Institutions
               Actions
                                         action           Institution                            Responsibility
                                        Medium to long term (1 to 5 years)
                                                                                Extend the functions and capacities of the
15. Strengthen institutional
                                                                                directorate in charge of land monitoring,
    capacity to control the                         MUH
                                                                                control and occupation (DSCOS), with the
    occupation of land
                                                                                possible support of PDGI.

                                                                                Reorganize ONAS by providing human and
16. Ensure that institutions
                                                                                financial resources to maintain drainage
    responsible for drainage and
                                                                                systems around the country. Support the
    water works, such as ONAS and                   MHA
                                                                                sanitation department in its coordination
    the sanitation department, can
                                                                                role to supervise implementation of rain
    also manage the networks
                                                                                water management and sanitation policies.

                                                                                Continue funding ANACIM's capacity-
17. Strengthen the capacity of the
                                                    Ministry of Tourism         building program to strengthen surveillance
     national meteorology agency
                                                    and Air Transport           and data collection around the country,
     (ANACIM) in providing early
                                                    (administrator of           including equipment and the means to
     warning of weather-related
                                                    ANACIM)                     modernize information management and
     disasters
                                                                                analysis for early warning

18. Strengthen the community-based
     approach in PDGI: including
     activities to engage communities
                                                                                Include a component or sub-component
     in flood mitigation and                        Ministry for flood
                                                                                dedicated to local administration and
     preservation of no-go zones, as                management
                                                                                communities within PDGI
     well as maintenance of drainage
     works (as per experiences in
     component C of PROGEP)

19. Implement an integrated
                                                    Ministry for flood
     approach to management
                                                    management                  Jointly implement PDGI through
     of rain/waste water and
                                                                                integrated management of rain/waste
     solid waste to improve                         MHA
                                                                                water and solid waste
     efficiency of investments
     in flood-prone areas.                          MATCL

20. Recognize the challenges of                                                 Integrate river flood mitigation into PDGI
    river flooding along with urban                 Ministry for flood
    floods within PDGI (in terms of                 management                  Strengthen technical capacity of
    water flow and preservation of                  MHA                         the Water Resources Planning and
    water beds)                                                                 Management Department (DGPRE)

21. Develop a communication
    strategy for PDGI activities, as
                                                    Ministry for flood          Prepare and implement
    well as a strategy for sharing
                                                    management                  communication strategy
    information with national and
    local stakeholders




                                                     Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   32
       CONCLUSION
       The conclusions drawn from these consultations reveal that the government of Senegal is resolutely on track
       with regard to flood management, but that adjustments need to be made at the strategic, organizational,
       and financial level to face future rainy seasons.
       The analysis of this proactive policy has shed light on good practices to better anticipate disasters and
       manage recovery. Among these best practices and areas identified for improvement:
       The analysis of this proactive policy helped shed light on good practices and avenues for improvement in
       order to better anticipate disasters and deal with the recovery phases while ensuring the improved efficiency
       of this policy. The identified good practices and avenues for improvement, include the aspects below:

       POLITICAL WILL AFFIRMED IN THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
       The efforts made by the government thus far should be commended, particularly the development and
       implementation -mostly with government funds- of a ten-year program for sustainable flood management,
       estimated at over 700 billion FCFA (USD 1.4 billion) whose implementation is entrusted to an entity at
       ministerial level;
       By choosing to invest up to 400 million FCFA (USD 800,000) for the construction of a new head office for
       the Directorate of Civil Protection to enable the latter to develop DRM activities and tools, the Senegalese
       Government displayed its commitment to promote Disaster Risk Management and, in particular,
       the prevention of floods, as a top development priority. Besides, the DRM, including flood management,
       is an integral part of the Emerging Senegal Plan, which is the government’s priority development
       framework for 2014-2017. DRM is also one of the strategic axes of the National Economic and
       Social Development Strategy (2012-2017.)

       ESSENTIAL INSTITUTIONAL MECHANISMS THAT NEED TO BE READJUSTED FOR
       EFFICIENT COORDINATION
       Public authorities have expressed a genuine desire to put in place an intervention system in response to
       risk prevention and disaster management needs. However, the general observation emerging from analysis
       of the DRR mechanisms in Senegal is that for this institutional tool to be fully effective, the inter-sectoral
       roles for organization and coordination need more clarity.
       Operational processes such as the preparation or updating of prevention plans, the institution of early
       warning systems or the organization of simulation exercises, are all preparedness and recovery mechanisms
       that also need to be systematized and generalized.


33 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
To help strengthen the existing institutional mechanisms in Senegal, several initiatives emerged: the
Project for Disaster Risk Management and Adaptation to Climate Change (PGRC-ACC), financed by GFDRR
and implemented by DPC. This project, in its first phase, will support a national early warning coordination
mechanism, improve emergency preparedness, develop a coordination and crisis management center,
reactivate the national DRR platform and reinforce the status of DPC to enable it to better discharge
its functions of coordination and implementation of DRR policies in Senegal. The second phase of this
project should make the established mechanisms operational. The request for financing is being prepared
for GFDRR.

Regional and urban planning: a priority to be strengthened in the short-term
The construction of rainwater drainage systems and housing to relocate populations living in flood-prone zones
registered substantial progress in 2013 and 2014. However, the regional planning project and the development
of new urban centers require the government’s full attention in the short-term, in order to integrate the global
sustainable flood management strategy and ensure its effective application. In fact, the rules of land-use in
general and urbanization in particular, are vital in DRM and, of course, in flood management.
Beyond ensuring harmonious socio-economic development for the entire country, an enlightened regional
development policy will also better identify the areas prone to disaster risk, such as floods, and thus reduce
exposure and vulnerability.

A NATIONAL COMMUNICATION PLAN FOR EFFECTIVE PREVENTION AND RECOVERY
Disaster risks sensitization and information activities should be stepped up to encourage the adherence of
all stakeholders, including the local population, to flood management policy and development of the culture
of prevention at national level. The preparation and implementation of a national plan for communication
and sensitization on risk prevention should enable actors (locally elected representatives, administrative
authorities, civil society, and private sector) to both enhance their participation in the definition of DRM in
Senegal and to contribute actively to the implementation of more efficient prevention and recovery policies.




                                                    Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   34
       ANNEX 1: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS CONSULTED FOR CASE STUDY

         N°    Name                          Organization                 Title                  Telephone     Email
         1     Mr. Idrissa DIALLO            Réseau des Parlementaires    Député Maire           77.566.0327   Diallo_idy@yahoo.com
                                                                          de la commune
                                                                          d’arrondissement de
                                                                          Dalifort; Président
                                                                          du Réseau des
                                                                          Parlementaires en
                                                                          RRC
         2     Mme. Khady Hel CISSE          Ville de Pikine                                     77.521.6844   Khadyhel@yahoo.fr
         3     Mr. Mamadou MBAYE             Commune d’arrondissement     Maire                  77.544.1119   yarammbaye@yahoo.fr
                                             de Grand Yoff
         4     Mr. Abdoulaye NDAO            Ville de Dakar                                      77.551.1578   ndaoabdoulaye@yahoo.fr
         5     Mr. Mbaye GNING               Union des Associations                              77.200.4188   mbayegsitie@gmail.com
                                             d’Elus Locaux
         6     Mr. Aliou DIOUCK              Mairie de Djeddah            Maire                  77.192.8217   Diouck.aliou@yahoo.fr
                                             Thiaroye Kao
         7     Mr. Serigne Mbacké SOW        Collectif des Associations                          77.233.4123   serignembackesow@gmail.com
                                             pour le Développement                               77.682.6300
                                             de Djiddah Thiaroye Kao
                                             (CADDTK)
         8     Mr. Moussa THIAM              CADDTK
         9     Pr Meissa BEYE                Mairie Ville de Rufisque     1er Adjoint au Maire   77.658.2005   meissa.beye@gmail.com
                                                                                                 70.202.6069
         10    Pr Serigne FAYE               Université Cheikh Anta                              77.411.8395   fayes@ucad.sn
                                             Diop (UCAD)
         11    Mr. Ansoumana BODIAN          Université Gaston Berger                            77.811.7553   ansoumana.bodian@ugb.adm.sn
                                             (UGB)
         12    Mr. Cheikh DIOP               Primature                    Conseiller Technique   33.849.1830   diopsheikh@gmail.com
                                                                          chargé des secteurs    77.740.7892
                                                                          de l’hydraulique,
                                                                          de l’assainissement,
                                                                          de l’environnemt
                                                                          et des mines
         13    Mme. Ndèye Abibatou Lô        Direction Assainissement     Chef de Projet         77.651.6772   lo_abibatou@yahoo.com
               NIANE                         (Ministère Hydraulique et
                                             Assainissement)
         14    Mr. Siny SENE                 Direction Assainissement                            77.420.8418   sinysene85@yahoo.com
                                             (Ministère Hydraulique et
                                             Assainissement)
         15    Mr. Pedre SY                  Office National de                                  77.450.8002   pedre.sy@onas.sn
                                             l’Assainissement du                                               pedresy@yahoo.fr
                                             Sénégal (ONAS/Ministère
                                             de l’Hydraulique et de
                                             l’Assainissement)
         16    Mr. El Hadji Daouda DIOP      ONAS/Ministère de            Chef de Projets        33.859.3531   daouda.diop@onas.sn
                                             l’Hydraulique et de          Travaux Programme      77.569.5797
                                             l’Assainissement             d’Urgence
                                                                          de Lutte contre
                                                                          les Inondations
         17    Mr. Boubacar CISSÉ            DGPRE/MHA                                           77.640.0318   babcisse@yahoo.fr




35 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
N°   Name                    Organization                   Title                    Telephone         Email
18   Mr. Amadou Diouldé      DUA/ MUH                                                77.644.0976       diouldediallo@gmail.com
     DIALLO
19   Mr. Ablaye DIOUF        DUA/MUH
20   Mr. Kadialou TOURÉ      DUA/MUH                                                 77.630.2983       tkadialou@yahoo.fr
21   Mr. Bassirou DIOUF      Direction de la                                         77.633.2293       sbachirmakhtar@yahoo.fr
                             Surveillance et du Contrôle
                             de l’Occupation du Sol
                             (DSCOS/MUH)
22   Mr. Mamadou DIENG       Fondation Droit à la Ville/                             77.431.9866       mdieng14@yahoo.fr
                             Ministère de l’Urbanisme
                             et de l’Habitat
23   Mme. Mame Sokhna        Direction Régionale de                                  77.656.5252       nmamesoxna@yahoo.com
     NDIOUCK                 l’Environnement et des
                             Etablissements Classées –
                             Dakar (DREEC /DK)
                             Ministère de
                             l’Environnement
24   Mme. Maimouna M. Seck   Direction Régionale de         Assistante               77.548.7063       dreecdakar@yahoo.fr
     Mbaye                   l’Environnement et des         Technique
                             Etablissements Classées –
                             Dakar (DREEC/DK)
25   Mme. Aïda Diongue       ANACIM/MTTA                                             77.562.5984       aida.diongue.niang@gmail
     NIANG                                                                           77.740.6324
26   Mr. Sadibou BA          ANACIM/MTTA                                             77.403.823        sadibouba@yahoo.fr
27   Colonel Babacar THIAM   Direction des Transmission     Colonel                  77.332.1294       babacar330@yahoo.fr
                             Forces Armées
28   Mr. Alpha SIDIBE        Ministère de la                Conseiller               77.740.887        vieuxalpha@gmail.com
                             Restructuration et de          Technique n°1
                             l’Aménagement des Zones
                             d’inondations (MRAZI)
29   Mr. Ibra Thioro FALL    MRAZI                          Conseiller Technique     77.740.5889       ibrat.fall@gmail.com
30   Mr. Madické CISSE       MRAZI                                                   77.258.8406       cmadické@yahoo.fr
31   Mr. Dame GAYE           Direction Protection Civile    Directeur                77.529.0982       damaebgaye@yahoo.fr
                             (DPC/MINT)
32   Commandant Cheikh       DPC/MINT                       Adjoint au               33.889.3900       c.tine3@yahoo.fr
     TINE                                                   Directeur/Point          77.529.1417
                                                            focal du MINT
33   Capitaine Aly CISSÉ     DPC/MINT                                                70.6579405        aly6c@yahoo.fr
34   Mr. Abdou Khadre        Ministère de                                            77.514.4690       khadrediatta@yahoo.fr
     DIATTA                  l’Aménagement du
                             Territoire et des
                             Collectivités Locales
                             (MATCL)
35   Mr. Mohamadou Kabir     Agence de Développement        Directeur Général        77.529.3376       pacadem@orange.sn
     SOW                     ADM/MATCL                                                                 dgadm@orange.sn
36   Mr. Cheikhou BALDE      ADM/MATCL                                               77.651.0023       debale2002@yahoo.fr
37   Mr. Pierre COLY         ADM/MATCL                                               77.529.3319       pcoly@admsenegal.org
38   Mme. Marie NDAW         ADM/MATCL                      Directrice Technique     77.644.8337       ndeyemariendaw@gmail.com
39   Mr. Adama GUEYE         ADM/MATCL                                               77.529.3321       adamsgueye@orange.sn
40   Mr. Abdoulaye SAGNA     AGEROUTE                                                77.639.9228       asagna@ageroute.sn


                                                           Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   36
         N°    Name                          Organization                 Title                Telephone      Email
         41    Mr. Cheikh BITEYE             APIX                         Promotion des        77.644.7798    cbiteye@apix.sn
                                                                          Investissements et
                                                                          Grands Travaux
         42    Mr. Bathie SOW                APIX                         Ingénieur            77.740.1477    bsow@apix.sn
         43    Mr. Dominique NDONG           APIX                         Coordonnateur        33.889.4490    dndong@apix.sn
                                                                          Général des
                                                                          Grands Travaux
         44    Mme. Maman COULIBALY          APIX                                              77.474.4150    mcoulibaly@apix.sn
         45    Mr. Ousmane BATHIERY          Centre de Suivi Ecologique                        77.847.3537    ousmane.bathiery@cse.sn
                                             (CSE)
         46    Mr. Malick DIAGNE             CSE                                               77.611.5035    Malick.diagne@cse.sn
         47    Mr. Mare Lo                   Consultant DRR                                    77.639.3035    marecodelo@gmail.com
         48    Mr. Papa Mawade WADE          Wetlands International                            77.644.1210    pmwade@wetlands africa.org
                                             Afrique
         49    Mr. Abdoulaye DIENG           DCEF/MEF
         50    Mme. Batouly LY               MSA/PROGEP                                        77.318.4419    batouly2000@yahoo.fr
         51    Mr. Amadou BOCOUM             MSA/ PROGEP                                       77.503.0124    amadboc9@yahoo.fr
         52    Mr. Boucar DIOUF              MSA/ PROGEP                                       77.946.3343    papeboucardiouf@hotmail.com
         53    Mr. Cheikh Sadibou            ENDA ECOPOP FS/PROGEP                             77.634.6833    cssidibe@hotmail.com
               SIDIBE
         54    Mamadou L. BARRY              ENDA ECOPOP FS/PROGEP                             77451.7783     mlbarry@endaecopop.org
                                                                                                              lamabarry@live.fr
         55    Mme. Sophie BARANES           PNUD/CPR                     Coordinatrice        33.869.2758    Sophie.baranes@undp.org
                                                                          Régionale            77.332.1417
                                                                          Prévention
                                                                          des Crises et
                                                                          Relèvement
         56    Mr. FOURTUNE                  Union Européenne             Chargé de
                                                                          programme
                                                                          – section
                                                                          infrastructure
         57    Christophe VALINGOT           DG ECHO Bureau Régional      Coordinateur         77.639.4168    christophe.valingot@echfield.
                                             Afrique de l’Ouest           Régional du                         eu
                                                                          Secteur Eau et
                                                                          Assainissement
         58    Mr. Mahecor NDIAYE            BAD                                                              m.h.ndiaye@afdb.org
         59    Mr. Ibrahima Laye             Croix Rouge Sénégalaise      Responsable GRC      77.352.6189
               THIOME                        (CRS)
         60    Mme. Emma BELGASMI            Bureau de Coordination du                         33.859.6703    emma.belgasmi@undp.org
                                             Système des Nations Unies
         61    Mme. Maria MASULLO            OCHA                                              77.740.9526    masullo@un.org
         62    Mme. Isabelle FORGE           Banque Mondiale /GFDRR       Senior DRM                          iforge@worldbank.org
         63    Mme. Ndèye Fatou              Banque Mondiale              Consultante          77.636.7300    asguey@orange.sn
               GUEYE                                                                                          ndatou2007@hotmail.com
         64    Mme. Isabelle Céline          Banque Mondiale /GFDRR       Spécialiste en       33.859.4115    ikane@worldbank.org
               KANE                                                       Gestion des
                                                                          Risques et des
                                                                          Catastrophes
         65    Mme. Reiko NIIMI              Banque Mondiale /GFDRR       Case Study Leader    202.473.3817   rniimi@worldbank.org


37 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
Country Case Study Series | Guide for Disaster Recovery Frameworks | August 2014   38
39 Senegal: Urban Floods Recovery and Reconstruction Since 2009
