            INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR




COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE




           PDNA GUIDELINES VOLUME B
CONTENTS
n ABBREVIATIONS	1

n INTRODUCTION	2

n ASSESSMENT PROCESS	                                     3

n BASELINE INFORMATION	                                   4

n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS	                         7

n ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER	    9

n ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT	                          10

n CROSS-SECTORAL COORDINATION AND CROSS-CUTTING THEMES	   11
  IN COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE

n SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY	                               13

n ANNEXES 	                                               20

	
  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
         AIDS Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome         TOR Recovery Strategy
          BBB Build Back Better                            UN Terms of Reference
          BOP Balance of Payments                     UNAIDS United Nations
          CBO Community-based Organizations
                                                        UNCT Joint United Nations Programme on
         CSO Civil Society Organizations                     HIV/AIDS
        DALA Damage and Loss Assessment                 UNDP United Nations Country Team
         DRM Disaster Risk Management
                                                       UNDAC United Nations Development Pro-
         DRR Disaster Risk Reduction                         gramme
           EU European Union                           UNDAF United Nations Disaster Assessment
          GBV Gender-based violence                          and Coordination
         GDP Gross Domestic Product                   UNOSAT United Nations Development Assistance
       GFDRR Global Facility for Disaster Reduction          Framework
              and Recovery                              WASH United Nations Operational Satellite
          GIS Geographical Information Systems               Applications Programme
          HCT UN Humanitarian Country Team                WB Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
          HDI Human Development Index                    WHO World Bank
          HIV Human Immunodeficiency Virus                PRA World Health Organization
        HRNA Human Recovery Needs Assessment
           IDP Internally Displaced Person
           IFIS International Finance Institutions
         INEE Inter-Agency Network for Education in
              Emergencies
         MDG Millennium Development Goals
        MDTF Multi-Donor Trust Fund
         NGO Non-Government Organization
        PDNA Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
        PLHIV People Living with HIV and AIDS
         PRSP Participatory Rural Appraisal
         RBPF Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
            RF Results-Based Planning Framework
            RS Recovery Framework




1 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  INTRODUCTION
  This guide is intended to support and facilitate post disaster recovery of community infrastructure with particular
  emphasis on:

          •	 Systematic assessment of the nature, type and extent of the disaster’s effect on the community
             infrastructure in the affected regions;

          •	 Determination of the consequences on the community infrastructure, the aggregate macroeco-
             nomic and human development levels of the country; and

          •	 Determination of a recovery and reconstruction strategy that is based on community participation.




2 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  ASSESSMENT PROCESS
  SECTOR OVERVIEW
  Community infrastructure primarily refers to small scale basic structures, technical facilities and systems built at
  the community level that are critical for sustenance of lives and livelihoods of the population living in a commu-
  nity. These are low-cost small-scale infrastructures built over time through community-led initiatives according
  to the needs and aspirations of the community population. These micro infrastructures are socially, economically
  and operationally linked with community lives and livelihood options, ensure basic services to its population and
  are thus conceived as critical lifelines for survival of the community.

  Community infrastructures, because of being less robust in their design, are usually subjected to severe damage
  by any natural event of reasonable magnitude or intensity. These small-scale infrastructures represent a weaker
  segment of the assets available at the local level, making the community more vulnerable to the challenges of
  disasters. The conditions are worse for urban community infrastructures that are built in and around slums and
  informal settlements.

  Community Infrastructure is developed by the actors of informal sector, through community-led and non-gov-
  ernment-funded initiatives according to the needs and aspirations of the population in the community. Often,
  these structures have been built in isolation from planned government programs and disconnected from the
  formal sector’s development initiatives. community infrastructures are not supported by regulatory mecha-
  nisms such as building codes and construction regulations.

  The types of infrastructure are extremely diverse and vary from community to community depending on
  geo-physical, socio-cultural and economic factors that influence the lives and livelihoods of the population in
  a community. Therefore, estimation of damage, changes in production flows and determination of recovery
  options require special skills and deeper understanding of geo-physical settings and socio-political dynamics of
  the affected regions.

  Due to the informal conditions under which the community infrastructure has been developed, these structures
  are often absent from the official government records and have not been accounted for in the national account-
  ing systems.

  The recovery of community infrastructure is essentially a community-driven process and it is therefore important
  to ensure that the assessment should be guided by the insights and participation of the community populations.
  This poses significant challenges and often makes the process an unusually complex and difficult undertaking.

  Community infrastructure is an integral sub-sector of the infrastructure sector. Therefore, it is important to note
  that the assessment and recovery planning of some structures and typologies included in this chapter may fall
  under the responsibility of other PDNA sector teams (transportation, electricity, water and sanitation, manufac-
  turing, trade, and education) and may address cross-cutting issues of gender and livelihoods. It is important to
  note that there is a danger of double or multiple accounting in terms of damage and recovery and reconstruction
  needs estimation unless the CI Team works in close collaboration with the Infrastructure Team, and shares infor-
  mation with other sector teams who may be collecting the same or similar information.

  However, drawing a line between main infrastructure and community infrastructure is not easy, and a globally
  accepted definition for community infrastructure does not yet exist. A collaborative effort leading to continued
  consultation with national and local authorities, affected communities and other sectoral assessment groups is
  the only way to define `community infrastructure` in the affected region and to determine the scope of damage
  and assessment to be undertaken in this sector.


3 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  DATA COLLECTION METHODS
  The comprehensive assessment of community infrastructure, as outlined in this chapter, combines the use of
  quantitative primary data on damage and changes in flows by the assessment teams and secondary data. Such
  data allows for the quantifying of the physical damage caused by a disaster, with the use of baseline data and
  qualitative and quantitative information to assess the implications that such damage will have on mobility, safety,
  access to basic services, and livelihood opportunities of the women and men in the affected community.

  Primary qualitative and quantitative information is also used to examine how community infrastructure assets
  have been affected. This implies the use of a variety of assessment methods, including primary data collection
  techniques such as household sample surveys, participatory rural appraisal techniques, key informant interviews,
  group discussions, participant observations and other methods.

  The entire PDNA process usually takes four to six weeks depending on the extent of damage. Within this
  period, field data collection and community consultation requires at least two weeks. It is important to plan
  on at least two to three weeks for field assessment, followed by another one to weeks for data analysis and
  report preparation. Past experience has shown that all experts and staffs are not always required for the entire
  assessment period.

  Depending on the scale of disaster, several teams are often required in the affected regions in order to facilitate
  timely completion of field assessments. In such cases, each team should include experts who are familiar with
  undertaking community infrastructure assessments.

  MOBILIZING HUMAN RESOURCES FOR THE ASSESSMENT
  It is important to note that a separate CI Team does not always have to undertake the assessment of commu-
  nity infrastructure. Other sector teams may do it, with awareness of community infrastructure and specialized
  skills, technical knowledge, prior experience and understanding of community infrastructure in the post-disaster
  recovery context.

  CI recovery intersects multiple sectors and therefore, expertise and skills from a range of disciplines are required
  during assessment, planning and implementation. This range may include:

          •	 Engineering Knowledge and skills: Architects, engineers;

          •	 Community based planning and development: Community mobilization specialists; and
          •	 Other specialized knowledge and skills: DRR specialists, livelihoods specialists.



  BASELINE INFORMATION
  DESCRIPTION OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
  Typically, community infrastructure may be regrouped in six main categories:

      a.	 Connective infrastructure
          This infrastructure is mainly related to community access and internal circulation including internal
          roads, walkways, footpaths within the community providing access to the national arterial or local road
          system. The transport sector assesses damage and changes in flows to tertiary roads, which includes
          access to/from communities to the rest of the country. Beware of possible duplications.



4 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
      b.	 Protective Infrastructures
          These are small-scale and low-cost protecting structures built for various community purposes. They
          include drainage structures, pipe culverts, box culverts, footbridges, retaining walls, protection of
          slopes, jetties, small embankments or protection walls, and small earthen dams. Again, the trans-
          port sector team and the water and sanitation team would assess any damage or changes in flows
          related to collective systems. Beware of duplications.

      c.	 Socio Economic Structures
          These are small-scale structures, developed through local initiatives for a community’s socio-cultural
          and economic prosperity. They include small marketplaces and infrastructure within market grounds,
          including pathways, sheds, drains, community shops, community resource centers, religious centers,
          graveyards, playgrounds and so on. The trade sector team would assess damage and changes in flows
          for all market-related structures and activities. Beware of duplications.

      d.	 Water and Sanitation Lifelines
          These are minor structures built in the communities in response to their needs for a water supply and
          sanitation. They may include: water reservoirs and water sources, supply pipes, ponds, the community
          water supply system, pump houses and deep tube wells, drainage lines, waste disposal and compost-
          ing plants, etc. Again, the water and sanitation sector team would assess such structures and services.
          Beware of duplications.

      e.	 Energy Lifelines
          These belong to decentralized household or community-based energy sources and renewable energy
          plants that cater to the energy needs of remote and isolated off-grid communities. They include biogas
          plants, bio-gassifiers, solar home systems for electrification, and similar community-driven low-cost
          technical plants. Beware of duplications with the electricity and energy sector assessments.

      f.	 Communication Lifelines
          These are small ICT-based installations at the community, catering to their needs of information, com-
          munication and early warning messages. They may include community telephone centers, communi-
          ty-based early warning systems and communication devices, community-run radio and communication
          systems. Beware of duplication with the telecommunications assessment team.

  Disasters may severely damage community infrastructure. The assets, in terms of available community infrastruc-
  ture, are diverse in their sectoral divisions and their applications in the community.

  DESCRIPTION OF GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
  The governance and social processes refer to community infrastructure governance institutions, policies and
  procedures, and social organizations and networks that shape the construction and maintenance of community
  infrastructure. The assessment of governance and social processes identifies key institutions, such as NGOs, local
  and national authorities, and policies affecting community infrastructure, as well as formal and informal social
  networks, livelihoods, and socio-cultural and ethnic considerations linked to livelihoods. It is important to under-
  stand which governance and social processes are present in the affected areas, how they operate and support
  infrastructure systems, how they have been affected, and how they may enable/disable infrastructure recovery.
  The social organization at community level should be assessed also to understand the local capacity for recovery,
  and to identify collaboration and partnership arrangements in the recovery effort.




5 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  BASELINE INFORMATION REQUIREMENTS
  In order to gauge the full extent of a disaster’s impact on community infrastructure, it is necessary to understand
  the main characteristics of the infrastructure sector prior to the disaster, particularly to compare the differences
  between pre-disaster and post-disaster conditions. The baseline information required for community infrastruc-
  ture may be similar to the baseline used in the other infrastructure sectors (transport, energy, water and sanita-
  tion, communication, industry, trade, etc.), which may include:

      1.	 The characteristics (geographical, or spatial location), as well as capacities of the various components;
      2.	 Information/data on the coverage of services, including population coverage , type of user, of each
          component of community infrastructure;

      3.	 Information of the governance aspects of community infrastructure, including community-based man-
          agement processes, social processes, social organizations and institutions including NGOs and CBOs
          involved with decision-making, design, construction and financing as well as day-to-day maintenance
          of community infrastructure

      4.	 Information about sources of funds (community funds, NGO funds, etc.)for the financing of communi-
          ty infrastructure.

      5.	 Information on the community infrastructure portfolio: All types of community-led, non-govern-
          ment-funded common assets, all officially implemented infrastructure and prospective, adopted plans.
          Planned interventions are particularly important to register, as they could be adopted and used in the
          recovery process.

      6.	 General pre-disaster conditions in affected areas: This will include demographics, basic economic and
          social structures, and socio-economic conditions (poverty, HDI, etc.)

      7.	 The institutional and policy environment: It is important to ensure that recovery planning and needs are
          aligned with national laws and policies (and international instruments) for the sector.

  Field data collection should be carried out in concert with other sectoral assessment teams in order to harmonize
  the approach and to maximize the utilization of collective information and findings. Available information from
  secondary sources should be carefully reviewed and analyzed to determine the critical information gaps and data
  inconsistency to be addressed in the early stages of field data collection.

  BASELINE INFORMATION SOURCES
  It is important to note that due to the nature of community infrastructure, which often includes ad hoc, supple-
  mentary and self-implemented structures, the majority of structures will most likely not appear on official asset
  lists, and data should be complemented by field visits and direct involvement with women and men from the
  affected community.

  Since community infrastructure may be closely linked to community livelihood options, a review of baseline live-
  lihood information (if available) may provide a general sense on qualitative information in terms of types and
  concentration of community infrastructure in the affected communities. The national household surveys, under-
  taken periodically by national statistical authorities, provide useful disaggregated household information, includ-
  ing occupational and livelihood statistics. Household health and nutrition surveys, if available, may provide useful
  information on water supply and sanitation infrastructure.

  It is important to overlay a gender analysis on the demographic, employment and livelihood data as this will
  give a more complete picture of the gendered patterns of associated community infrastructure needs and pri-
  orities. For example, in low-income settlements, women may be the primary operators of small-market trading/

6 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  micro-enterprises, and therefore more affected by the destruction of the market. Reinstatement of the market
  will have real benefits for both women and the households they support.

  There may be reports or special studies available with community-based organizations, NGOs or local govern-
  ment institutions, focusing on community capacity, risks and vulnerabilities in the affected region. Useful infor-
  mation on community assets, including infrastructure, could be derived from these reports.

  The community infrastructure sub-sector is in particular need of map-based information to understand the ex-
  tent of the damages, as well as for planning the recovery process. Required map-based data includes but is not
  limited to: topography, landscape features, natural resources, the built environment, and the social, recreational
  and commercial spaces. There are several providers of maps, satellite images and geographic information:

      •	 The UN Cartographic Section and the UN Operational Satellite Applications Program (UNOSAT) have the
         capacity to provide maps and satellite imagery. These requests should be coordinated and shared with
         all relevant partners in order to allow every stakeholder access to the same resources.

      •	 Geographical Information Systems (GIS) is a system designed to create, manage, analyze and display
         geospatial data on digital maps.

      •	 Online map and geographical information programs, such as Google Earth (superimposition of im-
         ages obtained from satellite imagery and aerial photography) can be used to view areas subjected to
         disasters. Other free online collaborative networks are efficient sources to find crowd-sourced data
         (solicited contributions from online communities) and can serve a useful tool to map both physical and
         social structures.

  DATA GATHERING AND SAMPLING STRUCTURE
  Sampling size should be determined in accordance with the strategy agreed in consultation and coordination
  with other sectoral assessment groups, to optimize logistical requirements and to maximize the utilization of
  collective resources. Sampling should be representative and must cover communities with different categories
  of infrastructure damages (e.g. low, moderate and severe). At the community level the assessment should cover
  the entire geographic area and should be inclusive of all minor infrastructures, systems and facilities that are not
  covered by other sectoral assessment groups.



  ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER EFFECTS
  EFFECTS ON COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE AND PHYSICAL ASSETS
  The general effect of the disaster on the community infrastructure portfolio of affected areas should include:
  Damages to community infrastructure components, including:
      •	 Community access roads: These are internal roads, walkways and footpaths within the community
         providing access to the national arterial or local road system (village roads, earthen walkways in the
         community, house-to-house connection roads, etc.).
      •	 Minor structures: These are small-scale and low-cost structures built for various community purposes
         (drainage structures, pipe culverts, box culverts, footbridges, retaining walls, protection of slopes, jetties,
         small embankments or protection walls, small earthen dams, etc.).
      •	 Socio-economic infrastructure: These are small-scale physical infrastructures developed through lo-
         cal initiative for the community’s socio-cultural and economic prosperity (small marketplaces and infra-


7 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
          structure within market grounds including pathways, sheds, drains, etc., community shops, community
          resource centers, religious centers, graveyards, playgrounds and so on).
      •	 Community-based water supply and sanitation: These are minor infrastructures built in the com-
         munities in response to their needs regarding water supply and sanitation (water reservoirs and water
         sources, supply pipes, ponds and reservoirs, community water supply systems, pump houses and deep
         tube wells, drainage lines, waste disposal and composting plants, etc.).
      •	 Communication and early warning systems: These are small ICT-based installations catering to
         their needs on information, communication and early warning messages (community telephone centers,
         community-based early warning systems and communication devices, etc.).
      •	 Community-based non-conventional energy plants: These belong to decentralized household or
         community-based energy sources and renewable energy plants that cater to the energy needs of remote
         and isolated off-grid communities (biogas plants, bio-gassifiers, solar home systems for electrification,
         and similar community driven low cost technical plants).
      •	 Community-managed small and micro-enterprises: These are household or community-run mi-
         cro-enterprises and are subject to destruction of stocks and equipment during disaster events. These
         micro enterprises are likely to collapse in the local economic downturn following a disaster (handloom
         and cottage industries, potteries, fish processing plants, rice husking and agro-based plants, etc.).

  EFFECTS ON PRODUCTION, DELIVERY AND ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES
  Disasters may severely damage community infrastructure and thus disrupt community processes critical to the
  livelihoods of the community. Types of damage may include

      •	 Destruction of internal and external road communication (note that external roads will be assessed by
         the infrastructure team) making the community inaccessible and making relief work even harder;

      •	 Disruption of socio-economic and cultural activities, causing huge economic losses in the community;

      •	 Disruption of information and communication networks, thereby creating isolation and barriers for relief
         and rescue operations;

      •	 Disruption of drainage, water supply and sanitation facilities, which may lead to increased health hazards
         in the community; and
      •	 Destruction of community-based small and medium-scale enterprises that causes financial losses and
         market disruptions in the affected regions with the possibility of an acute shortage of essential items for
         the sustenance of the victims.

  EFFECTS ON GOVERNANCE AND DECISION-MAKING PROCESSES
  The local context is assessed in terms of the nature and extent of the impact caused by the disaster on gover-
  nance systems, including community-led organizations, NGOs, CBOs, local authorities, relevant government
  institutions (e.g. Ministry of Public Works), and the policy environment. Effects on Governance may include:
      •	 Disruptions in local governments/communities services in construction and maintenance of roads, infra-
         structure;

      •	 Disruption in local governments/ communities services in construction and management of water distri-
         bution and sanitation systems and loss of watsan services;



8 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
      •	 Disruption in cultural and religious processes, disruption of community processes such as com-
         munity based discussions, decision-making processes, community protection processes, social and
         cultural processes;

      •	 Disruptions in local business and economic processes; and

      •	 Disruption in local processes of information sharing and management.

  INCREASED RISKS AND VULNERABILITIES
  A key element of the assessment is to identify immediate risks to the affected communities, particularly new
  potential threats that may deteriorate conditions if the necessary measures are not taken in a timely manner. Pri-
  ority mitigation and preparedness measures are identified to avoid another disaster or a further deterioration of
  current safety conditions. Below are some potential risks due to the disaster impact on community infrastructure:

      •	 Vulnerability situation worsens; increased risks of loss of income and assets; social exploitation; health
         hazards etc.;

      •	 Risk of health hazards and increased water prices;

      •	 Risks of increased cost of social and cultural services; increased risks of anti-social activities etc.;

      •	 Risk of increased price of essential commodities; and

      •	 Increased risks of information blockage and isolation; risks of increased cost of information services.



  ESTIMATING THE VALUE OF THE EFFECTS OF THE DISASTER
  ASSESSMENT OF DAMAGE AND ECONOMIC FLOW CHANGES
  The estimation of damage in community infrastructure should be determined by the repair or replacement costs
  expressed in current values. The value of the damage is the replacement cost, or repair cost, of destroyed physi-
  cal assets with the same characteristics and standards as prior to the disaster and using the same unit costs that
  prevailed at the time of the disaster.

  Depending on the type of infrastructure and the nature of efforts needed for recovery, the assessment team,
  in consultation with local experts, should be able to define the thresholds of ‘partial damage’ and ‘complete
  damage’ for each type of community infrastructure. A rule of thumb practiced in some countries consider 0-15%
  damage as ‘minor damage’ that can be repaired with little effort by the community themselves, while 15-60%
  and 60-100% correspond with ‘partial damage’ and ‘complete damage’ requiring recovery support from exter-
  nal sources for their repair and reconstruction.

  Table 1 in the Annex shows a simple matrix for the compilation of damage and flow changes estimation for
  different types of community infrastructure. These assets are to be assessed only when they function in isolation,
  at community level, are built by the informal sector and are not part of the formal system.

  ASSESSMENT OF CHANGES IN ECONOMIC FLOWS
  IIndirect effects or economic losses due to the effect of the event on community infrastructure may be estimated
  by the disruption of goods and services at the community level – expressed in current values – over a period of
  time, from the disaster event to the moment services are back in place to the pre-disaster level. Examples of such
  effects are losses of production resulting in a loss of income or the cost of delay in transportation due to damage
  to community roads. Changes in economic flows could also include the additional cost of an interim arrange-

9 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  ment caused by possible disruption or lack of availability of raw materials or increased prices of such materials
  used as inputs, until a sustainable solution has been reached.

  In addition to asset destruction, it is necessary to estimate change in economic flows under the following headings:

      •	 The cost of demolition and debris removal;

      •	 The cost of reducing the vulnerability of community infrastructure, including work to stabilize soil, pro-
         tect dwellings or reinforce structures; and

      •	 The cost of temporary facilities for the period during which a new infrastructure system is under con-
         struction or damaged ones are under repair.

  There is no standard rule for costing of community infrastructure. It varies with the type of infrastructure and
  also from region to region. Since community infrastructure employs labor-intensive methods and uses locally
  available resources, the cost of a particular structure is greatly influenced by local wage rates and prices of locally
  available materials and equipment. The unit prices (commonly known as ‘rate schedules’) of common types of
  community infrastructure are usually available at the local government authority, particularly in the technical or
  engineering unit. In many developing countries, the engineering department or cell within the ministry of local
  government maintains updated rate schedules of local level infrastructures in different regions. Another possible
  source of information could be the public works department. If the price is not available for any particular type
  of infrastructure, the engineer (or technical expert) in the assessment mission should be able to determine the
  cost by analyzing the efforts and resources required in each step of the construction method, and in consultation
  with the community.

  The damage and change in flows assessment need not be of utmost quantitative precision. However, efforts
  must be made to ensure it is comprehensive in its scope and covers the complete range of effects on socio-eco-
  nomic, environmental and community livelihood aspects.

  The assessors may wish to undertake rapid sample surveys to capture the change in flows of the community and/
  or its members as a result of the total or partial destruction of physical assets. Such information would be useful
  as it may serve as an estimation of disaster impact on personal net income. They may wish to work closely with
  the livelihoods team.



  ASSESSMENT OF DISASTER IMPACT
  MACROECONOMIC IMPACT
  It should be noted that it is not expected that the effects on community infrastructure would have any significant
  economic impact on GDP, unless the government agreed to adopt a fiscal initiative, which would partially fund
  the redevelopment of community infrastructure damaged or destroyed, thus increasing government expenditure
  in the current fiscal period.




10 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  CROSS-SECTORAL COORDINATION AND CROSS-CUTTING
  THEMES IN COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  Below are some of the particular considerations relating to cross-sectoral coordination, inter-sectoral linkag-
  es as well as cross-cutting issues in the community infrastructure sub-sector. The assessment should indicate
  how these issues can be addressed in the recovery process, and should establish cross-sector arrangements as
  required with other sector teams to ensure that they are adequately addressed in the recovery strategy. The as-
  sessment and repair of some of the assets included in the community infrastructure assessment may fall under
  the responsibility of other PDNA sectors, and coordination is necessary at the start of the assessment to avoid
  overlaps. It is especially important to ensure that infrastructure included in the community infrastructure sub-sec-
  tor assessment does not duplicate but rather complements the work of others, to ensure a holistic assessment
  and recovery planning process.

  CROSS-SECTORAL COORDINATION
  Coordination in CI sector recovery is a multi-faceted challenge. This is particularly difficult because recovery in
  the CI sector is essentially a community-driven process and disaster-vulnerable communities across developing
  countries seriously lack coordination capacity.

  Effective coordination for assessment, planning and implementation of community infrastructure recovery is
  critically important for at least the following three important reasons:

                                   Community infrastructure cuts across many sectors and the recovery of CI is
                                   therefore required to be aligned appropriately with other sectoral recovery plans.
                                   For example, a damaged infrastructure of a community-based learning center must
                                   be repaired or reconstructed in a way that conforms to the national recovery plan
   Cross-sectoral linkages         in the education sector. Linkages must be established to ensure that the education
                                   services at the community level are restored appropriately once the school building
                                   is back in place. Similar coordination efforts are needed in the recovery of other types
                                   of community infrastructure such as community-based primary health centers, major
                                   or arterial road systems, etc.

                                   In the national development context, community infrastructure represents a
                                   microcosm of the national infrastructure system and it is therefore important that
   Consistency and                 CI recovery takes place in a manner consistent with the national recovery plan
   avoiding duplication            for infrastructure. Hence coordination with the assessment group for major
                                   infrastructure is crucial for ensuring consistency in technical configuration and
                                   planning, and more so for avoiding duplication in damage and loss estimation.

                                   Most importantly, community infrastructure recovery is inherently connected to
                                   livelihood recovery of the people living in the affected communities. In fact,
                                   community infrastructure recovery has proved to be the most effective vehicle for
   Livelihood recovery needs       the creation of employment for the poor and for channeling cash resources to local
                                   economies. Effective coordination with the livelihood sector is therefore extremely
                                   important to identify and prioritize interventions under the CI sector that facilitate
                                   rapid livelihood recovery.


  Apart from the above reasons, coordination among different sectoral assessment teams is often required for the
  interest of effective and quality discussion with the affected communities and with local institutions and stake-
  holders. Often separately organized meetings and consultations may create confusion and information gaps.

11 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  Better coordination among the sectoral assessment groups helps optimum utilization of logistics and saves time
  and resources in a post-disaster situation. Annex II provides further information on the coordination objectives
  and related issues. .

  GENDER AND SOCIAL EQUITY
  Social equity is a key consideration in post-disaster recovery because disasters affect different groups of people in
  different ways and an equitable response is necessary. Recovery processes have the potential to reinforce social
  inequities or to contribute to greater equality between differentiated social groups, such as those based on age
  (for example, the elderly, orphans or unaccompanied or separated children, child-headed households), gender or
  ethnicity. Gender is particularly important because women and men have different resources available to them
  and different coping strategies, which need to be understood and recognized in the recovery plan, and because
  women and girls are often discriminated against and excluded from decision-making relating to community in-
  frastructure needs and priorities. The elderly and the young are particularly exposed to hazards, because of their
  relative lack of mobility and dependence on others, and have particular levels of sensitivity to disasters once they
  occur. Similarly, the risk of exclusion of these groups from relief and recovery is high and they will often require
  special efforts and approaches.

  According to WHO estimates, between 7 and 10 percent of the world’s population lives with disabilities of
  one form or another. This population is extremely vulnerable in the face of disasters and requires high levels of
  attention and support in order to recover from the loss of care and the stable environment on which it normally
  depends. When possible, the principle of universal design should be applied when planning for community in-
  frastructure upgrades. This principle recognizes that everyone, not only persons with disabilities, passes through
  periods of life when their ability is challenged: childhood, illness and old age. As such, it is important to plan for
  the implementation of physical solutions that are satisfactorily accessible, safe and environmentally sound, which
  again will make it easier for all people to use.

  DISASTER RISK REDUCTION
  The community infrastructure recovery should adopt a resilient pathway and should make every effort possible
  to rebuild and lay down durable infrastructures to safeguard community lives and protect livelihoods from future
  disaster shocks. Disaster risk reduction (DRR) must therefore act as the key driver to advance the recovery process
  in a manner that effectively address the existing disaster risks and mitigates the risks of future disasters.

  Community infrastructures are usually the weakest form of physical infrastructures constructed at the local level
  and these make both the infrastructure and the community vulnerable to disaster shocks. Annex II provides a
  table showing generic impact of hazards on community infrastructure.

  Within the PDNA context, an in-depth technical investigation on structural vulnerability is not always possible.
  The structural vulnerability of CI can be assessed through either visual and structural investigation or a combi-
  nation of both. Visual investigation is often considered a feasible approach in the CI recovery context and this
  helps to determine the existing structural condition based on examining the age, type and structural soundness,
  environmental conditions and seismic risk of the site. Other visual measures include:

      •	 Analysis of design layout and technical configuration including structural system, dimension, geometry
         of elements, spacing, loading systems etc.;

      •	 Inspection and mapping of the detailed structural damage, e.g. spalling, pops-out, cracking and its pat-
         terns, corrosion, discoloration, etc.;

      •	 Judgment of the construction quality;



12 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
      •	 Evaluation of workmanship; and

      •	 Inspection of material used and its quality

  The following are a few suggested actions/steps for the promotion of disaster-resilient recovery of com-
  munity infrastructure:

      •	 Community capacity should be developed to prepare a community disaster risk reduction plan through
         conducting systematic mapping of community assets, vulnerabilities and identification of disaster risk.
         The recovery of community infrastructure should be seen as a distillation of the community disaster risk
         reduction plan and should aim to build community capacity and promote community resilience.

      •	 A detailed community risk assessment will be carried out involving diverse stakeholders at the local level.
         The compelling objective is to engage the local people in a consultative process on how to effectively
         avoid the threats of future disasters and to protect the lives and livelihoods of the community population
         in the future. An extensive consultative process will be initiated at the local level to determine, assess as
         well as to examine available options at the hands of local stakeholders to reduce future disaster risks.

      •	 Based upon the results of the risk assessment, elaborate a plan of actions for reducing disaster risks
         including structural measures at the local levels (e.g. construction of small-scale flood control structures)
         through community participation approaches.

      •	 Recovery of community infrastructure must be reflective of existing disaster risks and should make nec-
         essary provisions (e.g. compliance to building codes, highest flood level, maximum wind speed etc.) for
         risk-proofing infrastructures recovery.

      •	 The process should ensure that the communities have the understanding and hands-on knowledge of
         hazard-resistant construction materials and techniques.

      •	 The recovery planning should undertake risk assessment for site locations of important community infra-
         structure like water pumps, drainage structures, solid waste composting plants etc.

      •	 Manufacturers and suppliers of construction materials such as cement, steel, etc. should provide infor-
         mation, tools and guidance for safe and correct use of their materials. For example, provision of gloves
         and boots when using cement, and suppliers/manufacturers raise awareness on how cement is mixed
         and cured, etc.

      •	 Small entrepreneurs should be supported to develop business contingency plans.



  SECTOR RECOVERY STRATEGY
  The recovery strategy must be aligned to national laws and existing sector development policies and strategies.
  In addition, current best practices should be adopted.

  SECTOR RECOVERY VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
  The vision describes the desired long-term recovery outcome in the community infrastructure sub-sector, which
  should include measures to improve sector performance and build resilient communities, through appropriate
  technologies and practices.

  Guiding principles for community infrastructure recovery should be defined to inform the sector recovery strat-
  egy and to guide the recovery process in an effective, transparent and accountable manner. These should be


13 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  agreed to within the sector team under the leadership of the government. Below are some examples of recovery
  guiding principles.

      •	 Respond to the distinct needs and priorities of affected women and men of all ages within the population;

      •	 Identify and focus on the most vulnerable and most affected, ensuring their fullest participation in deci-
         sions about their needs and priorities;

      •	 Restore capacities and capabilities;

      •	 Support spontaneous recovery processes;

      •	 Ensure national ownership and leadership of the infrastructure recovery strategy;

      •	 Work in partnership with civil society, donors, NGOs, WB and other UN agencies;

      •	 Maintain synergies with humanitarian actions and development goals;

      •	 Take into account and support national strategies on urban planning rural development and sustainable
         development; And

      •	 Reinforce national and local plans for DRR.

      •	 While the design of community infrastructure will essentially be governed by engineering standards and
         technical provisions, the following technical considerations are also important:

      •	 A context- and site-specific process that should comply with legal provisions and standards applicable to
         the affected regions.

      •	 The design process should be guided by existing planning and construction guidelines, master plans and
         prospective projects (if any).

      •	 The recovery process should use local resources, locally available materials, and existing knowledge.

      •	 The recovery process should take account of possible recycling and productive use of the construction
         materials extracted from the debris or rubble after the disaster.

      •	 The design process must comply and be reflective of gender considerations and sensitive to cultural needs.

  STAKEHOLDERS’ CONSULTATION
  Design options should be discussed with local communities in order to reflect their needs and expectations. The
  process should give consideration to indigenous risk reduction practices and community coping mechanisms.
  Based on factors typically present in low-income dense settlements, such environmental threats and limited
  physical space, design solutions capable of responding to several challenges simultaneously should be devel-
  oped. Maintenance is an integral part of the life cycle of infrastructural interventions, and hence the design
  options should take account of community-friendly and community-led, sustainable maintenance arrangements.

  One of the key challenges faced in the needs assessment process is the genuine involvement of women and
  men from the communities to ensure that their own distinct perspectives and needs, based on local wisdom and
  traditional knowledge, are captured through a consultative and participatory process. The recovery plan must re-
  flect community needs and priorities as the success of community infrastructure recovery largely depends on the
  choices made by women and men from the community as well as the capacity demonstrated by the community
  for planning, programming, and implementation and monitoring during recovery.




14 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  While community empowerment is an incremental and long-term process, the planning process for community
  infrastructure recovery should seize all opportunities for building community capacity and contributing to com-
  munity empowerment during the recovery process.

  RECONSTRUCTION AND RECOVERY NEEDS, INCLUDING BUILDING BACK BETTER
  The following recovery needs may not apply to all disaster situations, but the guidance presents the usual recov-
  ery needs, which should be in direct relation to the assessment results. Estimations of overall recovery needs in
  the community infrastructure sub-sector should consider the following:

      •	 The repair or rebuilding of destroyed physical assets in order to resume a safe and well-functioning community;

      •	 The rehabilitation of service delivery systems and restoring access to goods and services;

      •	 Restoring governance and social processes;

      •	 Redressing immediate risks and building back better; And

      •	 Measures to address the human development impact.

  TYPES OF RECOVERY PROGRAMMES
  The strategic focus of community infrastructure recovery is context-specific and largely depends on the
  type of hazards and the magnitude of the effect. The following areas of assistance are commonly ap-
  plied to the recovery of community infrastructure and can be supported in the early recovery phase. It
  is important to note that these thematic areas should not be seen as a step-by-step guide where one
  implementation phase follows the other, but rather included in an overall plan for the recovery process
  and prioritized as required.

   CLEARANCE OF DEBRIS AND OPENING UP ACCESS TO COMMUNITY SITES
  The objective is to open up community access networks by removing rubble and debris of the devastation
  caused by the disaster. In most cases, this support is urgently required to facilitate relief and rescue op-
  erations as well as to generate short-term employment opportunities for the disaster-stricken population
  in the community. The clearance of rubble and debris should be done in line with existing environmental
  rules and standards. Reusable building materials must be preserved for their productive reuse during the
  recovery and reconstruction phase.
   IMPLEMENTING SAFETY MEASURES IN THE COMMUNITY
  Risk assessments must be undertaken in areas prone to environmental and natural hazards before any res-
  toration can take place. Plans for the prevention of natural hazards that include the quantification of hazard,
  the qualification of issues at stake, the resulting zoning (areas not to be built in or only under certain con-
  ditions) and recommendations for mitigation solutions must be developed. Where possible, retaining walls
  and other interventions used to secure land should be built before reconstructing other structures.

   RESTORATION AND UPGRADE OF COMMUNITY ACCESS ROAD NETWORKS AND PUBLIC SPACES
  The assistance should include repair, reconstruction and upgrading of community access roads networks
  with proper drainage and other required connective and protective infrastructure. Piecemeal repair and
  restoration of roads after recurrent disaster is neither cost-effective nor economically sustainable. While
  planning for the restoration of roads and other infrastructure, common urban space must be incorporat-
  ed in the plans. Rehabilitating and revitalizing public space is a crucial part of building socially integrated
  urban environments. Local meeting places close to accommodation are especially valued in high-density
  informal settlements as easy access to public space provides income-earning opportunities.

15 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
   RESTORATION OF WATER SUPPLY AND SANITATION FACILITIES
  In cases not covered by the WASH recovery plan, support the restoration of community-based water
  supply and sanitation facilities, including but not limited to: cleaning of community ponds and water
  supply sources; re-installation of water treatment plants; installation of tube-wells; reparation of water
  supply pipes; installation of rainwater harvesting structures; construction of adequate sanitary facilities
  for communities; and setting up solid waste disposal systems.

   CAPACITY BUILDING AND TRAINING FOR COMMUNITY AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS
  The recovery process offers a window of opportunity to adopt resilient development and support for
  recovery and should aim to build the capacity of the community, local authorities and other stakeholders
  to promote safe and resilient communities.

  The capacity building efforts should include specialized training for local engineers, masons, carpenters,
  and other craftspeople on safe and disaster-resilient construction techniques and methods. The capacity
  building process should offer opportunities for the local officials and the community leaders in having the
  right exposure to disaster-resilient standard technologies. Workshops and events should be organized to
  sensitize the community and local government officials for disaster-resilient infrastructure development
  at the local level.

  The following training activities may be considered as part of the community infrastructure recovery process:

   Target groups                                               Rigs and trailer trucks
   Community leaders, representatives from various pro-        Suggested training that may be imparted during recovery of communi-
   fessions in the community and local stakeholders: in this   ty infrastructure:
   regard, ensure the equal or – at a very minimum – the       •	   Building community managerial skills for recovery
   representative – participation of women and men from
   the community.                                              •	   Orientation and awareness training in disaster resilient technolo-
                                                                    gies and safety standards
                                                               •	   Labor rights, health, safety and environment
                                                               •	   Gender issues in community infrastructure recovery
                                                               •	   Participatory monitoring of community infrastructure recovery
                                                               •	   Community-based maintenance
                                                               •	   Capacity building in disaster risk reduction including risk identi-
                                                                    fication and mapping, risk mitigation options, and community
                                                                    based early warning
   Local artisans, masons, technicians (M/F)                   •	   Training in disaster resilient construction techniques and methods
                                                               •	   Labor rights, health, safety and environment
   Local officials, NGOs/CBOs and local stakeholders           •	   Orientation and awareness training in disaster resilient technolo-
                                                                    gies and safety standards
                                                               •	   Local disaster risk management

   Local entrepreneurs and stakeholders                        Development of micro-entrepreneurial skills and business management



   BUILDING BACK BETTER (BBB)
  The assessment should identify the underlying risks and the measures that need to be taken in the re-
  covery process to protect communities from future crises. This is done in order to reduce vulnerability
  and build capacities to address risks, and to include this concept in a practical manner in urban planning
  and construction decisions. Furthermore, it is done to develop and enforce building codes, reconstruct
  to standards and to provide an opportunity to register informally constructed infrastructure of adequate

16 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  quality and include these as national assets. With technical support and proactive measures, community
  infrastructure can be recovered in a way that addresses the underlying causes of risks, and minimizes
  vulnerability in the future. As such, close coordination with the sector team assessing DRR/M is crucial.

  The assessment identifies appropriate technologies and practices that can be effective in protecting com-
  munities and their infrastructure against these known threats. This includes local knowledge and positive
  coping strategies that can be supported, as well as negative coping strategies that can be avoided in the
  recovery process. Measures identified are integrated into the sector’s recovery strategy and reflected in
  the national recovery framework.

  Natural resource management technologies and practices should also be considered, particularly those
  that redress the underlying drivers of risk and make community infrastructure more resilient. Examples
  include the enhanced management of water to reduce flooding, soil-protection systems that make use of
  trees and shrubs as shelterbelts, windbreaks and live fences.

  Safe location and design of new infrastructure built during the recovery process are key to building back
  better and reducing risk. To achieve this, it will be necessary to assess the following:

      •	 Infrastructure at risk or exposed to risk;

      •	 Determine if it is safe to rebuild the community in the same location or if there is a need to support
         resettlement. If so, determine where and how;

      •	 Potential land tenure obstacles that should be addressed to secure safe land/safer housing;

      •	 Introduction of coastal/lakeshore zoning to reduce future risk; and

      •	 Laws, policies, regulations and management practices that may need to change.

  SECTOR RECOVERY PLAN
  In line with the PDNA guidance on the recovery strategy the community infrastructure sub-sector recovery plan
  should be formulated following the results-based model, and therefore include 1) priority needs, 2) interventions
  required, 3) expected outputs, 4) recovery costs, and 5) intended outcomes.

  Indicative Example of a Results-Based Recovery Plan
   Priority recovery needs        Interventions           Interventions            Recovery costs   Intended outcomes

   To assist those affected by    1.	 Supply construction 1.	 4 markets rebuilt    $4,330,000       20,000 affected people
   the disaster in X province         materials                                                     have restored access to
                                                          2.	 10 access roads
   with the repair and rebuild-                                                                     basic community infra-
                                  2.	 Provide technical       and pathways
   ing of damaged community                                                                         structure.
                                      assistance for          cleared and re-
   infrastructure                     rebuilding              paired
                                  3.	 Capacity building   3.	 2 training centers
                                      training support        established and 50
                                                              government staff
                                                              trained



  PRIORITIZING AND SEQUENCING RECOVERY NEEDS

  Recovery needs in the sector must be prioritized and sequenced (short-term, medium-term and long term), as
  appropriate. Criteria may be developed by the sub-sector team (or previously by the PDNA team) to guide the
  prioritization process. The immediate focus of community infrastructure recovery after a catastrophic event is to fa-

17 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  cilitate rescue and relief operations by the temporary repair of community access roads and the restoration of com-
  munication systems for better coordination and information management. Moreover, a drinking water supply and
  sanitation facilities should be restored urgently to mitigate secondary health hazards in the affected community.

  The medium-term objectives of community infrastructure recovery are to support community livelihood and
  economic recovery as well as to facilitate access to basic services through the systematic implementation of infra-
  structure recovery activities. The strategy should be devised to facilitate and complement spontaneous recovery
  efforts by the community.

  The longer-term focus of community infrastructure will be to build capacities of the affected communities, local
  government institutions and the relevant national authorities, and ensure sustainable recovery of community in-
  frastructure by addressing the root causes of the underlying risks and community vulnerabilities. Specific capaci-
  ties and institutional mechanism should be built to ensure community oversight and participatory monitoring of
  infrastructure recovery in the community. Opportunities should be seized to build awareness at the national and
  local levels about safety standards and to promote a culture of resilience in the development and maintenance
  of community infrastructure.

  Key recovery objectives of community infrastructures at different phases:

   Phases             Timeline          Key objectives

   Immediate          2-8 weeks         •	   Restore/repair critical communication facilities to support relief supplies and saving
                                             lives.
                                        •	   Restore communication networks and early warning systems for information dis-
                                             semination and better coordination.
                                        •	   Develop medium-term and long-term recovery plans for damaged community
                                             infrastructure including technical designs, drawings and illustrations, following a
                                             multi-stakeholder approach and taking into account disaster risk reduction, gender
                                             and environmental considerations.
                                        •	   Develop capacity of local government institutions, NGOs and community-based
                                             organizations for coordination, planning and implementation of infrastructure
                                             recovery.

   Medium-term        2-12 months       •	   Implement activities for restoration of damaged community infrastructure.
                                        •	   Create employment opportunities for the residents of affected communities.
                                        •	   Implement activities to support immediate resumption of community livelihood
                                             activities and economic opportunities.
                                        •	   Complement spontaneous community efforts to recover minor structures.
                                        •	   Prepare grounds and harness conditions for longer term sustainable development.

   Longer term        2-18 months       •	   Build capacity and strengthen community institutional mechanisms for implemen-
                                             tation and participatory monitoring of community infrastructure recovery program.
                                        •	   Promote community awareness of safety standards and disaster risk reduction, and
                                             build a culture of resilience at the community level.

  The recovery plan must take into account the consultations that have taken place, as well as the national devel-
  opment objectives and policies. Additionally, it is important that the recovery plan is informed by the following:

      •	 The integration of BBB concerns in recovery does not take on the national development agenda, and is
         not driven by international experts or development partners.



18 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
      •	 Address key risks and vulnerabilities that contributed to the extent of the effects/impact on communities,
         systems and infrastructure, and that can be avoided.

      •	 Where possible, BBB should also have a positive contribution on the recovery from the current disaster.

      •	 Consultations and communications with the other sectors are essential in order to avoid contradictory
         recommendations, gaps or overlaps.

   COSTING
  This section explains how the costs for reconstruction and recovery are calculated based on the projected needs,
  and proposes realistic approaches to estimating costs for BBB. This should be done in proportion to basic recov-
  ery costs, existing national budgets and absorption capacity.

  All assumptions, formulas and references used for unit costs for each budget line item should be made explicit.

  IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS	
   PARTNERSHIPS, COORDINATION AND MANAGEMENT
  This sub-section of the plan describes key partnerships, coordination and management arrangements for the
  recovery process of the sector, such as:

      •	 Coordination arrangements with the government, civil society, and the private sector;

      •	 Inter-sectoral arrangements (with other clusters such as WASH, environment, DRR, health);

      •	 Management arrangements within the government for the sector recovery process; and

      •	 Inter-agency management arrangements (e.g. coordination unit or similar arrangements, support ser-
         vices to be established, such as offices, human resources, etc.)

   MONITORING AND EVALUATION (M&E)
  Include in this section the plan for monitoring and evaluation in the sector, considering the following:

      •	 What is to be monitored and evaluated;

      •	 The activities needed to monitor and evaluate;

      •	 Who is responsible for M&E activities;

      •	 When the M&E activities are planned (timing);

      •	 How M&E are carried out (methods); and

      •	 What resources are required and where they are committed.

   LINKS TO DEVELOPMENT
  This sub-section outlines the ways in which the recovery of the sector will link with and support the country’s
  development goals and priorities, where possible aligning the recovery process with the broader strategic devel-
  opment objectives of the sector. Consider the following:

      •	 National objectives for meeting MDGs;



19 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
      •	 National policies, poverty reduction strategies and other key instruments related to community infra-
         structure; and

      •	 UN development planning instruments (e.g. UNDAF).

   KEY ASSUMPTIONS AND CONSTRAINTS
  Identify key assumptions made to successfully complete the recovery of the sector, and the major constraints
  likely to be encountered during the recovery process, indicating how they might be overcome.



  ANNEXES
  ANNEX I: A GENERIC CLASSIFICATION (TYPOLOGY) OF COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURES
  THAT ARE INTIMATELY LINKED WITH COMMUNITY LIVELIHOOD OPTIONS
   Generic Types                 Description                                    Examples

   Community access roads        These are internal roads, walkways, foot-      Village roads, earthen walkways in the community,
                                 paths within the community providing ac-       house-to-house connection roads, etc.
                                 cess for the community people to national
                                 arterial or local road systems.

   Minor structures              These are small-scale and low-cost             Drainage structures, pipe culverts, box culverts,
                                 appurtenant structures built for various       footbridges, retaining walls, protection of slopes,
                                 community purposes.                            jetties, small embankments or protection walls,
                                                                                small earthen dams, etc.

   Socio-economic                These are small-scale physical infrastruc-     Small marketplaces and infrastructure within mar-
   infrastructure                tures in the community developed through       ket grounds including pathways, sheds, drains, etc.,
                                 local initiative for the community’s so-       community shops, community resource centers, re-
                                 cio-cultural and economic prosperity.          ligious centers, graveyards, playgrounds and so on

   Community-based water         These are minor infrastructures built in the   Water reservoir and water sources, supply pipes,
   supply and sanitation         communities in response to their needs on      ponds and reservoirs, community water supply sys-
                                 water supply and sanitation                    tems, pump houses and deep tube wells, drainage
                                                                                lines, waste disposal and composting plants, etc.

   Communication and             These are small ICT-based installations in the Community telephone centers, community-based
   early warning systems         community catering to needs on information, early warning systems, communication devices, etc.
                                 communication and early warning messages.

   Community-based non-          These belong to decentralized household        Biogas plants, bio-gassifiers, solar home systems for
   conventional energy           or community-based energy sources and          electrification, and similar community-driven low
   plants                        renewable energy plants which cater to the     cost technical plants.
                                 energy needs of remote and isolated off-
                                 grid communities.

   Community-managed             These are household or community-run           Handloom and cottage industries, potteries, fish
   small and micro-enterprises   micro-enterprises and are subject to loss      processing plants, rice husking and agro-based
                                 of stocks and equipment during disaster        plants, etc.
                                 events. These micro-enterprises are likely
                                 to collapse in the local economic downturn
                                 following a disaster.


20 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  ANNEX II: MATRIX OF DAMAGES IN COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS




                                                                                                                                Complete dam-
                               Matrix of Damage and losses




                                                                                                                                                                               Repair / Recon-
                                                                                                      Partial damage
                                                                               Minor damage




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Indirect effect



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Total damage
                                                                                                                                                                                                 struction cost
                                                                                                                                age 60-100%

                                                                                                                                                uantification
                               Community Infrastructure Assets




                                                                                                                                                                (state Unit)
                               1/4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            and loss
                                                                                                                       15-60%
                                                                                              0-15%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (loss)
                                Mobility
                                Access roads (to community)
                                Internal roads (dimensioned for vehicles)
   CONNECTIVE INFRASTRUCTURE




                                Sidewalks	
                                Internal walkways (paved)
                                Footpaths (unpaved)
                                Bicycle lanes
                                Stairways
                                Bridges (dimensioned for vehicles)
                                Bridges (pedestrian)
                                Marina
                                Other (Specify)
                                Other (Specify)
                                Other (Specify)



                                Public and Commercial

                                Parks	

                                Plazas (open, urbanized spaces)

                                Market places

                                Urban furniture (sheds, benches, trash bins)

                                Community shops

                                Resource centers

                                Sacred places/Religious centers

                                Playgrounds

                                Sports facilities (including fields)

                                Cemeteries

                                Other (Specify)

                                Other (Specify)

                                Other (Specify)




21 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
                           Communications

                           Internet hubs

                           Telephone centers

                           Early warning systems

                           Other (Specify)

                           Other (Specify)

                           Other (Specify)




                                                                                                                          Complete damage
                           Matrix of Damage and losses




                                                                                                                                                                           Repair / Recon-
                                                                                                Partial damage
                                                                         Minor damage




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Indirect effect



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Total damage
                                                                                                                                                                                             struction cost
                                                                                                                                            uantification
                           Community Infrastructure Assets




                                                                                                                                                            (state Unit)
                                                                                                                          60-100%
                           2/4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        and loss
                                                                                                                 15-60%
                                                                                        0-15%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (loss)
                            Water-management systems
                            Drainage canals (masonry/durable material)
                            Storm drains
                            French drains (trenches with rocks/gravel)
                            Embankment of ravines/rivers
                            Culverts and outlets
                            Other (Specify)
                            Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Subtotal
   PROTECTIVE STRUCTURES




                            Flooding and landslide protections
                            Vegetation (clusters/belts)
                            Retaining walls (masonry/durable material)
                            Gabion baskets
                            Boulder nets
                            Terraced slopes
                            Dams
                            Breakwater structures	
                            Other (Specify)
                            Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Subtotal
                            Public lighting
                            Street lamps
                            Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Subtotal




22 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
                                                                                                                         Repair / Recon-
                                                              Minor damage
                     Matrix of Damage and losses




                                                                                                                                             Indirect effect



                                                                                                                                                                 Total damage
                                                                                                                         struction cost
                                                                                                        uantification
                                                                                                        (state Unit)
                     Community Infrastructure Assets




                                                                                       Complete

                                                                                       60-100%
                                                                                       damang




                                                                                                                                                                 and loss
                                                                             damage
                     3/4




                                                                             15-60%
                                                                             Partial
                                                              0-15%




                                                                                                                                             (loss)
                     Electricity grids (ad hoc connections)
                     Utility poles
                     Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                        Subtotal
                     Fuel-based power generators
   ENERGY NETWORKS




                     Community-driven power generators
                     Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                        Subtotal
                     Green energy/off-grid solutions
                     Solar-power driven energy sources
                     Bio-gas plants
                     Other (Specify)
                     Hydropower
                     Other (Specify)




                                                                                                                        Reconstruction
                                                                                       Complete dam

                     Matrix of Damage and losses




                                                                                                                                                               Total damage
                                                                                                      uantification




                                                                                                                                           effect (loss)
                                                                                                      (state Unit)
                     Community Infrastructure Assets
                                                                                       60-100%




                                                                                                                                                               and loss
                                                              damage



                                                                             damage




                                                                                                                        Repair /
                                                                             15-60%




                                                                                                                                           Indirect
                     4/4
                                                                             Partial
                                                              0-15%
                                                              Minor




                                                                                                                        cost
                     Piped water
                     Supply pipes
   WATER AND




                     Connection points
                     Water treatment facilities
                     Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                        Subtotal
                     Wells and boreholes, water-harvesting
                     Tube-wells
                     Wells
                     Boreholes
                     Reservoirs
                     Sewage systems
                     Toilet facilities
                     Sewer pipes
                     Other (Specify)
                     Other (Specify)
                                                                                                                        Subtotal

23 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
        Ponds
        Pumps (electric/hand)
        Water-harvesting structures
        Other (Specify)
        Other (Specify)
                                       Subtotal
        Sewage systems
        Toilet facilities
        Sewer pipes
        Other (Specify)
        Other (Specify)
                                       Subtotal
        Septic tank/other solutions
        On-site wastewater treatment
        Composting toilets
        Other (Specify)
        Other (Specify)
                                       Subtotal
        Solid waste handling
        Waste handling facilities
        Recycling facilities
                                       Subtotal




24 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  ANNEX III: COORDINATION OBJECTIVES AND TOPICS:
  Coordination cannot be achieved by ensuring simple participation and involvement. Coordination efforts must
  aim achieve its inherent objectives and these objectives vary among stakeholders and between stages of recov-
  ery. The key coordination objectives in the recovery of the community infrastructure sector are:

      •	 Facilitating information sharing and exchange of data;

      •	 Promoting synergy in assessment and recovery planning, designing and recovery;

      •	 Addressing cross-sectoral needs during recovery;

      •	 Avoiding duplication or double-counting and gap filling;

      •	 Optimizing logistical resources during assessment of damage, loss and recovery needs; And

      •	 Promoting inclusive recovery by taking into consideration of the needs and opinions of diverse stakehold-
         ers into consideration.

  The specific coordination issues and objectives among key stakeholders at various recovery stages are explained
  in the following table:

     Sector/Entity                                             Key coordination objectives

                           Pre-Assessment Phase                Assessment Phase                   Recovery Phase

     Major                 •	   Scoping for CI recovery        •	   Information sharing and       •	   Promoting conformity
     infrastructure                                                 cross-checking                     on design and technical
                           •	   Avoiding duplication and
     group                                                                                             standards
                                filling gaps                   •	   Optimizing logistics during
                                                                    field trips                   •	   Exchange of information
                           •	   Technical consistency
                                                               •	   Communicating and                  and data
                           •	   Design standard
                                                                    sharing community needs       •	   Promoting participatory
                           •	   Exchange of information             and interests for better           monitoring and local ac-
                           •	   Setting priorities                  connectivity with major            countability
                                                                    infrastructure
                           •	   Optimizing resource planning

     Livelihood sector     •	   Better understanding on        •	   Information exchange and      •	   Participatory monitoring
                                the livelihood losses in the        cross-verification            •	   Creation and better facilita-
                                affected communities           •	   Optimizing logistics and           tion of livelihood opportu-
                           •	   Data exchange and infor-            coordinated consultation at        nities
                                mation sharing                      the community level
                           •	   Optimization in logistical     •	   Incorporating livelihood
                                planning and resource               needs in planning and pri-
                                sharing                             oritization in CI recovery

     Governance            •	   Data exchange and infor-       •	   Information exchange and      •	   Promoting participatory
     sector                     mation sharing for defining         cross-verification                 monitoring and local
                                baseline situation                                                     accountability
                                                               •	   Optimizing logistics and
                           •	   Optimizing resource plan-           coordinated consultation at   •	   Provisioning operation
                                ning                                the community level                and maintenance support
                                                                                                       from local and central
                           •	   Coordinated approach           •	   Community perspectives
                                                                                                       government.
                                and defining methods for            and needs for good gov-
                                assessment and recovery             ernance and local govern-     •	   Capacity building and good
                                planning                            ment support for sustain-          governance
                                                                    able recovery




25 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
     Sector/Entity                                            Key coordination objectives

     Local officials,      •	   Data exchange and infor-      •	   Information exchange and        •	   Orientation and awareness
     NGOs/CBOs and              mation sharing for defining        cross-verification                   training in disaster resilient
     local stakeholders         baseline situation                                                      technologies and safety
                                                              •	   Optimising logistics and
                                                                                                        standards
                           •	   Optimising resource plan-          coordinated consultation at
                                ning                               the community level             •	   Local disaster risk manage-
                                                                                                        ment
                           •	   Coordinated approach          •	   Community perspectives
                                and defining methods for           and needs for good gov-
                                assessment and recovery            ernance and local govern-
                                planning                           ment support for sustain-
                                                                   able recovery

   Water and               •	   Scoping for CI recovery       •	   Information sharing and         •	   Exchange of
   sanitation sector                                               cross-checking                       information and data
                           •	   Avoiding duplication and
                                filling gaps                  •	   Optimizing logistics            •	   Promoting participatory
                                                                   during field assessment              monitoring and local
                           •	   Promoting consistency and
                                                                   and information collection           accountability
                                synergy
                                                              •	   Ensuring infrastructural
                           •	   Exchange of information
                                                                   need for full recovery
                           •	   Setting priorities                 of water and sanitation
                           •	   Optimizing resource                (Watsan) services in the
                                planning                           affected communities

   Related PDNA sector     •	   Scoping for CI recovery       •	   Information exchange and        •	   Exchange of
   (health, education,                                             cross-verification                   information and data
                           •	   Avoiding duplication
   agriculture etc)                                                                                •	   Promoting participatory
                                and filling gaps              •	   Optimizing logistics and
                                                                   coordinated consultation             monitoring and local
                           •	   Promoting consistency
                                                                   at the community level               accountability
                                and synergy
                                                              •	   Incorporating livelihood
                           •	   Exchange of information
                                                                   needs in planning and
                           •	   Setting priorities                 prioritization in CI recovery
                           •	   Optimizing resource
                                planning

   Coordination with       •	   Information collection        •	   Data collection and             •	   Effective monitoring and
   local institutions           and verification                   cross-verification                   quality implementation
                           •	   Facilitating organisation     •	   Facilitating assessment of      •	   Conforming to local
                                and planning for PDNA              institutional capacity and           development plans and
                                in CI sector                       needs                                standards
                           •	   Mobilising resources for      •	   Better understanding of         •	   Creating demand for
                                PDNA in CI sector                  local development plans              effective operation and
                                                                   and practices                        maintenance
                                                              •	   Facilitating local resource     •	   Promoting understanding
                                                                   mobilisation                         and raising local aware-
                                                                                                        ness of disaster resilient
                                                                                                        construction




26 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
     Sector/Entity                                           Key coordination objectives

   Local NGOs/CBOs         •	   Information collection       •	   Data collection and         •	   Participatory monitoring
                                and verification                  cross-verification               and quality control
                           •	   Understanding pre-disaster   •	   Providing local knowledge   •	   Facilitating participation in
                                local contexts                                                     recovery implementation
                                                             •	   Facilitating community
                           •	   Sourcing local expertise          participation and           •	   Creating demand for
                                on CI                             engagement                       effective operation and
                                                                                                   maintenance
                           •	   Facilitating organization    •	   Securing community
                                and planning for PDNA in          inputs and support to       •	   Promoting understanding
                                CI sector                         CI recovery                      and raising local
                                                                                                   awareness of disaster
                                                                                                   resilient construction.




27 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
  ANNEX IV: DISASTER IMPACTS IN THE CI SECTOR
  Disaster impacts vary across the types of community infrastructure based on their structural vulnerabilities and the
  hazard type. The generic level of impact by moderate to high intensity hazards on different types of CI are shown
  in the table below:

   Type of Community                          Flood   Cyclone    Tsunami     Earth-     Volcano      Landslide   Fire
   Infrastructure                                                            quake
                                                                (H – high; M- Medium and L – Less)
   Community/Neighborhood Access Road
   Village roads	                              H        M           H           M          H            H         L
   Neighborhood access roads                   M         L          M           M          H            M         L
   Footpath	                                   M         L          M           M          H            M         L
   Earthen Walkways/House                      H        M           H           M          H            H         L
   Road structure (Culvert/Foot Bridge etc)    M         L          M           L          H            M         L
   Slope protection wall                       H        M           H           L          H            M         L
   Small Drainage and Water Structure
   Drains/Drainage pipes                       H        M           H           H          H            H         L
   Pipe culverts	                              M        M           M           L          M            M         L
   Footbridge                                  M        M           H           L          M            M         L
   Earthen dam                                 H        H           H           L          H            M         L
   Water reservoir                             M        M           M           L          M            M         L
   Retaining wall   	
                                               H        M           H           M          M            H         L
   Small embankment                            H        M           H           L          H            M         L
   Deep tube well                              M         L          M           M          M             L        L
   Community latrines                          H        M           H           M          M            M        M
   Solid waste disposal system                 H        H           H           M          H            M        M
   Waste composting plant                      H        H           H           M          H            M         H
   Socio-Economic Infrastructure
   Community resource centers                  M        M           H           H          M            M         H
   Community clubs
   Mosque/Church/Religious centers             H        M           H           H          M            M         H

   Community clinics                           H        H           H           H          M            M         H
   Community schools                           H        H           H           H          M            M         H
   Community shops                             H        H           H           H          H            H         H
   Market grounds                              H        M           M           M          H            H         L
   Market sheds                                M        H           H           H          H            H         H
   Communication and Early Warning Systems
   Community telecenters/early                 M        H           H           H          H            H         H
   warning center
   Community mobile charging center            M        H           H           M          H            M         H
   Community IT Training center                M        H           H           M          H            M         H
   Community-Based Non-Conventional Energy Plant
   Biogas plants	                              H        M           H           H          H            M         H
   Solar PV systems	                           M        H           H           M          M            M         L
   Windmills	                                   L       H           H           M          M             L        L

28 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
   Type of Community                   Flood    Cyclone    Tsunami     Earth-     Volcano      Landslide   Fire
   Infrastructure                                                      quake
                                                          (H – high; M- Medium and L – Less)
   Community-Based Small and Micro-enterprise
   Handloom and cottage industry         H        H           H           M          H            H         H
   Pottery	                              H        M           H           M          H            H        M
   Fish processing plant                 H        M           H           M          M            M         L
   Rice husking plant                    H        H           H           M          H            M         H
   Agro-based plant                      H        H           H           M          H            H        M




29 | COMMUNITY INFRASTRUCTURE
