ENABLING THE DIGITAL REVOLUTION
         IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA:
                What Role for Policy Reforms?




COUNTRY FOCUS: MALI
SPRING   2017
 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS.............................................................................................................................3

FOREWORD..................................................................................................................................................4

ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS........................................................................................................6

SPECIAL TOPICS..........................................................................................................................................8

Addressing the Challenges of ICT Development in Sub-Saharan Africa.................................................8

Mali: Conditions for Reaching Full Potential in Dryland Agriculture...................................................... 31

COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS.............................................................................................................. 43

AFCW3 Economies at a Glance................................................................................................................. 43

CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC.................................................................................................................. 45

CHAD............................................................................................................................................................ 49

GUINEA........................................................................................................................................................ 53

MALI.............................................................................................................................................................. 56

NIGER........................................................................................................................................................... 59




                                                                                      2
  


 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

 This report was prepared by Jose Lopez-Calix and Michel Rogy with the enthusiastic contributions of
 an interdisciplinary Bank team composed of Xavier Decoster, Arthur Foch, Boutheina Guermazi,
 Charles Hurpy, Marc Lixi, Joanne Gaskell, Mansur Ahmed, Madhur Gautam, Johannes Hoogeveen,
 Christopher L. Delgado, Krista Isaacs, Michael Morris, and Renganaden Soopramanien, Olivier Béguy,
 Arsène Kaho, Luc Razafimandimby, Ali Zafar, Markus Kitzmuller, Abdoul Ganou Mijiyawa, Irum Touqeer,
 Lars Christian Moller, Paola Ridolfi, Anne Laure Senges, Johannes Hoogeveeen, Vandana Chandra,
 Tim Kelly and Christophe Lemière. Paul Noumba, Jean Christophe Carret, Adama Coulibaly, Boubacar
 Sidiki Walbani, Siaka Bakayoko, and Rachidi B. Radji provided helpful guidance, information and
 comments.


 Compiling the report would not have been possible without the assistance of Silvia Gulino,
 Maude Jean-Baptiste, Fatimata K. Sy, Salimata Bessin Dera, Carine Belinda Bianda, Toubarot Mossane,
 Micheline Faucompre, Paulette Zoua, Teresa Bampoue, and Béatrice Toubarot Mossane. Soule Bow
 thoroughly reviewed the French translation.


 Precious editorial and composing work was timely executed by Valérie Bennett, Maria Deverna
 and their translation and editing colleagues at JPD Systems.




ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                     3
 


FOREWORD

I am glad to introduce the third edition of a series of reports aimed at discussing macroeconomic
developments in the Central African Republic, Chad, Guinea, Mali, and Niger. This series intends to
foster public debates on key macroeconomic and fiscal policy options in support of poverty reduction. It
disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
issues. One of the objectives of the series is to appraise regional trends and analysis quickly, even if
the presentations are less than fully polished. In short, this new series is a novel vehicle for the Bank to
pitch priority policy reforms not yet properly tackled or even debated in those countries. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this report are entirely those of World Bank staff and do not
necessarily represent the views of the World Bank Group or its affiliated organizations nor those of the
Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


The five countries covered in this report share a number of characteristics and are facing similar challenges
that justify their being monitored jointly. First, they face critical demographic issues that require immediate
action to enable them to experience a population dividend rather than a population burden that might
foreshadow interminable political and social conflicts in the future. Second, with the exception of Guinea,
these are landlocked, low-income Sahelian economies, heavily reliant on the agricultural sector, their
main source of revenue and means of subsistence, with a significant livestock sub-sector based in part
on traditional pastoral nomadism. Third, they are economically non-diversified. These five countries
rely on natural resources exploitation industries—gold for Mali, uranium and oil for Niger, bauxite for
Guinea, diamonds for the Central African Republic, and oil for Chad—that account for a crucial portion
of their output, export income, and public revenue. This dependence on the primary sector makes these




                                                       4                                                    FOREWORD
economies highly vulnerable to climate-related shocks and to volatility in the price of raw materials.
Fourth, each one is struggling to overcome a legacy of political instability and violence, exacerbated by
fragile sociopolitical conditions and the severity of regional security issues. Fifth and finally, four of the
five countries are members of a monetary union that uses a regional currency tied to the euro and exerts
considerable influence on the macroeconomic policies of its Member States.


In terms of the economic outlook, I am especially pleased to report that the news is promising. All of these
countries, with the exception of Chad, are looking at positive growth rates of around 4–6 percent in 2017,
and with the exception of the Central African Republic and Guinea, at downward-trending inflation rates
well below the 3 percent targeted by their regional monetary institutions.


This performance deserves to be underscored since despite their common characteristics and ongoing
external shocks, these countries continue to come up against unique structural constraints in terms of
development and opportunities for speeding up economic growth, reducing poverty, and sharing
prosperity. Because economic diversification is slow and ongoing electoral processes are complex,
joint efforts are currently underway to construct new development strategies. In this regard, this report
analyzes the status of the “digital revolution,” i.e., the rapid penetration of information and communication
technologies (ICT) services in these countries. Such services weigh heavily on future growth and poverty
reduction prospects. However, complex regulation and heavy taxation by international standards are
placing major obstacles on ICT development and the industry’s competitiveness in these countries that
need to be removed. In addition, our special section entitled “Country Focus” addresses a common
regional problem in these agriculture-based economies, namely Mali’s low agricultural productivity. Many
lessons are learned from its major determinants, and multiple policies to accelerate it are proposed.


Finally, I would like to express my gratitude to our governments and technical and financial partners for
their cooperation and multiple joint contributions over the past few months. Their encouragement, inputs,
and technical advice have made it possible to create an environment particularly well suited to a rich and
regular exchange of views on development policy. I hope that this series will continue making it possible
to deepen these discussions and get them out into public space in order to inform citizens and allow them
to express their views.




                                              Paola Ridolfi
                                              Acting Director of Operations
                                              Central African Republic, Chad, Guinea, Mali, and Niger




                                                       5
A C R O N Y M S A N D A B B R E V I AT I O N S
ACFPE	     Central African Professional Training and Employment Agency (Agence Centrafricaine
           pour la Formation Professionnelle et l’Emploi)
AFCW	      Central and West Africa
AFI	       Alliance for Financial Inclusion
ANR	       National Radiation Protection Agency (Agence Nationale de Radio-Protection)
ARPT	      Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (Autorité de Régulation des Postes
           et Télécommunications)
ART	       Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (Autorité de Régulation des Télécommuncations)
BB	Broadband
BCEAO	     Central Bank of West African States (Banque Centrale des États de l’Afrique de l’Ouest)
CAR	       Central African Republic
CEMAC	     Central African Economic and Monetary Community (Communauté Économique et
           Monétaire de l’Afrique Centrale)
CFU	       Unique Property Tax (Contribution Foncière Unique)
CNSS	      National Social Security Fund (Caisse Nationale de Sécurité Sociale)
DPO	       Development Policy Operation
ECOWAS	    Economic Community of West African States
EMI	       Electronic Money Institution
FNE	       National Environmental Fund (Fonds National de l’Environnement)
gbps	      Gigabits per Second
GDP	       Gross Development Product
GICA	      CAR Interprofessional Group (Groupement Interprofessionnel de Centrafrique)
GNF	       Guinean Franc
GNI	       Gross National Income
GNP	       Gross National Product
GSM	       Global System for Mobiles
GSMA	      Global System for Mobile Communication (Groupe Spécial Mobile)
HH	Household
HHI	       Herfindahl-Hirschman Index
HS	        Harmonized System
ICT	       Information and Communication Technology
IP	        Internet Protocol
ITU	       International Telecommunication Union
kbps	      Kilobit per Second
LAAICO	    Libyan Arab African Investment Company
M2M	Machine-to-Machine
MAG	       Midway Alfa Group




                                                 6                                ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
A C R O N Y M S A N D A B B R E V I AT I O N S

mbps	      Megabit per Second
MEDD	      Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development (Ministère de l’Environnement et du
           Développement Durable)
MFN	       Most-Favored Nation
MPTNT	     Ministry of Postal Services, Telecommunications, and New Technologies
           (Ministère des Postes, des Télécommunications, et des Nouvelles Technologies)
MTN	       Mobile Telephone Network
OGP	       Guinean Advertising Authority (Office Guinéen de la Publicité)
OTT	Over-the-Top
PPP	       Purchasing Power Parity
R&D	       Research and Development
SDG	       Sustainable Development Goal
SIM	       Subscriber Identxity Module
SMS	       Short Message Service
SOGEM	     Manantali Energy Management Corporation (Société de Gestion de l’Énergie de Manantali)
SSA	       Sub-Saharan Africa
TAP	       Payroll Tax
TARTEL	    Telecommunication Network Access Tax (Taxe sur l’Accès au Réseau des Télécommunications)
TATTIE	    End-User Incoming International Tax (Taxe sur la Terminaison du Trafic International Entrant)
TCT	       Telecommunication Tax
ToE	       Terms of Reference
TURTEL	    Telecommunication Network Usage Tax (Taxe d’Utilisation des Réseaux de Télécommunication)
USD	       United States Dollar
USF	       Universal Service Fund
VAT	       Value-Added Tax
VoIP	      Voice over Internet Protocol
VSAT	      Very Small Aperture Terminal
WAEMU	     West African Economic and Monetary Union
WB	        World Bank
WDR	       World Development Report
WHT	       Withholding Tax
WTO	       World Trade Organization
XAF	       Central African CFA Franc
XOF	       CFA Franc
ZTE	       Zhongxing Telecommunication Equipment




                                                7
SPECIAL TOPICS
Addressing the Challenges
of ICT Development in
Sub-Saharan Africa
A Lagging Reform Agenda for Achieving Affordable Universal Access

By Xavier Decoster, Arthur Foch, Boutheina Guermazi, Charles Hurpy, Marc Lixi, and Michel Rogy1



W H Y I C T M AT T E R S F O R D E V E L O P M E N T
Today’s digital developments in Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) requires affordable
universal access beyond voice or text messages (short message service – SMS) carried over mobile
phones, such as mobile money and the internet at broadband speeds. The World Development Report
2016 on Digital Dividends2 argues that first-generation supply-side policies for the ICT sector, which
aimed at universal access and affordability, have proved highly successful for voice services and selected
applications such as mobile payment services using the same 2G platform as the voice service.3 With
the growth of the ICT sector and the development of bandwidth-heavy applications, the policy focus is
progressively shifting from solving supply-side challenges (such as how to ensure affordable universal
access to networks) to addressing demand-side challenges (such as how to ensure that networks are open



  This article grew out of a longer technical note entitled “The Challenges of ICT Development in SSA” by the same authors.
1		
		The authors would like to acknowledge valuable peer reviewing by Tim Kelly and Vandana Chandra.
  World Bank. 2016. World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0671-1.
2		
		License: Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO. Available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016
  WDR 2016, p. 200.
3		


                                                                      8                                                        SPECIAL TOPICS
and safe). This will allow individuals, governments, and enterprises to ta ke full advantage of the digital
revolution and reap the Digital Dividend.

Improved access to mobile phone services (voice, text, mobile money and banking, internet) benefits
households – and specially the poor – in multiple ways. ICT can improve access to and use of information,
thereby reducing search costs, improving coordination between different parties, and increasing
market efficiency. This is the most obvious benefit of mobile phones. As mobile phones greatly reduce
communication costs, they allow individuals and firms to send and receive information quickly and
cheaply. An emerging body of research shows that the reduction in communication costs associated
with mobile phones has tangible economic benefits, including improving agricultural and labor market
efficiency as well as producer and consumer welfare.4;5 Another benefit of mobile phones is that increased
communication improves productive efficiency by allowing firms and service providers to better manage
their supply chains and service delivery. For example, fishermen who can choose where to land their
catch are known to first enquire about prices in different markets before deciding where to sell. Mobile
phones facilitate services directly or indirectly, including motor-taxi services, which can be requested by
people living remotely by simply beeping the driver. Such services can be life-saving, for example when
someone urgently needs to be taken to a healthcare facility. ICTs also facilitate communication between
social networks and geographic areas in response to shocks. For example, ICT platforms recently played a
central role in improving the effectiveness of healthcare institutions and emergency coordination centers
fighting Ebola in contaminated countries by improving information flows and electronic payments for
emergency response teams as well as the public. In Sierra Leone, the World Bank’s social protection team
used mobile payments successfully to issue USD 450,000 in payments to 6,000 community workers.

Yet AFCW36 countries, home to approximately 69 million people living in environments affected by the
challenges of fragility, conflict, and violence (CAR, Chad, Guinea, Mali, Niger) or post-Ebola recovery
(Guinea, Mali),7 still lag behind in terms of affordable universal access to networks. Mobile network
penetration in those countries is just 38 percent, compared to 43 percent for Sub Saharan Africa (SSA)
and a population coverage of 84 percent compared to 90 percent for SSA, while as few as 5 percent are
internet users compared to 22 percent for SSA (Figure 1). Boosting access to ICT networks and services
is therefore key to fostering inclusive growth and supporting pro-poor decentralized transfers and social
protection.

This article reviews the state of the sector’s performance in AFCW3 countries and highlights a lagging
reform agenda along with risks of the emergence of a cozy oligopoly market structure, issues related to
distressed state-owned operators, ineffective implementation of universal access and service policies and
programs, and inappropriate taxation of the sector. The note makes the case for governments to tackle the
unfished reform agenda if the sector is to achieve better development outcomes in terms of faster growth,
more jobs as well as better services.




4	 Robert T. Jensen. (2007). The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance, and Welfare in the
	 South Indian Fisheries Sector. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(3): 879−924.
5	 Jenny C. Aker. (2010). Information from Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural Markets in Niger.
	 American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 2(3): 46–59.
6	 AFCW3 countries are the Central African Republic, Chad, Guinea, Mali, and Niger.
7	 The official end of Ebola in Mali was January 18, 2015 and in Guinea December 29, 2015.


                                                                         9
      Figure 1: Access to ICTs in world, Sub-Saharan Africa, and AFCW3 countries (2016 or most recent data)




Source: WB ICT Practice based on World Development Indicators, International Telecommunications Union, GSMA Intelligence, Telegeography, and
national regulatory authorities. Note: (i) “Mobile coverage” refers to the population covered by a mobile signal; (ii) “Unique subscribers” represents
the total number of users who have subscribed to mobile services, excluding Machine-to-Machine (M2M) options. Subscribers differ from connections
in that a unique user may have multiple connections; (iii) Fixed broadband (BB) represents the total number of fixed broadband lines as well as
penetration as percentage of households (HH).




AFCW3 COUNTRIES ARE BEHIND IN AFFORDABLE
UNIVERSAL ACCESS TO MOBILE NETWORKS
The world is in the third wave of the ICT revolution.8 However, it has yet to reach most people in AFCW3
countries, where only 64 percent of the population has an active mobile connection compared to
71 percent in SSA and 95 percent worldwide (Table 1). In many low-income countries, the overall growth
trajectory can be attributed in part to rapid expansion in affordable cellular services. However, success
does not follow simply because people use mobile phones; success follows when users have productive
opportunities through their access to telecommunications. This is the first wave of ICT expansion. Arguably,
the second wave came with access to financial services through mobile money. Here, what is at stake is
not simply traditional communications services but other value-added services also. Today, we are in the
midst of the third wave of ICT expansion, with broadband internet allowing for a true digital revolution.
Unfortunately, this revolution is yet to reach 56 percent of the world’s people, 78 percent in SSA, and
95 percent in AFCW3 countries, who are still offline through lack of broadband connections and therefore
outside the digital economy.
                               Table 1: ICT access in AFCW3 countries (2016 or most recent data)




8 World Bank Group, Handshake Magazine, Connectivity October 2014.


                                                                           10                                                                 SPECIAL TOPICS
                              Table 1: ICT access in AFCW3 countries (2016 or most recent data)




Source: WB ICT Practice based on: WB World Development Indicators, WB Financial Inclusion Index (2014), International Telecommunications
Union, GSMA Intelligence, Telegeography, Afrobarometer Infrastructure Survey, and national regulatory authorities. Note: 2G Mobile coverage for SSA
extrapolated from ITU data. Weighted average by population for AFCW3 cluster. Mobile money accounts = Respondents aged 15+ personally using
a mobile phone to pay bills or to send or receive money in the past 12 months; Fixed BB = Fixed broadband penetration, measured by household
penetration (% HH).




Voice and Text
Whereas voice and text are standard ICT services, only 38 percent of the population in AFCW3 countries
has access to these compared to 43 percent in SSA and 66 percent worldwide. Contrary to Mali (60 percent)
and Guinea (46 percent), market penetration rates (expressed in terms of unique subscribers correcting
for the multi SIM card9 effect) are much lower than sub-regional averages in CAR (22 percent), Chad
(28 percent) and Niger (25 percent) (Table 1). Based on their per capita GDP, these three countries should
achieve at least a 45 percent penetration rate (Figure 3). In the case of Niger, a 25 percent penetration
rate implies that in practice, only 1 Nigerian aged 15+ has access to a mobile network. Recent research
by GSMA’s Connected Women Program suggests that women in Niger are 45 percent less likely to own a
mobile phone than men. The main reason for such low universal access is unlikely to be low geographic
coverage of the mobile networks, as it is fairly good at 86 percent in Chad, 85 percent in Guinea.10
85 percent in Mali, and 80 percent in Niger (Table 1). Meanwhile, population coverage in lowest in CAR,
where it is estimated at 59 percent.11 Yet achieving full coverage of the population remains a key policy
objective in order to prevent the unavailability of telecommunications services from affecting the most
vulnerable, poor, and isolated households.




9	 A SIM card is a smart card that gives a mobile phone its unique phone number and customer identity. In most African countries,
   subscribers tend to own several SIM cards as intra-networks (“on-net”) calls are cheaper than calls between networks (“off-net”).
10	 Figure extrapolated from the Afrobarometer Infrastructure Survey (2016). According to ITU, the population coverage is 99%. The
    national regulatory authority does not provide information on population coverage. However, its 2015 annual report states that all
    334 prefectures and sub-prefectures in Guinea are covered by at least one mobile service provider.
11	 2015. Source: Sector Regulator


                                                                          11
                                                                          Figure 3: Market penetration rate in relation to
   Figure 2: Mobile Connection penetration rate in AFCW3                 per capita GDP in ECOWAS and CEMAC countries
          countries (unique subscribers, end 2016)                             2015 (unique subscribers, end 2015)




  Data source: GSMA Intelligence                                      Data source: GSMA Intelligence and Telegeography




The main reason for a lack of universal access to mobile phones is affordability. Average monthly mobile
services costs as a share of overage monthly Gross National Income (GNI) range between 50 percent
in CEMAC and 30 percent in ECOWAS (2014) (Figure 3). However, while mobile voice tariffs in AFCW3
countries seem reasonable in absolute terms when compared to other countries in the sub-region (Figure
4), they are high relative to the purchasing power of the poorest households, especially in CAR and Niger.
For an average CAR consumer, a standard basket of mobile services represents over 90 percent of per
capita GNI, and almost 50 percent in Niger (Figure 5). Given the low purchasing power of customers,
prices have not decreased sufficiently to allow for the large-scale expansion of standard voice and text
services, thus further limiting the creation of productive opportunities associated with the use of mobile
payments. This becomes apparent when comparing average revenue per user, which is estimated at GNF
24,898 (including VAT; USD 3.30/month) in 201512 for 45 percent market penetration in Guinea and at
merely XAF 1,200 (including VAT; USD 2.30/month) in 201513 for 22 percent market penetration in CAR.


      Figure 4: Cost of a local mobile phone call in AFCW3
                                                                             Figure 5: Monthly mobile cost as a share
        countries (price of an off-net minute, peak time,
                                                                                of monthly GNI per capita (2014)
               USD and purchasing power parity)




   Note: (*) PPP$ data not available for CAR                    Note: Simple averages for CEMAC and ECOWAS cluster limited
                                                                to countries with available data.
   Data source: ITU, Measuring the Information Society, 2016.
                                                                Data source: GSMA, Deloitte, Digital inclusion and mobile sector
                                                                taxation in Niger, January 2017.



12	 2015. Source: Sector Regulator
13	 2015. Source: Sector Regulator


                                                                12                                                             SPECIAL TOPICS
Mobile Money
Mobile money services using a mobile phone to transfer money and make payments to the unbanked
have been mainstreamed by all large pan-African groups14 and are therefore available in all AFCW3
countries (1 service in CAR;15 2 each in Guinea, Mali, and Chad; 3 in Niger). For Mali and Niger, the West
African Economic and Monetary Union’s (WAEMU)16 2015 instructions17 established two types of models
for the issuance of e-money:18 (i) the banking model, where e-money issuance is the responsibility of a
credit or microfinance institution, whether or not in partnership with a technical operator; and (ii) the
non-bank model, implemented within the framework of a non-banking institution, called an Electronic
Money Institution (EMI) and approved for issuing e-money. For CAR and Chad, Central African Economic
and Monetary Community (CEMAC)19 regulations stipulate that a mobile partner can only offer a mobile
money service in partnership with a bank and that banks can partner with no more than one mobile
operator. In Guinea, mobile operators offer mobile banking services by partnering with one or more local
or international banks established in the country.

Progress with mobile money services reaching people, especially in rural areas, has been far from uniform
in AFCW3 countries. Mobile money services are taking off in Chad and Mali but are still nascent in Niger
and Guinea (Figures 6 and 7). In Mali, both active operators Orange Mali and Malitel offer a large array
of services including domestic transfers, sub-regional and international transfers, bill and merchant
payment, airtime top-up, etc. The particularly rapid uptake of mobile payments in Mali (with 2.7 million
users of mobile payment services at the end of 2015) suggests high growth potential, similar in fact to
more advanced East African countries such as Kenya or Tanzania, if the potential of mobile money services
in public services is to be tapped. The 2015 GSMA report on Mobile Money20 showcases Mali and Niger
as countries where mobile money has been successful in reaching rural areas, including through specific
profiles for the agents operating the mobile money’s physical cash-in and cash-out points (rural agents
tend to be older, with more established businesses and a broader portfolio of products), and through
agents offering mobile payments services for all the mobile operators.




14	 Orange Group, Maroc Télécom Group, Airtel Group, MTN Group.
15	 In CAR, Orange launched its mobile money service in the first half of 2016 in partnership with Ecobank, first in the Bangui area, where
    16 percent of the country’s population lives. The Central Bank rejected the partnership proposed by Telecel with another commercial bank
    active in CAR, causing Telecel to search for another commercial Bank acceptable to the Central Bank.
16	 Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo.
17	 BCEAO, Instruction No. 008-05-2015 régissant les conditions et modalités d’exercice des activités des émetteurs de monnaie électronique
    dans les États Membres de l’Union Monétaire Ouest Africaine (WAEMU).
18	 Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), Overview of Digital Financial Services in the West African Economic and Monetary Union, 2016.
19	 Gabon, Cameroon, Central African Republic (CAR), Chad, Republic of the Congo, and Equatorial Guinea.
20	 GSMA, State of the Industry Report – Mobile Money, February 2016.


                                                                       13
                     Figure 6: Mobile money access                                         Figure 7: Active mobile money accounts as
                        and transactions (2014)21                                           percentage of unique subscribers (2014)




     Source: World Bank, Financial Inclusion Index, 2015.                           Source: Calculation based on GSMA Intelligence,
                                                                                    WB Financial Inclusion Index and World Development
                                                                                    Indicators

                                                                                    Note: Weighted average by population for ECOWAS
                                                                                    and CEMAC cluster.




Mobile Broadband Internet
Mobile broadband internet is still in its infancy in AFCW3 countries, with the penetration rate for
3G-enabled SIM22 cards well below the regional average despite a 3G take off in coastal Guinea and
landlocked Mali and Chad (Figure 8). Given current population coverage by 3G networks (18 percent
in Niger, 22 percent in CAR, 36 percent in Guinea and Mali, 40 percent in Chad (Table 1), access to
broadband services in not offered beyond urban areas. Average international internet bandwidth per user
is very low (less than 1kpbs in Chad and CAR, and less than 5kbps in Guinea, Mali, and Niger), reflecting
bottlenecks in access to cheap international broadband connectivity, a key component of retail mobile
broadband internet prices. Rapid mobile broadband Internet development in Guinea was fueled by a
Bank-financed project allowing direct access to the international capacity on the sub-marine cable linking
the African Coast to Europe. This led to an enormous increase in international capacity to 9.5 gbps. As
a result, internet capacity per user has increased from 5 kbps in 2010 to an average of 86 kbps in 2016
despite a significant increase in the number of users. CAR has no international fiber optic connectivity in
place (operators rely on satellite links and microwave installations to access the global internet network).
Meanwhile, international capacity is severely controlled in other AFCW3 countries due to the duopoly of
existing mobile operators in Mali and a de facto monopoly by state-owned operators in Niger and Chad.
Without more significant reductions in retail prices, only limited expansion in broadband internet is likely
in AFCW3 countries, further limiting productive opportunities associated with the use of ICT.




21 	 Domestic remittances sent through a mobile phone: Denotes, among respondents reporting personally giving or sending any
   of their money in the past 12 months to a relative or friend living in a different area of their country, the percentage who sent it
   through a mobile phone, using their own account or someone else’s. Mobile accounts: respondents personally using a mobile
   phone to pay bills or to send or receive money in the past 12 months.
22 Thus far, 4G has been launched only in Chad. This occurred at the end of 2014.


                                                                          14                                                              SPECIAL TOPICS
Figure 8: 3G-enabled SIM cards per capita (active
                                                                        Figure 9: Internet penetration (2007–2016)
    and inactive, M2M excluded, 2011–2016)




 Source: GSMA Intelligence; World Bank World Development           Source: GSMA Intelligence; World Bank World Development
 Indicators                                                        Indicators




    Figure 10: Average international Internet                       Figure 11: Price per mbps in PPP USD/month for
    bandwidth per Internet user, Africa (2015)                         fixed residential broadband service (2014)




Note: kbps/user = kilobits per second per internet user         Note: mbps = megabits per second; PPP = purchasing power parity;
                                                                (a) = Indicates landlocked country; gradient indicates higher cost.
Source: ITU, Measuring ICT Society, 2016; map based on
Google spreadsheet visualization                                Source: World Bank, World Development Report 2016.




                                                           15
A F C W 3 C O U N T R I E S U R G E N T LY N E E D T O
TA C K L E T H E L A G G I N G I C T R E F O R M A G E N D A
All AFCW3 countries have embarked on the first wave of urgently needed supply-side policy reforms
to the ICT sector. Independent regulators have been established under the first phase of ICT reforms,
which aimed at separating the policy function (which remain with the Minister in charge of ICT), the
operations function (transferred to private sector, with the State remaining as a strategic investor in
incumbent operators after privatization), and the regulatory function, transferred to sector regulators).
Sector regulators should work primarily in the consumer’s favor by addressing market failures, fostering
effective competition, protecting consumer interests, and increasing access to technology and services.23
All AFCW3 countries embarked on revamping their legal and regulatory frameworks for telecoms between
2011 and 2015 in order to bring them up to date with technological development, including broadband
internet, virtual mobile operators, “over-the-top” (OTT) service providers,24 and best regulatory practices
(technological neutrality). 2G ICT laws covering data protection, e-commerce, and cybersecurity have also
been introduced (Table 2).



        Table 2: Status of first-generation ICT reforms in AFCW3 countries – legal and regulatory framework


                                      GUINEA                         MALI                    NIGER                CHAD                  CAR
 Independent                                2005                       2000                   1999                 1998                 1996
 regulator
 established                          (effective end
                                         of 2008)
 (date)
 Latest revision                            2015                 2011 (Decrees                2015                 2014            2016 (under
 of telecoms law                                                   revamping                                                       discussion in
                                                                 the regulatory                                                    the National
                                                                   framework)                                                       Assembly)
 Existence of G2 ICT                        YES                         YES                    YES                  YES                  YES
 laws

Source: WB ICT Practice




However, poor sector performance as regards affordable universal access to mobile networks is largely
explained by a significant lag in reforms and remaining reform priorities around market competition,
private participation, effective implementation of universal access and service policies and programs, and
appropriate taxation of the ICT sector.




23 Blackman, Colin, and Lara Srivastava. 2011. Telecommunication Regulation Handbook: Tenth Anniversary Edition. Washington, DC: World Bank.
24 OTT is the delivery of audio, video, and other media over the internet without the involvement of a multiple-systems operator in the control or
   distribution of the content. For telephony, Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) services such as Skype or Viber substitute paid voice calls with calls
   made “free of charge” over the internet. For text, which had been highly profitable for mobile operators, instant messaging OTT services such
   as WhatsApp or WeChat provide a more attractive substitute at a fraction of the price.


                                                                          16                                                                SPECIAL TOPICS
Reversing Decreased Market Competition
Mobile networks need spectrum to transmit voice, text, and mobile payments to the end user. As traffic
volume increases due the development of broadband services, fiber optic infrastructure is increasingly
becoming the technology of choice in several aspects of the internet connectivity value chain. This applies
to international connectivity, i.e., the point where the traffic enters or leaves a country (the “first mile”),
and national connectivity, i.e., when the traffic passes through that country (the “middle mile”). However,
wireless mobile remains the dominant technology with the new 3G and 4G technologies for reaching the
end user (the “last mile”). As frequencies are a scarce resource, best practice for introducing competition
has been through competitive bidding for nationwide mobile licenses for over a decade.



As a result of limited frequency, the number of active mobile operators is also limited, ranging from 2 in
Mali to 4 in CAR (Table 3). Moreover, based on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI), mobile operators
in CAR, Guinea, and Niger are relatively more competitive than in Chad and Mali (Figures 12 through
16). However, market structures in all AFCW3 countries are becoming more oligopolistic in nature, with a
private duopoly in Mali and Chad, a dominant private operator with a competitive fringe25 in Guinea and
in Niger, and a private duopoly with a competitive fringe in CAR.




          Table
           Table3:
                 3:Status
                    Statusof
                           offirst-generation ICT
                               first-generation   reforms
                                                ICT       in
                                                    reforms  AFCW3
                                                            in     countries
                                                               AFCW3         ––
                                                                     countries market competition (2016)
                                                                                                  (2016)
                                                                                arket Competition

                                          GUINEA               MALI                  NIGER                 CHAD                     CAR
 Number of active mobile                      4                  2 26
                                                                                        4                      3                      4
 operators (of which
 subsidiaries of large                       (2)                 (2)                   (3)                    (2)                    (2)
 pan-African groups) *
 Mobile market                             3,890               5,450                 3,927                  4,964                  3,332
 Herfindahl-Hirschman
 Index (HHI)
Source: Telegeography, country reports, 2017. Note: The HHI is the sum of the squares of the market shares of all firms in a given market. A score of
0 indicates perfect competition, while 10,000 denotes a complete monopoly. For more on the HHI see European Commission, 2004.27
* = Orange Group, Maroc Télécom Group, Airtel Group, MTN Group.




25 	 The competitive fringe refers to the group of small competitors challenging the dominant firm in a given market.
26	 One telecommunications license holder does not yet have an operational network, leaving a de facto duopoly between Sotelma/Malitel
     and Orange Mali.
27 	 European Commission, Guidelines on the assessment of horizontal mergers under the Council Regulation on the control of concentrations
	    between undertakings, 2004/C 31/03


                                                                           17
     Figure 12: Guinea – wireless market shares              Figure 13: Mali – wireless market shares
              in volume (2011–2016)                                  in volume (2011–2016)




Data source: Telegeography, 2016                       Data source: Telegeography, 2016




      Figure 14: Niger – wireless market shares              Figure 15: Chad – wireless market shares
              in volume (2011–2016)                                  in volume (2011–2016)
                                   F                                                 F




    Data source: Telegeography, 2016                   Data source: Telegeography, 2016




                                                  18                                               SPECIAL TOPICS
             Figure 16: CAR – wireless market shares
                     in volume (2011–2016)




      Data source: Telegeography, 2016




Fostering Private-Sector Participation
Worldwide experience with ICT access offers a consistent lesson, namely that managing and competing
with large and fiercely competitive global telecom operators is difficult to sustain without draining
the State’s Treasury and should be left to the private sector. Among AFCW3 countries, Mali is the only
country to have successfully privatized the incumbent operator, Sotelma, in 2009, selling 51 percent of
the company’s stock to Maroc Télécom for XAF 185 billion. This move provided additional financial and
technical resources that helped Sotelma compete with Orange Mali, which entered the market in 2003
with aggressive and successful expansion and marketing plans. Following privatization, Malitel ramped
up its investment in coverage and services significantly to eventually close the gap on Orange, though its
competitive edge has been deteriorating since 2015.

Like most government-owned incumbents in Africa, government-owned telecom incumbents in AFCW3
countries have been unsuccessful in entering the mobile market and sustaining the level of competition
seen from private mobile operators. They are in serious distress and thus constrain the development of
the ICT sector.


•	 Guinea. In October 2014, the Government announced plans to revive Sotelgui. However, to date,
   this has not happened. In January 2017, Guinea’s Minister of Telecommunications announced new
   plans to relaunch the incumbent operator, but this will be very challenging as the mobile market is
   highly competitive, with 4 operators and a new state-owned entity (SOGEB) with a monopoly on the
   wholesale market segment and the management of the national backbone still under construction.
   International capacity is managed by a Public Private Partnership entity (GUILAB).




                                                       19
•	 Niger. In December 2011, the Libyan Arab African Investment Company (LAAICO) and Chinese
     equipment vendor ZTE formed a joint venture (Dataport) to acquire a 51 percent stake in Sonitel and
     its wireless arm SahelCom. However, in 2009, the Government renationalized Sonitel from Dataport
     due to alleged poor management and failure to meet the terms of the privatization agreement. In
     2012, the National Assembly decided that Sonitel would remain fully public. For now, SahelCom is
     unable to compete globally. In its 2014 annual report, the Postal and Telecommunications Regulatory
     Authority (ARTP) highlighted its view that SahelCom was close to bankruptcy and had failed to repay
     its debts and other liabilities. At the end of 2016, the Government finalized the merger between
     Sonitel and SahelCom in a move aimed at streamlining the technical and financial resources of the
     two companies to make the combined entity more appealing to potential investors.28


•	 Chad. Affordable universal access to mobile and internet services has stalled in Chad for the last
     7 years because of the Government’s lack of a clear vision and political commitment to implement
     it. The privatization of Sotel Chad led to the launch of its Salam mobile service in 2009 and its TawaLi
     fixed broadband service in 2010, but with little success. In 2014, Sotel rebranded these services and
     rolled them into Groupe Sotel Tchad alongside its traditional fixed line telephony business. In 2010,
     the Government sold a 60 percent stake in SOTEL to a Libyan holding company (GreenN) for USD
     90 million. However, due to complications related with the civil war, in Government renationalized
     Sotel. In 2014 the Government again announced its intention to re-privatize Sotel, but because of
     political and social resistance linked to employee management and deep suspicion of government
     intentions, the plan failed. In June 2015, an agreement was finally reached between Sotel, the Telecom
     Ministry, and Midway Alfa Group (MAG), a Romanian company, to cede control of the administrative,
     technical, and financial management of Sotel and a share of the company’s net earnings for five years
     in exchange for an investment of USD 50 million in the company. However, employee protests since
     late 2015 seem to have stalled progress.


•	 CAR. Socatel launched a mobile subsidiary, Centrafrique Télécom Plus, in 1995, but it closed
     in 2005 due to its small subscriber base and inability to renew its mobile license. The country
     has only 1,000 fixed telephone subscribers and roughly the same number of fixed broadband
     subscribers, mostly business consumers. Fixed telephone and fixed broadband services
     reached about 0.1 percent of households in CAR in 2015, well below the SSA average of
     2.2 percent.29 Socatel is in an advanced state of disrepair as it operates at a huge financial deficit
     and its infrastructure is severely inadequate for operating the remaining elements of the fixed-line
     network. Restructuring the operator will be a challenge because it has 190+ employees and a net
     social debt of about XOF 5.3 billion. The proposed social plan would cost about USD 2 million.



Political leverage and vested interests among unionized employees have led state-owned telecoms
operators to stall reform and become a major obstacle to the growth of the ICT sector. The overall
negative impact of such decisions on the overall sector is significant (Table 4). Some governments believe




28	 Telegeography, Niger, 2017.
29	 Telegeography, 2016.



                                                      20                                             SPECIAL TOPICS
that since incumbents were historically in charge of the provision of fixed telephone infrastructure, they
are entitled to provide the fiber optic broadband infrastructure required to develop mobile broadband
internet. In Chad and CAR, incumbents still have exclusive rights for fixed telephony. In Niger, a de facto
monopoly operates the fiber optic infrastructure for the international and national backbone funded by
the Government. In Guinea, a public company (SOGEM) has been established to build and operate a
national fiber optic backbone funded by the Government. However, it is unclear whether or how private
participation might be envisaged. In Chad, Sotel operates the N’Djamena Moundou fiber optic link that
connected it to Cameroon. A new 1,500 km link between N’Djamena and Adré has been funded by
the Government and is envisaged to be operated by a public private partnership. Governments have
also engaged in policy reversals to alleviate the financial burden of distressed incumbents. In Niger, the
incumbent operator was given the exclusive right to operate the international gateway.


               Table 4: Status of first-generation ICT reforms in AFCW3 countries – private participation

                                        GUINEA                  MALI                 NIGER             CHAD           CAR
 Privatization of                          NO                    YES                  NO                 NO           NO
 incumbent operator
 Has there been a failed                   YES                   NO                   YES               YES           NO
 attempted to privatize?
 Incumbent fixed                           NO                    YES                  YES               YES           NO
 operator also active in
 mobile market
 Incumbent operator with                   NO                    NO            International gate- Fixed          Fixed
 exclusive rights                                                              ways (de facto fiber telephony     telephony
                                                                               optic backbone)
 Current status of                 Bankrupt              Relatively            Uncompetitive:     Dysfunctional   Advanced
 incumbent operator                                      competitive:          6% market share in                 state of
                                                         35% market            mobile telephony,                  disrepair
                                                         share in mobile       fewer than 13,000
                                                         telephony             fixed broadband
                                                         (December             subscribers
                                                         2016)30               (September 2016)31
 Number of employees               0 (social                     n/d           Around 1,20032      Around 450     Around 190
                                   plan fully
                                   implemented)
Source: WB ICT Practice




Effective Implementation of
Universal Access Service Policies and Programs
Mobile network coverage remains out of reach for about 12.5 million people in AFCW3 countries, which
represents 18 percent of the total population.33 However, the situation is far worse for mobile broadband
as 72 percent of the population (49.4 million people) is out of reach of a 3G signal.34 Even where it is




30	TeleGeography
31	TeleGeography
32	 Discussion with Nigerian authorities held in September 2016.
33	 1.9m in Guinea, 2.6m in Mali, 4.0m in Niger, 2.0m in Chad, and 2.0m in CAR.
34	 8.0m in Guinea, 11.2m in Mali, 16.2m in Niger, 10.9m in Chad, and 3.0m in CAR.


                                                                        21
technically viable to serve these populations, firms may have little commercial incentive to do so because
the costs of reaching them are high as most of them live in rural locations with low population density or
in geographically remote areas. However, as the social costs of remaining unserved are high and growing,
there is a need to bridge the connectivity gap through universal service policies and programs designed
to increase the coverage and penetration of mobile networks.

Due to economies of scale in mobile networks and services, marginal costs in densely populated urban
centers tend to be significantly lower than in far-flung rural areas that may also lack key complementary
infrastructure such as reliable electricity, which further increases the cost of supply. On the demand side
too, urban households are often more attractive customers because they are wealthier than their rural
counterparts. For example, 16 percent of CAR’s population live in only 0.1 percent of its territory—the
capital city, Bangui—and almost 60 percent live in less than 20 percent of its territory. As a result, mobile
services are heavily concentrated in Bangui and the small number of cities in the central and western
regions of the country. At the end of 2014, the number of sites for each mobile operator ranged from
44 (Azur) to 105 (Telecel), a very low value by international standards given the extent of the territory.
Moreover, mobile operators deactivated mobile sites in four localities in 2014 because of difficulties with
maintenance and the security situation. There are only about 100 sites in CAR covering an ostensible
59 percent of the population, in comparison with global standards of at least 400 sites needed to achieve
a 60 percent population coverage with an acceptable quality of service. Covering over 90 percent of the
population would require at least 1,500 sites.

To extend affordable access, over 70 countries around the world have established Universal Service Funds
(USF) to channel payments by operators to fund infrastructure in rural areas or to provide access to libraries,
schools, and hospitals. Some USFs have performed well, notably those that use competitive mechanisms to
distribute funds, such as least-cost subsidies in Pakistan or reverse auctions in rural Chile. If well-managed
and transparent, USFs can be powerful tools for providing ICT to under-served communities.35 However,
USFs have not been made operational in any of the AFCW3 countries. While fees have been collected
from operators, unspent USFs in AFCW3 countries amount to over USD 100 million (Table 5).


            Table 5: Status of first-generation ICT reforms in AFCW3 countries – independent regulation:
                                 implementation of Universal Access and Service Funds

                                                    GUINEA                    MALI                NIGER              CHAD              CAR

 Effective implementation of                          NO                       NO                   NO                NO               NO
 universal access and service
 policies


 Undisbursed amount in                                USD                    USD                  USD            Unknown37          No fees
 Universal Service Fund                            30 million            36.9 million           35 million                         collected38
                                                  (December              (December             (September
                                                     2016)                  2014)                2016)36
Source: WB ICT Practice




35 	 A4AI, 2017 Affordability Report, 2017.
36	 Discussion with the Nigerian authorities held in February 2017. This amount is currently available. The fund has an additional USD 52 million
     in accounts receivable.
37	 A fee was introduced in 2014 representing 2.5% of the total sales of wireless operators. However, no information is available on the actual amounts
    collected or available.
38	 The Universal Service Fund is mentioned in the telecom law in CAR, but its operationalization is subject to an implementing decree
    that has still not been issued as of today.


                                                                         22                                                              SPECIAL TOPICS
Appropriate Taxation of the ICT Sector
WDR 2016 on Digital Dividends39 advised countries to look at the digital economy as a source of growth
and jobs and not just of revenue. However, revenues from telecoms, such as customs duties on hardware,
auctioning and managing spectrums, and value-added tax (VAT) or sales taxes on services have been one
of the fastest growing sources of revenue in many developing countries. While license fees typically cover
the value of scarce frequencies (a public good) and are paid to the Treasury, sector-specific taxes and fees
are included in the license in order to: (i) cover the costs of the regulatory function, such as numbering
administration fees or frequency administration fees; and (ii) contribute to the USF (see above). All AFCW3
countries reflect such standard sector-specific taxes and fees in their legal and regulatory frameworks
and in the license obligations of the mobile operators. Furthermore, in recent years, sector-specific taxes
and fees have proliferated in AFCW3 countries, particularly in the form of excise and sales taxes (Table 5).
In response, there is an urgent need for a coherent and reasoned approach to additional taxes and fees
specific to the ICT sector.

Excise taxes are per unit taxes, costing a specific amount for a unit of the specific ICT service purchased.40
In AFCW3 countries, a multiplicity of excise taxes have been introduced: on domestic retail voice and text
services (Guinea), domestic retail internet (Guinea) or domestic revenues (Niger), international incoming
wholesale voice service (Guinea, Niger, CAR), and SIM cards (Niger). In 2015, Guinea also introduced
TARTEL, a sales tax set at 3 percent of revenues of mobile operators.

Furthermore, all AFCW3 countries levy a 10 percent import tax on computers and mobile phones. In
countries where the penetration level is very low, high import tariffs on entry-level phones may constrain
the ability of the poorest to access mobile networks. In CAR, entry-level mobile phones cost around XAF
6,900 (about USD 10), which represent 3.7 percent of per capita GDP. In Niger, entry-level mobile phones
cost around XOF 7,000 (about USD 10), estimated to be more than 20 days of income for the bottom
20 percent of the population.41 The affordability threshold for an entry-level mobile phone in countries
such as CAR and Niger is generally considered to be not more than XOF-XAF 5,000 (about USD 8).




39 	 WDR 2016, p. 255.
40 	 Typical examples of excise taxes are taxes on gasoline, alcohol, or tobacco, as the rationale for the imposition of such excise taxes is often public
     safety and health, public morals, or environmental protection (consequently, funds collected are often earmarked, as in tobacco tax revenues
     unding government anti-smoking campaigns).
41 	 GSMA, Inclusion Numérique et Fiscalité dans le Secteur de la Téléphonie Mobile au Niger, January 2017.


                                                                          23
    Table 6: Status of first-generation ICT reforms in AFCW3 countries – independent regulation: ICT taxation


                               GUINEA              MALI                   NIGER                       CHAD                          CAR
 Mobile operators’                USD               USD                   USD                  USD 297 million in          USD 46.9 million
 revenues (share of            397 million       720 million       348 million in 2015           2015 (2.8%)                  in 2014
 GDP)                           in 2016           in 2014                 (5%)
                                 (5.9%)            (11%)                                                                           (2.7%)

 Overall sector taxation          62%42              Not                    40%                         48%                        37.41%
 as % of mobile                                    available
 operators’ revenues
 Sector-specific excise             YES               YES                   YES                         NO                Since 2011, total
 taxes on access to                                                                                                           surtax on
 retail services                                                         SIM cards                                       domestic wireless
                                                                                                                         services capped at
 Sector-specific excise             YES               YES                   YES                         NO                3.5% for a 5-year
 taxes on use of retail                                                                                                        period43
 services                       Domestic                                Domestic
                                voice and                           revenues (access
                                   text                                and usage)
                                Domestic
                                 Internet
 Sector-specific excise             YES               NO                    YES                         YES                         YES
 taxes on wholesale
 services                       Incoming                                Incoming                    Incoming                   Incoming
                              international                        international voice         international voice        international voice
                                  voice
                                                                      USD 0.11/min.               USD 0.08/min.             USD 0.06/min.
                                USD 0.12/
                                  min                                (XOF 67.5/min)               (XAF 50/min)              (XAF 40/min.)

 Sector-specific sales              YES               NO                    YES                         YES                         YES
 taxes on ICT services
                                  (3% of                                                         7% of revenues            (2% of revenues)
                                revenues)                                                     (3.5% for regulatory
                                                                                               and administrative
                                                                                                  fees, 2.5% for
                                                                                                universal service,
                                                                                               1% for public R&D)
 Amount of custom                  10%               10%                    10%                         10%                         10%
 duties on entry-level
 mobile phones44
Source: WB ICT Practice based on audit commissioned by the Government (Guinea), information provided by local stakeholders (CAR)
and Deloitte study for GSMA (Niger)




•	 Guinea. The overall ICT tax rate in Guinea increased from 21 percent in 2014 to 70 percent of declared
     gross revenues in 2016.45 An excise tax on incoming voice traffic has been in place since September
     2009. A series of new ICT sector-specific taxes were introduced in 2015: one was TARTEL, a 3 percent
     tax on the revenues of the mobile operator. The second was a tax on specific domestic retail mobile
     services (Table 7).46 In 2016 a new sector-specific tax of 5 percent of the value of internet packages
     was introduced. In 2015, ARPT collected approximately 3.95 percent of mobile operators’ revenues to


42	 Ideaconsult, October 2016.
43 	 There is legal uncertainty as to what will happen in 2017.
44 	 Most recent data from World Trade Organization (WTO) Tariff Download Facility for Most-Favored Nation (MFN) tariffs for mobile phones
     (Harmonized System HS 6-digit code: 851712).
45 	 An excise tax on incoming voice traffic was introduced in September 2009, initially at USD 0.28/min., of which USD 0.03.5 was collected by
     ARPT, USD 0.07/min. was used to pay the private sector provider of the traffic monitoring system, and USD 0.015/min. was used to contribute
     to the financing of future broadband infrastructure (submarine cable, fiber optic backbone).
46 	 TCT: GNF 1 per second of voice communication; GNF 10 per text message.



                                                                       24                                                              SPECIAL TOPICS
      cover its costs as sector regulator, while this was expected to rise to 7.72 percent in 2016.47 In addition,
      taxes are levied by other actors alongside traditional stakeholders such as the Ministry of Economy
      and Finance, the sector regulator, and local authorities (“rights of ways”). The Guinean Advertising
      Office (OGP), established in 2015, has introduced a mobile marketing fee applied to bulk SMSs sent
      by mobile operators to their client bases.


                                         Table 7: Overview of ICT taxation in Guinea (2016)


         Tax Name                    Tax rate or                    Tax base                Value     % revenues
                                       value
                                        Total sales                                          3410        100%
               VAT                     18% / 20%                    Gross sales              664        19.47%
               TCT                       GNF 1/s.                       Traffic              642        15.40%
            TCT SMS                   GNF 10/SMS                        Traffic              30.85      0.90%
            TARTEL                          3%                          Sales                107.4      3.17%
     Research & Training                   1.5%                      Net sales               25.7       0.75%
      Contribution Fon-                     3%                       Net sales               38.5       1.13%
     cière Unique (CFU)
          Microwave                        Scale                      Network               115.52      3.39%
               USF                         2.5%                       Network                63.68      1.87%
          GSM VSAT                         Scale                      Network                20.85      0.61%
              OGP                             -                            -                  8         0.23%
       Total main taxes                       -                            -                1716.54     46.69%
      Taxes on benefits                    35%                     NET INCOME                491.8      14.42%
        Total taxes and                       -                            -                2143.15     62.85%
            duties
         Regulator fee                        -                            -                255.07      7.48%


Source: Ideaconsult, October 2016




•	 Niger. Mobile services yielded USD 348 million in revenues in 2015, representing 5 percent of
      Niger’s GDP. Preliminary consolidation of sector taxation made by Deloitte48 and to be confirmed
      by the ongoing study commissioned by the Government indicates that in 2015, overall taxation was
      estimated at 42 percent of mobile operators’ revenues. ARPT collected approximately 6.5 percent on
      revenues to cover its duties as sector regulator (license fees, USF, R&D fund, numbering). A specific
      tax (called the fixed component of TURTEL) was levied on SIM cards. Among AFCW3 countries, only
      Niger levies a tax amounting to XOF 250 (USD 0.40) for each new SIM card worth XOF 1,000, thereby
      increasing the cost of access to mobile networks for new customers. As most of the population
      with access is wealthier and lives in urban areas, the fixed-component TURTEL tax is an additional
      barrier to the poor having access to mobile networks. In fact, USD 0.40 is only slightly less than the



47	 Ideaconsult, October 2016.
48 	 GSMA, Deloitte, Digital inclusion and mobile sector taxation in Niger, January 2017.


                                                                           25
         daily income of the bottom 20 percent of the population (or USD 0.50). The variable component of
         TURTEL amounts to 3 percent of the domestic revenues of the mobile operators. The effect of the
         20 percent (TATTIE) tax imposed on the mobile operator’s revenues in 2015 caused a 37 percent
         drop in international incoming voice traffic (Table 8). If such an excise tax on incoming voice traffic
         had not been introduced, stable traffic volumes combined with rising incoming traffic prices in
         the sub-region (caused by African operators increasing their share of the revenues from incoming
         international traffic) would have brought the same amount of revenues for the Government.




                      Table 8: Impact of excise tax on international incoming traffic in Niger (2013–2015)


INCOMING INTERNATIONAL TRAFFIC                     Unit             2013                     2014                  2015                      2015 (est.)
                                                                                                                                             without TATTIE

Traffic volume                                     Min.                     718,559,888             568,670,348           447,289,976              718,559,888

Unit price billed to foreign operators             XOF                             78.71                 125.00                  169.04                 150.00

Revenues                                           XOF                  56,557,848,784          71,083,793,500         75,610,643,026          107,783,983,200

Unit cost for Nigerien op. (TATTIE excl.)          XOF                             23.00                   22.00                     21.00               21.00

Average amount of TATTIE                           XOF                                   -                 25.00                     64.79                     -

Net revenues                                       XOF                  40,030,971,360          44,356,287,144         37,236,890,502           92,694,225,552

Income tax                                         %                                   30                     30                       30                     30

Income tax (only profitable operators)             XOF                   7,882,872,934           9,900,649,886                                  27,808,267,666

Tax by TATTIE                                      XOF                                   -      14,216,758,700         28,980,663,028                          -

Total taxes                                        XOF                  7,882,872,934         24,117,408,586         28,980,663,028           27,808,267,666

Total taxes                                        US$ eq.                 15,765,746               48,234,817            57,961,326               55,616,535

Incoming international call for the 2 market leaders

TATTIE: XOF 25/min. (January 1, 2014), XOF 35/min. (January 1, 2015), XOF 67.5/min. (February 1 2015), XOF 88/min. (July 1, 2016)

    Source: WB ICT Practice




    •	 CAR. Mobile services yielded USD 46.9 million in revenues in 2014 while fixed-line broadband
         generated merely USD 3 million,49 representing 2.7 percent of CAR’s GDP. Preliminary consolidation of
         sector taxation made by the CAR Inter-professional Group (GICA) and to be confirmed by the ongoing
         study commissioned by the Government indicates that overall taxation is estimated at 37.41 percent
         of mobile operators’ revenues in 2016 (Table 9). Of particular concern are the very high amounts of
         revenue retained by the Telecommunications Regulatory Authority (ART), the sector regulator, and
         caused by the introduction of an excise tax on incoming voice traffic as well as the multiplicity of
         stakeholders raising taxes on mobile operators. ART is currently collecting a very high amount of taxes
         to perform its duties (17.64 percent of revenues).50 According to a Ministerial Decree of December
         2016, the tax collected by ART was raised to XAF 260/min. (equivalent to USD 0.43), which will impact




   49 ART, 2014.
   50 According to a convention signed in 2007, a ceiling of 3.5% of revenues was set for levying such duties, including numbering
      and IP addresses (art. 43, Law 07.020), contribution to universal service/access fund (art. 47, Law 07.020), and frequencies
      (Art. 5, Ministerial Decree 488/MPTNT).



                                                                            26                                                                SPECIAL TOPICS
     the taxation level in 2017. ART has canceled its contract with the private sector provider
     operating the traffic monitoring system and is in the process of selecting a new private sector
     provider. Taxes in CAR are also levied by several other agencies alongside the traditional
     stakeholders (Ministry of Economy and Finance, the sector regulator, and local authorities) to
     monitor alleged radioactivity emissions by mobile networks or negative environmental impacts
     of electromagnetic waves used by mobile operators to transmit communications. Finally, the
     2017 Finance Law introduced a new sales tax of 2 percent of mobile operators’ revenues.




                                        Table 9: Overview of ICT taxation in CAR (2015)


                             Nature of tax                                % revenues         Recipient
       Parafiscal levies                                                    22.12

                 Use of public domain
                            Regulatory fee                                   3.5                 ART
                            3G usage award                                   3.06      ART (50%) / MPTNT (50%)
                            License (depreciation)                           1.94          Public treasury
                            International traffic                           12.64                ART
                 Others
                            Environmental tax                                0.07      FNE (60%)/MEDD (40%)
                            Radioactivity tax                                0.55               ANR
                            Local tax                                        0.36            Municipality
       Taxation                                                             14.52
                 Direct tax                                                  4.24          Public treasury
                 Indirect tax                                               10.28          Public treasury
       Social contribution                                                   0.77           ACFPE/CNSS
       Total                                                                37.41


Source: Groupement Interprofessionnel de Centrafrique (GICA), 2017




TA C K L I N G R E F O R M P R I O R I T I E S :
T H R E E A X E S O F A N A G E N D A F O R I M M E D I AT E A C T I O N
The supply side of the mobile network services is conditioned by rules for market competition shaped
by the respective roles of the public and private sectors and mediated by the degree to which regulation
of the sector is independent of both government and the operators. AFCW3 countries urgently need
to address the unfinished agenda of the first wave of ICT sector reforms aimed at achieving affordable
universal access to mobile voice and text services as a key enabler in the successful development of mobile
money and broadband internet services. Priority reforms should focus on: (i) improving competition
ahead of the takeoff of broadband internet markets; (ii) using USF resources to serve the uncovered; and




                                                                     27
(iii) implementing a transparent and efficient fiscal policy regime to generate a fair share of revenues for
the public authorities under a pro-growth agenda. These reforms are better tackled by Development
Policy Operation (DPO) instruments and related technical assistance activities to accompany governments
in their reform efforts.



Improving competition ahead of the takeoff of broadband internet markets
The experience of the past decade has shown that competition is the driving force behind accelerated
and sustainable telecoms market development. Despite pro-competition policies that have encouraged
infrastructure competition away from fixed incumbent operators’ monopolies, mobile markets in AFCW3
countries are becoming increasing oligopolistic in nature, with a private duopoly in Mali and Chad, a
dominant private operator with a competitive fringe in Guinea and Niger, and a private duopoly with a
competitive fringe in CAR. In addition, in all AFCW3 countries except Mali, the incumbent fixed operator
is in a distressed situation. Given the limited penetration of broadband internet services, governments
should seek to revitalize competition ahead of the takeoff of the third wave of ICT expansion through the
following key measures:

    •	 Promoting market entry when the HHI is high by awarding 4G licenses to new market entrants;


    •	 Maintaining or creating a level playing field by: (i) imposing proportionate obligations on
        incumbent operators for wholesale broadband offers as well as for facility sharing through
        regulation or provisions in their 4G terms of reference (ToR); and (ii) effective regulatory oversight
        of such obligations;


    •	 Leveraging excess fiber optic capacity along electricity grids, pipelines, and roads to provide
        competitors to the incumbent mobile operators with alternative access to the global internet;


    •	 Fostering broadband public private partnerships to roll out infrastructure the private sector alone
        would not put in place in the near future, either on a stand-alone basis or by engaging voluntarily
        into some form of infrastructure sharing to reduce investment costs (e.g., through public-private
        partnerships for international fiber connectivity in the form of a submarine cable landing station)
        the private sector is unable to finance on its own. In Guinea, a public-private partnership for
        national fiber optic connectivity to all provincial capitals and borders is helping to create a national
        backbone designed to support broadband traffic throughout the territory; and


    •	 Dealing with distressed incumbent fixed operators while carefully handling the social dimension
        of the process by transferring the government-funded infrastructure to the broadband public-
        private partnerships (international fiber optic capacity, national fiber optic backbone capacity,
        local loop fiber, ducts and technical sites) and selling off the client base to other operators active
        in the retail market.




                                                       28                                               SPECIAL TOPICS
Using universal service fund resources to serve the uncovered
Markets fail where the private sector underinvests because the private return is less than the social return.
In AFCW3 countries, there is market failure in the provision of affordable access to ICT services for poor
people in remote or rural areas and those with very low purchasing power, who find the cost of mobile
phone services prohibitive. However, as the social costs of remaining underserved are high and growing,
there is a role for governments to take corrective action to offset this market failure. Universal service funds
(USF) established in AFCW3 countries are underutilized, remain unspent, or are used for unintended
purposes. Reform to existing universal service or access funds for mobile networks and services should
focus on the following key measures:


     •	 Establish and make operational a transparent and accountable governance structure for USFs;


     •	 Ensure quick disbursements from USFs to expand the coverage of mobile networks in rural and
          remote areas, using competitive mechanisms to distribute funds; and


     •	 Repurpose USFs to focus on accelerating broadband internet penetration.




Implement a transparent and efficient fiscal policy designed to generate a fair share
of revenues for the public authorities as part of a pro-growth agenda
The proliferation of taxes makes it increasingly difficult governments to estimate the total fiscal and
parafiscal levy on mobile operators. Governments in AFCW3 countries such as Guinea, Niger and CAR
have therefore started to commission independent fiscal audits and studies as inputs with a view to striking
a more appropriate balance between generating a fair share of fiscal revenues that would facilitate growth
of the ICT sector. As most local mobile operators are subsidiaries of large pan-African groups and have
thin capitalization, transfer prices may reduce local profits as well as the income tax base. Recent studies
conducted by GSMA, the mobile industry lobbying group,51 claim that: (a) in emerging markets, mobile
operators are often the largest tax contributors; (b) mobile operators and consumers are often subject
to sector-specific taxes and fees over and above general taxation; (c) taxes and fees on mobile services
appear misaligned with best practice tax principles; and (d) economic modeling suggests that mobile tax
reductions can support connectivity and fiscal sustainability in the medium term.




51 Between 2011 and 2016, a number of studies of taxation conducted by Deloitte/GSMA presented an in-depth analysis of mobile taxation and
   the impacts of potential reform on sector specific and macroeconomic variables.


                                                                    29
WDR 201652 recommends avoiding excessive import and excise taxes in digital emerging economies such
as the AFCW3 countries. Reforms of the existing fiscal and parafiscal regimes for mobile networks and
services should focus on the following key measures:


     •	 Ensure that independent sector regulation is run on a cost-recovery basis based on the duties to
          be performed by sector regulator and an audit and benchmarking of the underlying costs and
          incorporated in a legislative instrument. Among the duties to be performed are verification of
          traffic data and hence revenues generated by mobile operators. A much-needed robust traffic
          monitoring system should be procured according to international transparent and competitive
          bidding processes, and the financing of such a system should not be harmed by an ongoing levy
          on incoming international traffic;


     •	 Reduce the proliferation of fiscal and parafiscal taxes by numerous stakeholders, and provide
          transparency regarding the total amount by consolidating all taxes in a single legislative instrument;


     •	 Substitute all excise taxes levied on individual access to and usage of mobile services (voice, text,
          mobile money, broadband internet) by non-service specific sales taxes collected by the Treasury
          to avoid distortions in market prices and impact on customer preferences; and

     •	 Lower import tariffs on mobile phones in countries with low mobile penetration to boost access to
          mobile networks for the poorest.



From a region-specific perspective, the findings that mobile phones influence inclusive development
imply that SSA governments should put mobile phones at the heart of policy making in respect of issues
such as the alleviation of poverty, women’s empowerment, and bridging the gap between rural poor and
urban rich.53 However, sector reforms in a fast growing and highly transformative ICT sector are not always
easy, and a deep understanding of political and economic considerations is required if governments are
to design reform packages that can deliver tangible, significant, and lasting results as regards affordable
universal access to mobile voice, texting, and mobile payment services.

While AFCW3 countries are in urgent need of remaining focused on completing first-generation reforms,
they also need to start thinking about other reforms needed to move to the next level of digital development
while aiming at affordable universal access to a safe broadband internet. The recently approved Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG) underscore the need to ensure affordable universal access to the internet in
low income countries by 2020. Thus, to successfully develop their digital economies by enabling digital
technologies, including digital identity and mobile banking, as well as cross-sector synergies with ICTs,
including e-Agriculture, e-Education, e-Health, and e-Government, AFCW3 countries must embark on a
journey of continual learning and evolution.




52 WDR 2016, p. 210.
53 Asongu et al., Mobile Phone Innovation and Inclusive Human Development: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa, MPRA Paper No. 75046,
   March 2016.


                                                                    30                                                          SPECIAL TOPICS
Mali: Conditions for Reaching
Full Potential in Dryland
Agriculture
By Joanne Gaskell, Mansur Ahmed and Madhur Gautam54



BACKGROUND

Mali’s agriculture-focused development strategy offers valuable lessons for other African countries,
particularly those that are seeking to diversify their economies in the wake of falling commodity prices.
Mali pursues an agriculture-led growth strategy that appears to have paid off. Between 1994 and 2009,
reported agricultural GDP growth exceeded 10 percent per year. Accelerating agricultural productivity
growth remains key to stimulating rural demand, creating jobs, adapting to climate change, and ending
poverty in Mali.




54 This article grew out of World Bank Report No. P156684. The authors acknowledge valuable comments from peer reviewers Vandana Chandra,
   Johannes Hoogeveen, Christopher L. Delgado, Krista Isaacs, Michael Morris, and Renganaden Soopramanien.


                                                                    31
Mali’s agriculture sector has been a powerful driver of economic growth and poverty reduction. However,
recent trends suggest that the sector may be running out of steam. Between 1994 and 2009, as the total
factor productivity (TFP) growth rate in the agriculture sector55 was 2.2 percent per year, Mali’s poverty rate
declined from 85 percent to 49 percent. The increase in agricultural productivity growth was impressive,
being high relative to neighboring Sahel countries and on par with India’s. However, since 2010, growth
in agricultural inputs has exceeded growth in agricultural output, leading to a slowdown in productivity
growth. This article argues that there is scope for reversing this premature slow-down in agricultural
productivity growth by reallocating agricultural inputs more efficiently and promoting the use of improved
technologies.

Strategies aiming at reviving agricultural productivity growth in Mali need to be sensitive to differences
in livelihoods across geographic and target areas with high concentrations of poverty. One third of Mali’s
poor live in the dryland zone, a region that stretches west to east from Kayes through Mopti to the border
with Niger and south of Gao and includes Koulikoro in the south (Figure 1). Rainfall is low, averaging
300-800 mm annually depending on the sub-region. The region is a trade corridor, with grain moving from
the south toward the food deficit region in the north, and livestock moving from north to south. As rainfall
is too low to allow households to make a living based on incomes from crops alone, those in the dryland
zone rely on a mix of incomes derived from transhumant livestock rearing,56 remittances, and agriculture.

Climate-related shocks such as droughts are common in the dryland zone and are expected to become
more frequent and more severe as a result of climate change. Historical records show a trend of increasing
temperatures and declining rainfall in Mali. This trend is also likely to intensify given the long-term effects
of climate change (Figure 2). Mali’s dryland zone has both the lowest rainfall of any crop-producing zone
and the highest rainfall volatility nationwide. To secure agriculture and food security in the drylands,
interventions that can help farmers adapt to climate change are urgently needed.

Identification of policies and investments that can boost agricultural performance is a major challenge
because of the lack of micro data that might be used to measure the impact of government policies
on farmers’ decision-making process. The findings presented here are derived from Mali’s 2014 Living
Standards Measurement Study – Integrated Surveys on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA), a nationally representative
survey with a particular focus on agriculture.57 To measure the drivers of farm productivity and efficiency,
this study follows a stochastic production frontier (SPF) approach. This approach provides an assessment
of the sensitivity of production to different inputs and other factors while simultaneously identifying the
drivers of production efficiency. The detailed nature of the data permits rigorous estimates for different
agro-ecological zones and crops. This study analyzed productivity trends, input use, and farm efficiency in
the dryland zone with the aim of identifying policies and investments that could boost Mali’s agricultural
performance.




55 	 TFP consists of residual accounting for output growth over and above total input growth.
56	 Transhumant livestock rearing refers to seasonal movement of people along with their livestock between wetlands
     in the south and drylands in the north.
57 	 The 2014 LSMS-ISA was carried out by the National Statistical Institute of Mali with technical assistance from the World Bank.



                                                                         32                     MALI: CONDITIONS FOR REACHING FULL POTENTIAL
Findings
The first finding from the LSMS-ISA analysis is that, in contrast to other agro-ecological zones, Mali’s
dryland zone exhibits stagnant growth in yields and significant yield gaps. The crop portfolio in the dryland
zone is skewed toward millet and sorghum, which have contributed relatively less to growth in Mali’s
agricultural GDP (1 and 2 percentage points, respectively, compared to 6 percentage points each for rice
and maize). A breakdown of output growth by crop shows that the production value of dryland crops has
been increasing largely due to price changes as opposed to yield increases (Figure 3). Meanwhile, the
development and adoption of agricultural technologies has been uneven across crops.

There is enormous variation in yields across farmers within the dryland zone. Depending on the crop,
farmers in the top quarter of the yield distribution are on average 10 times more productive than those
in the bottom quarter (Figure 4). To some extent, wide variation in yields across farmers reflects agro-
ecological variation, but it also suggests that knowledge of farming methods is unevenly distributed and
that there are large potential gains to be made from extension and technology adoption.

Productivity analysis based on plot-level data indicates four farming practices and technologies that
would boost monetary incomes if they were more widely adopted. The first is organic fertilizer. Over half
of farming households in the dryland zone use organic fertilizer. Controlling for other factors, the SPF
model’s findings show that organic fertilizer has a large and positive effect on productivity for all crops in
the dryland zone. In particular, in the dryland zone, where organic matter is lacking and the risk of drought
is high, soil carbon build-up helps increase crop resilience to drought by improving soil water retention
and soil fertility. The productivity benefits of organic fertilizer suggest there is an opportunity for climate
smart “triple wins” in Malian agriculture. A strategy designed to increase soil carbon could include the
reintegration of livestock into crop systems, afforestation, or no-till farming.

A second finding of the SPF model is that seed and improved cultivar-related technology are under-
utilized. Farmers throughout Mali underspend on new seed technologies and improved cultivars, with
an adoption rate for improved cultivars of only 6 percent for dryland farmers. These observed farming
practices may be a response to weather-related risks or reflect a lack of technical knowledge on the part of
farmers, or they may indicate that public and private seed systems are not reaching farmers. In addition to
increasing the quantity of seed available to farmers, productivity would be enhanced by promoting access
to improved seed varieties. Adoption of improved seeds is relatively high among irrigated rice farmers.
Effort is needed to make improved varieties of maize, sorghum, and millet more readily accessible to
farmers.

Third, the SPF model shows that, at the margin, pesticide use has a significantly positive impact on farm
productivity in both the dryland and southern zones with that effect being highest in the dryland zone.
Farmers in the southern zone typically use more pesticides than farm households in the dryland zone.
Pesticide appears to be most effective for particular dryland crops such as maize and peanuts. Pesticide
use in the dryland zone is highest for rice cultivation. Other crops, such as maize, have lower pesticide use
and represent an opportunity to enhance productivity through pesticide application.

Finally, the SPF model indicates that irrigation increases the productivity of plots in the dryland zone.
However, due to the small sample size of the LSMS-ISA (only 4 percent of the plots are irrigated), these
results should be interpreted with caution. Irrigation levels are low due to a lack of irrigation potential



                                                       33
outside the irrigated zone. Cervigni and Morris (2016)58 estimate that only 10 percent or less of African
drylands have irrigation potential without even accounting for increasing water shortages under climate
change. This suggests that despite the benefits of irrigation for agricultural productivity and resilience, the
vast majority of dryland farmers must continue to rely on rain-fed plots.

Notably, inorganic fertilizer use shows no appreciable impact on productivity, a result that is robust in
both the southern and dryland zones. Similarly, there is no productive impact of chemical fertilizer use
across individual crops in the dryland zone. The marginal value of chemical fertilizer is generally lower
than even the subsidized market price, and there is evidence that farmers who use chemical fertilizer
overuse it (Figure 5). Non-urea fertilizer is more effective than urea fertilizer, at the margin. However, the
key message is that current returns from fertilizer use do not justify significant expenditure on fertilizer
subsidies. Negative returns from chemical fertilizer use may be due to fertilizer quality, delays in delivery
and distribution affecting the timing of applications, insufficient knowledge on the part of farmers about
application practices and plot-specific nutrient constraints, or lack of complementary inputs such as
improved seeds and irrigation.

The weak links between chemical fertilizer use and agricultural productivity suggest that there are significant
fiscal and productivity gains to be made from reforming Mali’s national input subsidy system. It may be
possible to reduce the subsidy without affecting production levels among recipients who are familiar
with the technology and use sufficient quantities of fertilizer. Importantly, heavy subsidies on fertilizer
appear to promote their overuse since the marginal returns at current use levels are below the marginal
cost (price) of fertilizer (Figure 6). In addition, the LSMS-ISA data also provide evidence of leakage. About
6 percent of farmers who receive the national fertilizer subsidy do not use fertilizer on their plots. The
unsubsidized value of this fertilizer is USD 5 million, implying a misallocation (and potential savings) of
USD 2.5 million in subsidies.59

In addition to looking at the relationship between agricultural inputs and farm productivity, the analysis
also identifies factors that explain farm inefficiency, that is, characteristics of farmers that allow them to
do more with a given set of inputs. Technical efficiencies are widely dispersed and higher in the southern
zone compared to the dryland zone, even controlling for agro-ecological differences. Within the dryland
zone, the technical efficiency of maize producers is higher than that of sorghum, millet, and peanut farmers
(Figure 7). The high dispersion of technical efficiencies for primary dryland crops suggests substantial
scope for improving production efficiency. Mean technical efficiency in the dryland zone is 50 percent,
that is, the average farmer in this zone is only half as productive as the best farmer. This large difference
suggests that increasing access to technology and technical advisory services may be critical in helping
lagging farmers to do more with the inputs they have, with the potential to increase productivity by as
much as 50 percent.

Aside from geographic location and crop choice, other factors that determine farm efficiency include
farm size, gender, education, health, and access to motorized transport. Small farms are significantly more
efficient than large farms. This effect is true across agro-ecological zones and across crops within the
dryland zone. It should be noted that as the SPF specification controls for land and soil quality as well as
agro-ecological conditions by zone, this result is robust to the usual concern that the inverse relationship
between efficiency and farm size may be due to varying land quality.


58 https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/23576/9781464808173.pdf?sequence=4
59 This calculation assumes that these farmers are of average size (larger farmers receive a bigger subsidy), that subsidized farmers used the
   entire subsidized amount of fertilizer, and that the total subsidy cost is CFAF 24 billion.



                                                                      34                     MALI: CONDITIONS FOR REACHING FULL POTENTIAL
Gender gaps reduce agricultural productivity, particularly in the dryland zone. The negative effects of
gender inequality on agricultural production are significant across the country. Female-headed households
are less efficient than male-headed households in the dryland zone but not in the southern zone. This
difference may be due to cultural factors. The disparity, as measured in this study, is not in access to inputs
per se but in the efficient use of those inputs.

Households with workers who have attended formal schooling are less efficient at crop production. This
effect is significant for all rural households and for households in the dryland zone, but not for households
in the southern zone. Household workers who have attended formal schooling may have more off-farm
employment opportunities relative to unschooled workers, and the result may represent a loss of skilled
capacity due to non-farm work, perhaps representing an opportunity cost of education for household
crop production.

Transportation is a bottleneck for farmers in the dryland zone. Improved access to markets through
motorized transport improves production efficiency for farmers in the dryland zone. However, the same
relationship does not hold in the southern zone, where travel times tend to be shorter. Dryland farmers
who produce peanuts and maize are more strongly affected by transport bottlenecks than farmers who
produce sorghum and millet, probably because peanut and maize crops rely on shippers and traders
whereas millet and sorghum are more likely to be consumed within the household or the village.

Investing in farmers’ health would boost agricultural productivity. Farmers who have experienced a health
shock in the past year are significantly less productive. Health shocks, likely due to malaria, have the
largest effect in the southern zone, where returns from agricultural labor tend to be higher. In the dryland
zone, health risks are only one of the many types of risk that threaten livelihoods.

Finally, an important finding relates to extension and advisory services. Neither distance to an agricultural
guidance center nor the mode of transport to the center are found to increase farm efficiency. This result is
important because it suggests the lack of effective advisory services despite significant scope for improvement
in farmers’ technical efficiency as well as in their use of heavily subsidized fertilizers. The policy implication is
to carefully review and strengthen the agricultural advisory services for a potentially large payoff.



Conclusion and Policy Lessons
While this analysis has focused on maximizing productivity, a successful poverty reduction strategy in
arid zones also rests on stabilizing yields and reducing risk. A key priority in areas without irrigation
potential will be to reduce the risk of crop failure in drought years through improved land husbandry
and water harvesting coupled with the multiplication of palatable, drought-resistant, early-maturing millet
and sorghum varieties. Social safety nets and support for leaving agriculture are additional resilience
strategies that may be judged necessary.

Productivity gaps in the dryland zone represent policy opportunities. By implementing appropriate,
evidence-based policies and investments, Mali has an opportunity to make its agricultural sector more
resilient, inclusive, and successful. Yield rates for major crops in the dryland zone (millet and sorghum)
have remained nearly stagnant for three decades, even though our findings suggest potential payoffs
from interventions designed to promote soil improvements (organic fertilizer), better seeds, extension



                                                          35
advice, pesticides, and market access. The analysis of strategies designed to increase crop productivity
and the role of Mali’s input subsidy program shows how a relatively small investment in data and research
can lead to millions of dollars in efficiency savings in public expenditures. Mali has a strong agricultural
economy and a significant agricultural public spending program. Continuous investments in learning,
innovation, availability of new farm technologies, and agricultural infrastructure will be necessary if Mali
is to maintain its position as a leader in the region and expand the benefits of agricultural productivity
growth to all regions of the country. Specific key policy lessons follow.

•	 There are big opportunities for “triple wins” from “climate-smart” agriculture strategies. First, helping
    farmers increase organic fertilizer use would make farms both more productive and more resilient
    (through higher soil water retention) while also contributing to climate mitigation through soil carbon
    sequestration. Second, evidence shows that subsidized maize and rice producers overuse chemical
    nitrogen fertilizer, and reversing such overuse would improve both environmental sustainability
    and fiscal sustainability. Third, mechanization-related technology appears not to provide significant
    productivity benefits, similar to the experience in countries such as Brazil.

•	 Farmers who use chemical fertilizer overuse it, implying economically wasteful use of subsidized
    fertilizer. Although use of non-urea is more effective than that of urea at the margin, current returns
    from fertilizer use do not justify the significant expenditure on subsiding them.

•	 Better access to extension and technology could double productivity in the dryland zone. The average
    farmer in this zone is only half as productive as the best farmer, which suggests that increasing access
    to information and technology may help lagging farmers do more with the inputs they have.

•	 Farmers could achieve higher economic returns through higher planting density, increasing the quantity
    of seed available to farmers, and enhanced access to improved seed varieties.

•	 Improved access to markets through motorized transport would improve production efficiency for
    farmers in the dryland zone. Dryland farmers who produce peanuts and maize are more strongly
    affected by transport bottlenecks than farmers who produce sorghum and millet, presumably due to
    the absence of shippers and traders. Transportation is a main bottleneck for farmers in the dryland
    zone but not in the southern zone.

•	 Investing in health would boost agricultural productivity. Health shocks have the largest effect in the
    southern zone, where returns from agricultural labor tend to be higher. In the dryland zone, health
    risks are one of many types of risk that threaten livelihoods.

•	 Reducing gender disparities would improve agricultural production, particularly in the dryland zone.
    Female-headed households are less productive than male-headed households in the dryland zone
    but not in the southern zone, and this may be due to cultural factors.

•	 The national fertilizer subsidy is partially misallocated to farmers who do not use fertilizer on their
    plots. The value of subsidized fertilizer that is not applied (by its intended recipient) is approximately
    USD 5 million, corresponding to six percent of subsidized households.

•	 Continuous investments in learning and innovation are necessary to maintain Mali’s position as an
    agricultural leader in the region. Poor access to information and technology is a constraint at the farm
    level, and even small investments in agricultural data and research can lead to millions of dollars in
    efficiency savings in public expenditure.



                                                      36                MALI: CONDITIONS FOR REACHING FULL POTENTIAL
FIGURES



  1.	 Number of Poor by Livelihood Zone




     Source: Authors based on FEWS NET livelihood zone classification




                                                                  37
2. Observed Trends for Higher Temperatures and Lower Rainfall in Mali (USGS)




       Source: United States Geological Survey (USGS)




3. Decomposition of Output Growth by Crop, 2004–2013



               0 .3

              0 .25

               0 .2

              0 .15

               0 .1

              0 .0 5

                  0
                         Maize     GroundnutsRice,	 paddy Sorghum          Millet   Cowpeas   Cotton
             -0 .0 5

                                                        Area   Yield   Price




                                                                  38                MALI: CONDITIONS FOR REACHING FULL POTENTIAL
4. Yield Gaps in the Dryland Zone Compared to the Southern Zone




       12.0
                                                                  Yield	Potentials:75th	Percentile	as	a	Ratio	of	25th	Percentile	

                                                                                                                                                                      10 .1
       10 .0

                                                                                                                                                8.3
         8.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          6.9
                                                                                             6.2
         6.0                                                                                                                                                5.2

                                                                          3.9        3.9
         4.0                                                                                             3.6                                                                   3.5
                                                           2.8                                                                     2.9
                                                                                                                      2.5

         2.0



         0 .0
                                           Southern	 Dryland	 Southern	 Dryland	 Southern	 Dryland	 Southern	 Dryland	 Southern	 Dryland	 Southern	 Dryland	
                                             zone     zone      zone     zone      zone     zone      zone     zone      zone     zone      zone     zone
                                                                 Millet                Sorghum                 Rice                      Maize               Cow	Peas            Peanuts




                                                           12.0
         Yield	ratio	(farmers	in	the	75th	percentile	 /	




                                                                                                                                                                        10.1
                                                           10.0
                farmers	in	the	25th	percentile)




                                                                                                                                                      8.3
                                                            8.0                                                                                                                           6.9
                                                                                                   6.2
                                                            6.0                                                                                               5.2

                                                                                 3.9       3.9                  3.6
                                                            4.0                                                                                                                3.5
                                                                      2.8                                                                2.9
                                                                                                                             2.5
                                                            2.0

                                                            0.0
                                                                   HP	Zone        Dry	 HP	Zone Dry	 HP	Zone Dry	 HP	Zone Dry	 HP	Zone Dry	 HP	Zone Dry	
                                                                                 Zone          Zone         Zone         Zone         Zone         Zone
                                                                            Millet          Sorghum                   Rice                     Maize              Cow	Peas           Peanut




Note: This figure shows the ratio of yields for the 75th percentile farmers compared to yields for the 25th percentile of farmers across crops and zones.
The high dispersion in yields among dryland farmers suggests opportunities for improvement.

Source: Authors based on LSMS-ISA




                                                                                                                              39
                                            5. Non-Parametric Relationship between Marginal Returns from Chemical Fertilizer
                                              (CFAF/Kg) and the Quantity of Chemical Fertilizer Applied (Kg/Ha), by Fertilizer Type
                                                 2000




                                                                                                                                                           2000
                                                 1500




                                                                                                                                                           1500
LOWESS (Marginal Value on Fertilizer Use)




                                                                                                    LOWESS (Marginal Value on Fertilizer Use)
                                                                     Southern zone                                                                                         Dryland zone
                                                 1000




                                                                                                                                                           1000

                                                                                     Market Price= 500 (CFA/KG)                                                                              Market Price= 500 (CFA/KG)
                                                 500




                                                                                                                                                           500




                                                            Non-Urea                                                                                                           Non-Urea

                                                                                                                                                                                          Subsidized Price=200 (CFA/KG)
                                                                               Subsidized Price= 200 (CFA/KG)



                                                              Urea                                                                                                             Urea
                                                 0




                                                                                                                                                           0




                                                        0    100          200          300                                                      400               0   100          200          300                 400
                                                              Urea or Non-Urea Use (KG/Ha)                                                                             Urea or Non-Urea Use (KG/Ha)




                                                                                                                                                      40                MALI: CONDITIONS FOR REACHING FULL POTENTIAL
6. Impact of the Subsidy on Fertilizer Use




Source: Authors based on LSMS-ISA




                                             41
7. Technical Efficiencies by Zone and across Crops in the Dryland Zone


                                              Kernel Density Distribution of Technical Efficiencies
        3




                             All Crops
 Kernel Density
  1     0 2




                    0                    .2                    .4                            .6                    .8                  1
                                                                    Technical efficiencies

                                                            Rural                            Southern zone
                                                            Dryland zone
        10




                        By Crops in Dryland zone)
                8
 Kernel Density
    4   2
        0 6




                    0                    .2                    .4                            .6                    .8                  1
                                                                    Technical Efficiencies

                                                                    Millet                    Sorghum
                                                                    Maize                     Peanut




Source: Authors based on LSMS-ISA




                                                                             42                         MALI: CONDITIONS FOR REACHING FULL POTENTIAL
C OU N TRY E C O N O M I C F O C US
   AFCW3 Economies at a Glance




                 43
                                                             M A C R O E C O N O M I C I N D I C AT O R S O F
                                                      A F C W 3 C O U N T R I E S AT A G L A N C E , 2 0 1 2 - 2 0 1 7


                                                    Rapid	growth	gained	momentum	 in	2016,	but	                                                                         …and	inflation	 kept	low,	except	for	rising	rates	
                                                           Chad	fell	 into	 deep	recession…                                                                                           in	Guinea	 and	CAR
                                                      CAR        Chad           Mali              Guinea            Niger                                                CAR             Chad            Mali              Guinea       Niger
                                                                                                                                                               20
                                          20
     GDP	growth	rate	(%)




                                                                                                                                 Annual,	average
                                                                                                                                                               15

                                               0                                                                                                               10

                                                                                                                                                                5
                                          -20
                                                                                                                                                                0

                                          -40                                                                                                                  -5
                                                       2012     2013        2014          2015      2016	p      2017	f                                                    2012          2013          2014          2015     2016	p    2017	f




                                                    Current	account	deficits	remained	high	in	2016,	                                                                     …despite	positive	terms	of	trade,	Chad	being	an	
                                                       and	in	double	digits	in	Guinea	and	Niger…                                                                                             outlier
                                                      2012    2013      2014       2015      2016	p        2017	f                                                                2012      2013        2014         2015     2016	p    2017	f
                                                                                                                                                                40
                                           -30
                                                                                                                                                                20
                                           -25
                                                                                                                                       Annual,	%	change
   %	of	GDP




                                           -20                                                                                                                      0

                                           -15                                                                                                                 -20
                                           -10
                                                                                                                                                               -40
                                               -5
                                                                                                                                                               -60
                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                             CAR               Chad           Mali          Guinea      Niger
                                                        CAR          Chad          Mali          Guinea        Niger




                                                    Fiscal	deficits	 decreased	in	2016,	or	featured	                                                                    …partly	supported	 by	rising	revenue,	except	
                                                       slight	 increases	like	in	Chad	and	Mali…                                                                         for	Chad	 and	Niger	which	rather	cut	 outlays
                                                       2012    2013      2014       2015         2016	p      2017	f                                                       CAR             Chad               Mali          Guinea        Niger
Including	grants,	cash	basis,	%	of	GDP




                                          4
                                                                                                                                                               35
                                          2
                                                                                                                                 Excluding	 grants,	%	of	GDP




                                                                                                                                                               30
                                          0                                                                                                                    25
                                          -2                                                                                                                   20
                                          -4                                                                                                                   15

                                          -6                                                                                                                   10

                                          -8                                                                                                                    5

                                         -10                                                                                                                    0
                                                       CAR        Chad             Mali           Guinea         Niger                                                    2012          2013          2014          2015      2016	p    2017	f




Source: IMF and World Bank staff estimates; IMF AIV, several years. Note: data for 2016 are revised projections, and 2017 are forecasts. Fiscal deficits
include grants and are on cash basis; they may slightly differ from some reported in the text done on a commitment basis.




                                                                                                                            44                                                                                      COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC
Central African Republic (CAR)


Table 1
Population, million                              5.0

GDP, current US$ billion                         1.8

GDP per capita, current US$                     352

Poverty rate ($1.9/day 2011PPP terms)
                                    a
                                                66.3

Poverty rate ($3.1/day 2011PPP terms)
                                    a
                                                82.3

Gini Coefficienta
                                                56.2

Life Expectancy at birth, yearsb                49.9

                                                   
Sources: World Bank WDI and Macro Poverty

Outlook:

Notes:

(a) Most recent value (2008)                 

(b) Most recent WDI value (2014)




Democratic elections in February 2016 put an end to years of political volatility and eased violence in
Central African Republic. Real GDP has begun to recover gradually following its 2013 collapse. Donors
responded by pledging over US$ 2 billion at the Brussels Donor Conference in November 2016 to
support the government’s new Recovery and Peace-Building strategy. However, the short-term outlook
remains vulnerable to a temporary deterioration in the security environment, which, together with
delayed public investments, translated into slower growth for 2016. While the government, with IMF
program support, continues to make progress on tackling imbalances in the external and fiscal accounts,
CEMAC’s very weak external position may further increase consolidation and structural reform pressures.




Recent Developments
Economic recovery in CAR is proceeding slower than expected, with real GDP growth in 2016 now estimated
at 4.5 percent. The fact that the economy grew slower than in 2015 can be largely attributed to recent
bouts of insecurity, disrupting economic activity, and delayed public investment. Private consumption
continues to be the main contributor to GDP, while gross fixed capital formation remains hampered by
a weak investment climate and limited public investment. After a subdued 2015, export growth appears
to have been more pronounced in 2016 on the back of solid production increases of key export goods
such as gold, wood, coffee, and cotton. This also shows on the supply side, where the primary sector
has recently benefitted from stronger performances in the forest, coffee, and cotton subsectors, while
industry continues to struggle. Services, in particular transport, have suffered from the volatile security
environment but recently started to recover.




                                                       45
At the same time, transport disruptions resulted in a temporary decrease in the supply of key staples,
which, together with increased demand from returnees, put upward pressure on consumer prices. As
a result, annual average inflation for 2016 is projected at a persistent 4.6 percent and clearly above the
CEMAC target of 3 percent. Against this backdrop, the relatively loose monetary policy stance of the
regional central bank (BEAC), intended to support oil exporters suffering the consequences of low oil
prices, made it difficult to contain inflation more in CAR.

A relatively stronger export performance paired with weaker import growth - driven by delayed investments
and slower-than-expected recovery - have resulted in slightly reduced pressures on the current account.
However, the estimated Current Account Deficit (CAD) remains at a sizeable 9 percent of GDP in 2016.
The trade deficit is largely financed by official grants in the current account and direct investment on the
capital and financial account side of the BOP. This leaves CAR with a foreign exchange reserve coverage
of around 4 months of imports for 2016.

On the fiscal front, provisional government statistics for 2016 suggest total revenues of around 14 percent
of GDP (of which around 40 percent are grants), outweighing total expenditures of 12.5 percent of GDP.
This has led to a 2016 budget surplus of around 1.7 percent of GDP, or a deficit of 4.3 percent without
grants. However, out of a relatively small FCFA 25b in capital expenditure in 2016, only a miniscule
FCFA 2.9b was financed from own resources. This fact boldly underlines the major weakness in public
investment and any sustainable structural policy effort going forward. The public debt to GDP ratio for
2016 is projected at 42.6 percent, down from 48.5 percent in 2015.

Poverty remains widespread and elevated. Projections based on GDP per capita growth indicate that an
estimated 75 percent of the population lived on less than US$ 1.90 per day (2011 PPP) in 2016, up from
66 percent (US$ 1.90 a day, 2011 PPP) in 2008, when the last poverty survey was conducted. The livelihoods
of the poor are predominantly in agriculture, and the continued fragility of the situation has constrained
welfare improvements as many farmers have not fully returned to regular cultivation of their fields. Also,
an estimated 10 to 15 percent of the population continues to be internally displaced with few to no assets
to rebuild their livelihoods.



Outlook
The short- and medium-term growth outlook remains cautiously positive but characterized by significant
uncertainty. Real GDP growth is projected to gradually accelerate to 4.75 percent in 2017 and 5 percent in
2018, with poverty declining slightly to 74 percent. This scenario is conditioned by continuously improving
security, efficient implementation of the government investment (development) plan as well as a further
strengthening of performances in the primary sector and related exports. The CAD is expected to again
widen to above 10 percent of GDP in 2017, reflecting a pickup in demand for imports. FDI is expected to
gradually pick up from an estimated 2.6 percent of GDP in 2016 to a projected 3.5 percent in 2017.

Following the first review in late 2016, the IMF program appeared to be broadly on track. The fiscal
accounts are projected to show a surplus of 0.9 percent of GDP in 2017 and a deficit of 2.4 percent in
2018. But the decision by CEMAC members to maintain the peg in the face of a persistent terms of trade
shock triggered by low oil prices may translate into potential adjustments to the program. Although CAR
is a net oil importer, membership of a monetary and economic union such as CEMAC, consisting of mostly
net oil exporters, may bring complex challenges. On the one hand, the nominal exchange rate is pegged



                                                     46                                   COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
to the Euro60 and both the NEER and REER have recently appreciated, thereby aggravating structural
weakness in export competitiveness. BEAC’s loose monetary policy stance, intended to ease the strong
external headwinds, has finally run out of steam, leaving prospects of significant tightening also for CAR.
On the other hand, the second and highly complementary pillar of regional macro stability - the fiscal
convergence framework setting rules for revenue savings, budget deficit and debt ceilings, inflation and
arrears - also faces significant challenges. Inexistent fiscal buffers, the need to clear arrears in the near
term and capacity constraints to domestic bank lending will leave CAR dependent on international grants
to close its financing gap.



Risks and Challenges
Risks to CAR’s outlook remain clearly tilted towards the downside. Maintaining and solidifying security
is a necessary condition for further recovery and poverty reduction. Managing fiscal consolidation in the
context of tightening monetary policy and amid the expectation of it moving towards a structural growth
agenda will be a formidable challenge for the government of CAR. Two specific risks to the growth and
macro outlook are worth highlighting: First, projections regarding a key export good - diamonds - are
conditional on swift progress with the Kimberly certification process. But expectations vary significantly
and remain highly uncertain. Diamond revenues remain significantly below expectation. For example, a
total of FCFA 350m was expected in 2016 but only 27m realized. Second, asymmetries across CEMAC
countries in their coping and macro fiscal adjustment may give rise to free rider dynamics that could
undermine optimal regional policy responses while threatening the stability of the monetary and economic
union itself.

Shifting from fiscal stabilization to structural policy for growth will be the main medium-term challenge. To
move towards a diversified economy able to deliver inclusive growth and jobs, it is vital that CAR increases
agricultural productivity and strengthens public investment to gradually crowd in private investment while
implementing a strong social policy component under the Recovery and Peace-Building Plan.




60 And guaranteed by the French Treasury



                                                      47
                       S E L E C T E D E C O N O M I C I N D I C AT O R S ,
                    INCLUDING PROJECTIONS FOR 2016-2019
                                                           2012 2013 2014 2015                      2016    2017     2018     2019
 National income and prices                                 Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated
 Real GDP                                                     4.1     -36.7        1.0       4.8      4.5     4.7      5.0      5.2
 GDP deflator                                                 2.7        7.0     11.1        6.2      6.9     6.2      5.7      5.2
 CPI (EoP)                                                    5.9        6.6     11.6        4.5      5.1     4.5      3.9      3.5


 External sector
 Imports                                                     12.2     -27.6      57.3        9.1     -2.4    10.2      4.0      8.4
 Exports                                                      7.4     -27.9       -8.8       0.5      7.6    12.8      3.6     11.9
 Terms of Trade (deterioration -)                            -0.7      10.9        3.5     14.2       7.0    -7.7      1.9     -0.3


 Fiscal Accounts                                                       % of GDP, unless otherwise indicated
 Expenditure                                                 16.4      14.9      12.7      14.9      11.9    16.1     16.0     16.3
 Revenue and grants                                          16.4        8.4     15.7      14.3      13.5    13.1     13.6     14.2
 Central Government Balance (incl. grants)                       0      -6.5         3      -0.6      1.7     0.9      -2.4    -2.0


 Selected Monetary Accounts                                 Annual percentage change, unless otherwise indicated
 Base Money                                                   1.6        5.6     14.6        5.3     12.2    13.0     11.0     10.9
 Credit to the economy                                       30.2     -16.3          4      -0.5      7.5    11.3     11.0     10.6


 Balance of Payments                                                   % of GDP, unless otherwise indicated
 Current Account Balance                                     -4.6         -3      -5.6      -9.1     -9.0     -11    -10.0     -9.7
 Imports                                                     23.9      25.0      37.6      34.8      31.5    31.4     30.7     30.7
 Exports                                                     12.5      14.5      13.1      12.7      12.8    11.3     12.7     13.0
 Foreign Direct Investment                                    3.2        0.1       0.1       0.3      1.6     3.5      3.3      2.8
 Gross Reserves (in million US$, EoP)                      172.1     199.4      279.1     199.1      206     232       263     276
        In months of next year’s imports                      5.6        3.7       5.1       4.2      3.9     4.2      4.3      4.3
        As % of short-term external debt                     30.8      17.5      12.6        7.4


 Public Debt
 Total government (end of period)                            23.5      38.5      51.1      48.5      42.6    31.2     26.6     22.6
 o/w External debt                                            9.7      14.6      14.9      14.5      16.8    14.9     13.3     12.2


 Memo
 GDP nominal (FCFA billions)                               1108        750       842        937     1046    1164     1292     1430



Source: IMF (March 2017), Authorities and Bank staff forecast (MFMod simulations, February 2017).




                                                                         48                                         COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
CHAD
Chad’s macroeconomic crisis was triggered by persistent low oil prices and led to a deep recession as
well as seriously deteriorated fiscal and external positions. The Government has responded decisively with
a substantial fiscal adjustment; however, the external and fiscal deficits remain high. This situation points
towards an increase in the poverty rate. The medium-term outlook remains challenging, with a stagnation
of real GDP growth in 2017 and a gradual recovery dependent on how oil prices evolve. Ambitious reforms
in the areas of fiscal sustainability and economic diversification are needed to tackle this crisis.



Recent Developments
Chad’s economy is experiencing its worst recession since it began exporting oil in 2003, due to exogenous
shocks emanating from the oil sector and the deterioration of the security situation. Economic growth
declined from 6.9 percent in 2014 to 1.8 percent in 2015 and the economy is estimated to have contracted
by 7.0 percent in 2016. Oil GDP dropped by 11.5 percent in 2016 after oil-related investment was cut by
more than 80 percent and production declined. Non-oil GDP decreased by 6 percent in 2016, mainly
as a result of large reductions in public spending, which is the main driver of the non-oil sector. Security
challenges have negatively impacted the economy, including livestock, commerce, communication, and
cross-border trade. Trade activities at the Nigerian border in the agriculture and livestock sectors have
largely halted following security concerns and the depreciation of the Naira. On the supply side, despite
an increase in agricultural output of 12 percent thanks to good rainfall, the primary sector contracted
by 6 percent due to the drop of the oil sector. The industry and service sectors were severely impacted
by increased security risks, public spending cuts, and reduced liquidity in the public sector. As a result
of the economic malaise and good harvest, prices fell by 1.1 percent in 2016 compared to inflation of
3.7 percent in 2015.

Despite a substantial fiscal adjustment, the external and fiscal deficits remain high. Oil-related fiscal revenue
declined from 11.7 percent to 3.8 percent of non-oil GDP between 2014 and 2016. The Government
responded by cutting drastically public expenditures by 11.4 percent of non-oil GDP during the same
period. As a result, the fiscal balance (commitment basis) decreased from 4.6 percent of GDP in 2015 to
2.3 percent. On a cash basis, however, the overall fiscal deficit increased slightly, because of arrears, from
4.4 percent of non-oil GDP in 2014 to 4.6 percent in 2016. The deficit was financed through issuance of
treasury bonds in the regional debt market and budget support from development partners. The recent
increase in domestic debt results in a high risk of public debt distress. Hard currency rationing following
the shortages and substantial fiscal consolidation have contributed to a reduction in the current account
deficit from 12.4 percent in 2015 to an estimated 8.8 percent of GDP in 2016. A deteriorating financial
and capital account reflects significantly lower foreign direct investment related to the oil and construction
sectors and adverse security conditions.




                                                        49
As a member of the CEMAC monetary union, Chad’s monetary and exchange rate policy is determined
by the regional central bank, BEAC. Chad’s international reserves continue to fall, representing barely
0.3 month of imports at end-2016. However, regional reserve coverage of 2 months is far below what is
considered adequate (five months) for a resource-rich monetary union with a fixed exchange rate. Broad
money growth contracted by 6.3 percent due to the spillovers in the financial sector, which is shallow and
heavily dependent on central government.

The last household survey in 2011 showed that poverty had declined to 47 percent from 55 percent in
2003, as measured with the national poverty line. Using the international poverty line of $ 1.9 per day
PPP, extreme poverty in Chad declined from 62.9 percent to 38.4 percent over the same period. The
Gini coefficient, however, rose between 2003 and 2011, indicating growing inequality. Updated poverty
measures are needed to evaluate the impact of the shocks described above, and a new survey is being
prepared for 2017/2018.



Outlook
Chad’s real GDP growth is projected to stagnate at 0.2 percent in 2017 but to start to gradually accelerate
in 2018 and 2019 on the back of an expected recovery of oil prices and production. In 2017, oil sector
growth is projected to contract by 0.6 percent, while the non-oil sector should expand slightly (0.3 percent)
as the impact of the fiscal adjustment on the secondary and tertiary sectors moderates with the planned
revenue reforms and more pronounced growth in agriculture. The oil sector is expected to expand in
2018-2019 by 8.0 percent as new oilfields become operational, leading non-oil GDP growth to recover
slightly on average by 2.2 percent. The expected recovery would support positive price growth, increasing
inflation to more than 2 percent. The overall fiscal deficit is projected to decrease to 1.4 percent of GDP
in 2017 and shrink more the following years as oil revenues recover. On the external front, hard currency
rationing is expected to ease the current account deficit to around 4 percent of GDP, financed by donor
budget support, increasing projected FDI and changes in reserves. Broad money supply (M2) is expected
to significantly increase from 2017 following the projected recovery.

Increasing poverty levels coupled with population growth will lead to more than one and a half million
new poor by 2019. Since the last household consumption survey was conducted in 2011, poverty levels
are projected on the basis of GDP and population growth data. Using the $1.90 per day international
poverty line, poverty levels are expected to have risen slightly from 34.8 percent in 2014 to 38.7 percent
in 2016. Under the current growth scenario, the poverty rate is expected to rise further to 39.8 percent
by 2019. The changes reflect the continuing impact of reductions in public services due to austerity and
income loss due the disruption of cross-border livestock trade. These trends were partially offset by
modest increases in agriculture. The primary sector employs nearly three-quarters of the working-age
population. The poverty rate and number of poor will continue to increase, however, due to one of the
highest population growth rates worldwide at 3.3 percent annually. The absolute number of poor is
projected to increase from 4.7 million to 6.3 million between 2012 and 2019.




                                                      50                                   COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
Risks and Challenges
Chad has an urgent need to finance its external and fiscal deficits given the lower expected public revenues.
Prospects for the short term are more difficult on account of lower oil prices and export volumes and the
repayment of oil sales’ advances. In addition to the expected budget support, the Government needs to
significantly adjust spending and seek to improve liquidity by limiting tax and custom exemptions and
simplifying the tax system.

In the medium term, instability in oil revenues complicates fiscal management, budgetary planning, and
the efficient use of public resources. Large declines in revenues since 2014 have brought about sharp
cuts in expenditure, which have been disruptive and costly. There is a lack of robust fiscal capacity that
can provide a broader and more predictable set of instruments to ensure the sustainability of the macro
framework in the face of volatile oil prices.

Growth diversification and structural transformation are the main challenges for a longer-term agenda.
In 2013, before oil prices collapsed, the oil sector accounted for about 20 percent of the country’s GDP,
about 65 percent of government revenues, and 90 percent of total exports. The Chadian government has
learned from the current crisis that the lack of economic diversification exposes the country’s economy to
exogenous shocks.




                                                      51
      S E L E C T E D E C O N O M I C A N D F I N A N C I A L I N D I C AT O R S

                                                                                    2016    2017     2018       2019
                                                                  2014     2015
                                                                                     ((p)     (p)


      National income and prices
         Real GDP                                                    6.9     1.8     -7.0      0.2     3.2        3.1
           Oil GDP                                                   5.7    32.2    -11.5     -0.6     9.6        6.0
           Non-Oil GDP                                               7.1     -2.9    -6.0      0.3     2.0        2.5
         Consumer price inflation (average)                          1.7     3.7     -1.1      0.0     1.6        3.0


      Money and Credit
         Credit to government (a/)                                 18.0     25.3     20.7     -6.2
         Credit to the private sector (a/)                         17.3      0.3     -4.1      1.6
         Broad money (M2)                                          26.5      -4.7    -6.3      2.4


      External sector
         Exports volume of goods and services                        5.9    29.2     -6.7     -1.2     8.4        5.2
         Imports volume of goods and services                        9.4   -21.4    -13.1      0.0     5.9        2.9
         Overall balance of payments (% of GDP)                     -1.2     -6.9    -8.1      0.6     0.5        1.4
         Current external balance (% of GDP)                        -8.8   -12.4     -8.8     -4.8     -5.2      -4.1
         External Debt (% of GDP)                                  29.1     25.0     29.7    29.8     28.1       26.2


                                                    (percentage of non-oil GDP, unless otherwise specified)
      Central government finances
         Revenue and grants                                        23.2     17.1     15.5    18.7     19.2       19.1
         Total expenditure and net lending                         29.4     22.9     18.0    19.7     19.2       19.2
         Non-oil Primary Balance (excl. grants) commit.)           -16.2     -9.7    -5.0     -5.9     -5.5      -4.7
         Overall balance (incl. grants, cash basis)                 -4.4     -4.5    -4.6     -1.4     -0.4      -0.2
         Total Debt (percent of GDP)                               40.9     46.3     57.0    53.4     51.2       49.2
                Domestic debt                                      11.8     21.3     27.3    23.6     23.1       23.0




      Memorandum items:
      Nominal GDP (FCFA billion)                                  6,912    6,474    5,705   5,714    5,991     6,349
      Nominal non-oil GDP (FCFA billion)                          5,179    5,184    4,765   4,781    4,958     5,232



Source: Chadian Authorities, IMF and Bank staff, February 2017.




                                                                   52                                         COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
GUINEA
The Guinean economy is slowly recovering from the Ebola pandemic and commodity price slowdown,
which affected the country in recent years. Growth is estimated to have resumed to 5.2 percent in 2016
compared to 0.1 percent in 2015 and driven by mining and agriculture. Growth is expected to converge to
its long-term average over the medium term. Key risks included continued low commodity prices, potential
macroeconomic slippages, and challenges in protecting pro-poor spending.



Recent Developments
The Guinean economy is gradually recovering from the Ebola pandemic, which hit the country in 2014 and
2015 when the economy barely expanded. Economic growth is estimated to have reached 5.2 percent in
2016 compared to 0.1 percent in 2015. Positive supply shocks in the mining sector, a strong agricultural
harvest, and higher electricity supply are supporting the recovery. Services and manufacturing are still
lagging. A decline in commodity prices, especially iron ore, has also adversely affected Guinea’s economy
with the shelving by Rio Tinto of the $20 billion Simandou project.

Fiscal policy was tight in 2016 in order to adjust imbalances in 2015. Revenue increased from 17.8 percent of
GDP in 2015 to 19.0 percent in 2016 due to higher indirect and direct tax revenues, including from telecom
taxes and VAT. Total expenditures as a percent of GDP decreased from 28.3 percent of GDP in 2015 to
21.3 percent in 2016. The fiscal adjustment was significant due to the need to correct the spending incurred
when the central bank (BCRG) issued guarantees during 2014 and 2015 to local and foreign banks on behalf
of private companies executing public works contracts to help them secure commercial bank loans. The
government instituted a system of cash rationing in 2016, limiting expenditures to available grant financing
and revenues. Cuts to non-priority expenditures, including both capital and current expenditures, were the
hallmark of the government’s fiscal consolidation strategy. The fiscal deficit was reduced to 0.9 percent of
GDP in 2016 compared to 8.9 percent in 2015. Guinea’s debt dynamics will remain sustainable, as long as
the government continues to give priority to concessional external loans and grants. The risk of external
debt distress is moderate, according to the latest IMF-WB Debt Sustainability Analysis.

Monetary policy is conducted with the objective of replenishing international reserves and reducing the
black-market premium. The central bank also reduced its interventions in the foreign exchange market,
and the official and parallel market rates were unified. Guinea’s international reserves were equivalent to
3 months of the country’s imports in 2016. Guinea maintains a managed float exchange and an independent
central bank whose goal is price stability. The inflation rate was 8.1 percent in 2016. The real effective
exchange rate is competitive without being misaligned.

The current account deficit improved in 2016 to about 12.2 percent of GDP compared to 20.2 percent of
GDP in 2015. This improvement mainly reflects strong bauxite export growth. The recovery in international
gold prices and the full resumption of diamond exports also contributed. The increase in import volumes,
driven by higher economic growth, was offset by lower international oil prices. The deficit was largely
financed by FDI in the extractives sector amounting to $385 million, especially in bauxite and gold.

The extreme poverty rate, based on the $1.9 per day (PPP 2011) poverty line, was estimated at
35.3 percent in 2012, compared to more than 60 percent in the 1990s. Ebola has led to a worsening of


                                                      53
poverty and living standards since 2012. Simulations based on the 2014 census suggest a likely increase
in poverty to nearly 58 percent in 2014 nationally, with both urban and rural areas experiencing increased
poverty. In fact, a post-Ebola survey conducted in September 2015 and based on a mobile phone survey
of 2,467 households suggested that poverty may have increased further.



Outlook
Over the medium term, Guinea is envisaged to maintain macroeconomic sustainability with the implementation
of the reform agenda and the resumption of mining investment and economic activity. Over the medium
term, growth is projected to reach more than 4 percent in 2017-19, driven by mining and agriculture. FDI
inflows into the mining sector are envisaged in the next few years as several new projects come on board,
especially in bauxite and gold. The services sector is expected to recover fully in three years to its pre-Ebola
performance, while the expansion of manufacturing will continue to be constrained by poor infrastructure
and lack of finances for firms. The fiscal deficit will exceed no more than 2.5 percent of GDP consistent with
financing opportunities, macroeconomic stability, and growth. The authorities are attempting to achieve
medium-term fiscal sustainability, while having growth-boosting private spending coupled with stronger
revenue mobilization from both direct and indirect taxes. The fiscal policy stance of the authorities will be
aligned closely with available financing, and monetization of the deficit by the central bank will be avoided.
On the external side, the goal is to have a sustainable current account deficit (including grants) at below
15 percent. From 2016 to 2019, Guinea will continue to export bauxite and other metals while importing raw
materials and capital goods. Risks also may stem from fiscal slippages and macroeconomic imbalances.

The poverty outlook for the post-2012 period was negatively affected by the Ebola crisis. In fact, the
extreme poverty rate, based on the $1.9 per day (PPP 2011) poverty line, was expected to increase from
35.3 percent in 2012 to a peak of 38.1 percent in 2015, before declining gradually to 34.4 percent in 2019
thanks to the post-Ebola economic recovery.



Risks and Challenges
The most important challenge for Guinea is to sustain economic growth and achieve greater poverty
reduction amidst a tightening of global financial conditions. The mining sector remains a challenge, as
the projected rebound in mining production will depend on several factors including the regulatory
environment, investor perceptions of the market, and the outlook for international metal prices. The
Simandou $20 billion iron ore project is currently shelved due to high infrastructure prices and low
iron ore prices, but it has the potential to materialize if iron ore prices rebound. A second challenge
for the Guinean economy is to maintain the pace of macroeconomic and fiscal reforms and to improve
the efficiency of public spending. The country will try to navigate a challenging fiscal situation in the
medium-term with a budget that aims to keep the fiscal deficit to less than 2.5 percentage points of
GDP through a combination of increased revenue mobilization and a prudent expenditure management.
The government will need to keep protecting the social sectors, especially as the share of health in total
government spending increased from 2.5 percent in 2015 to 5 percent in 2016. Finally, the government
will need to avoid borrowing imprudently for its infrastructure projects, including roads and dams, and
maximize the grant element of its loans.




                                                       54                                    COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
              G U I N E A : K E Y E C O N O M I C I N D I C AT O R S , 2 0 1 4 - 1 9
                                                                      2014      2015     2016     2017     2018     2019
                                                                                                  proj     proj     proj
                                                           (annual change in percent)
 National Accounts and Prices
 GDP at constant prices                                                  1.1      0.1      5.2      4.6      4.9       5.7
 GDP at current prices                                                   10.9     7.6     15.6      13.6     11.6     11.4
 GDP deflator                                                            9.8      7.5      9.9      8.6      6.4       5.4
 Consumer Prices
 Annual average                                                          9.7      8.2      8.1      8.4      7.0       5.5
 End of period                                                           9.0      7.3      8.7      8.1      6.0       5.0
 External sector
 Exports (in US$ terms)                                                  4.7     -18.5    23.5      14.2     22.3     10.9
 Imports (in US$ terms)                                                  26.1    -6.7      4.0      2.7      5.0       9.4
 Money and Credit
 Net foreign assets                                                      -8.3    -11.0     7.4      9.9      7.3       3.5
 Net domestic assets                                                     20.6    31.2      4.1      10.9     3.7       8.0
   Net claims on government                                              7.5     17.2     -0.6      1.9      0.4      -0.3
   Credit to non-government sector                                       13.7    10.8      4.7      9.0      3.3       8.3
 Broad money                                                             12.3    20.3     11.6      20.8     11.0     10.4
 Reserve money                                                           14.5     2.6     10.4      16.2     12.2      4.4
 Central Government Finances (% of GDP)
 Total revenue and grants                                                22.3    19.3     21.1      20.5     20.8     21.0
   Revenue                                                               18.2    17.8     19.0      18.1     18.3     18.5
   Grants                                                                4.1      1.5      2.1      2.4      2.5       2.5
 Total expenditure and net lending                                       26.5    28.3     21.3      21.2     23.8     23.4
 Current expenditure                                                     17.9    18.4     15.6      15.8     15.5     15.3
 Capital expenditure                                                     8.4      9.9      5.6      8.2      8.3       8.1
 Overall budget balance
   Excluding grants                                                      -8.3    -10.5    -2.3      -3.1     -5.5     -4.9
    Including grants                                                     -4.2    -8.9     -0.9      -0.6     -3.0     -2.4
 Current Account Balance
 Including official transfers                                           -17.6    -20.2    -12.2    -12.1    -10.3     -11.3
 Excluding official transfers                                           -19.4    -20.4    -13.6    -12.6    -10.8     -11.8
 Overall balance of payments                                             -0.9    -5.2      1.5      1.6      0.8      -0.6
 Gross official reserves (months of imports)                             3.7      2.2      3.0      3.2      3.4       3.7
 External public debt                                                    25.9    25.8     27.1      28.3     30.4     31.8
 Total public debt                                                       43.8    50.7     52.1      49.2     48.7     47.4
 Nominal GDP (GNF billion)                                            46,901    50,457   58,335   66,266   73,963    82,388

Source: International Monetary Fund; Bank staff estimations and projections.



                                                                          55
MALI
Growth remained robust in 2016 at 5.4 percent, driven by higher public investment and a solid performance
in all sectors owing to favorable weather conditions and improvements in the business climate. The
economic outlook is positive with projected robust GDP growth, a sizable decline in the fiscal and current
account deficits, and subdued inflation. It is nonetheless subject to downside risks linked mainly to the
fragile security conditions, governance issues, and climatic conditions.



Recent Developments
Growth has been robust since 2014. It reached 5.4 percent in 2016, driven by solid performances in all
sectors. The primary sector grew by 5.4 percent due to favorable weather conditions, expanded access to
inputs, and extension of agricultural land under cultivation. The tertiary sector expanded by 6.3 percent,
led by renewed impetus in telecommunications. After a 1.1 percent contraction in 2015, the secondary
sector rebounded by 4.5 percent thanks to vibrant agribusiness activities while gold mining production
continued to decline following the closure of two mines.

On the demand side, private consumption and public investment supported economic activity. Private
consumption grew by 5.3 percent, fueled by income earnings in rural areas and stable food prices in
urban areas. Public investment rose by 36.6 percent, reflecting the government’s efforts to bridge
infrastructure gaps including investments related to the Peace Agreement, and increased acquisitions of
defense equipment. One-third of public investment was financed by development partners. Conversely,
private investment, mainly concentrated in the mining and telecom sectors, increased more moderately
by 5.6 percent.

The external current-account deficit further deteriorated in 2016 to -7.7 percent of GDP, as higher public
investment and household consumption outweighed a decline in fuel imports. It was partly financed
by capital and financial account surpluses, mainly in the form of debt (3.6 percent of GDP), foreign aid
(1.4 percent of GDP), and foreign direct investment (0.9 percent of GDP). As a result, Mali’s net foreign
assets at the central bank depleted by 18.7 percent and are equivalent 1.5 months of imports.

The overall fiscal deficit widened from -1.8 percent of GDP to -4.3 percent in 2016 due to substantial
increases in public investment in spite of significant improvements in domestic revenues. Tax revenue
accounted for 14.9 percent of GDP, up 0.9 percent of GDP compared with 2015. Nonetheless, tax revenues
remained well below the WAEMU convergence criterion of 20 percent of GDP and the regional average.
The marked increase in tax collection stemmed primarily from increased fuel taxation, implementation
of reforms to broaden the tax base, and reduced tax exemptions. However, the debt-to-GDP ratio has
slightly decreased from 30.9 percent to 29.7 percent, reflecting the moderate risk of debt distress incurred
by the country.

Inflation remained subdued at -1.9 percent, well below the WAEMU convergence criterion of 3 percent,
due to good crop production and lower international petroleum prices despite the depreciation of
the CFA franc against the dollar. This was also the outcome of prudent exchange rate and monetary
policy management at the regional level by the BCEAO, the central bank of West African states. Over
the recent period, the BCEAO adopted an accommodative policy stance by increasing its refinancing to
commercial banks to make up for the poor performance of the interbank market and promote lending to

                                                     56                                   COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
support regional economic activity. However, in December 2016, the BCEAO started to tighten its policy
in response to larger regional fiscal and current account deficits in order to secure the consistency of the
CFA franc peg to the Euro.

The economic slowdown following the security and political crises in 2012-13 led to a 2.6 percentage point
rise in the extreme poverty rate – to 50.4 percent in 2013 – compared to 2011. Nonetheless, exceptional
agricultural output growth since 2014 coupled with the tertiary sector expansion led to strong GDP per
capita growth and a decline in the poverty rate, estimated at 43.9 percent in 2016. Inequality is also likely
to have waned, since the revenue increase would mostly benefit households working in the agricultural
and tertiary sectors which are most affected by poverty.



Outlook
Mali’s economy is projected to grow by around 5 percent annually over the period 2017-19, reflecting
a return to normality and a gradual tapering off of the recent surge in international aid. All economic
sectors are expected to have a positive contribution to growth, albeit, in varying magnitudes. The tertiary
sector should be the most vigorous, with a growth rate averaging 6.6 percent, thanks to the momentum in
telecommunications. The primary sector’s growth will level off to around 5 percent, matching the growth
rate of the economy as a whole owing to the good performance in agriculture (especially irrigated rice),
while the secondary sector’s growth rate is expected to slow down from 5.0 percent in 2016 to 2.2 percent
in 2019, due to continued decline in gold production.

The current account deficit is projected to narrow down – though remaining sizeable – from -7.7 percent
in 2016 to -5.3 percent in 2019 on account of fiscal consolidation and sustained tighter monetary policy
by the regional central bank, which is expected to dampen imports. In the same vein, the fiscal position
is expected to strengthen from -4.3 percent of GDP in 2016 to -3.0 percent in 2019 owing to improved
domestic revenue mobilization and the maintenance of greater discipline in recurrent expenditure. As
a result, public debt is expected to rise gradually to 31.6 percent of GDP. Inflation will remain below
1 percent, reflecting sustained food crop growth and low global inflation.

The poverty rate is also projected to decline steadily. The continuation of the robust expansion of the
Malian economy over the period 2017-19 will result in rising per capita GDP and a concomitant reduction
in the poverty rate to about 39.4 percent in 2019.



Risks and Challenges
Mali’s solid economic outlook is subject to substantial and persistent downside risks. Slow implementation
of the peace agreement and of the restoration of security throughout the country could dampen economy-
wide growth. This would hamper sustained improvements in the welfare of households in conflict-affected
areas and the return and reintegration of displaced households and refugees. Also, economic governance
risks are affecting the efficiency of public financial management, the assistance of development partners
and the creation of a more attractive business climate. Weather-related shocks pose a serious risk to
agricultural production and global warming might intensify this threat over time. Finally, any further
decline in global gold or cotton prices could destabilize the external accounts, as these commodities
represent the bulk of Mali’s export revenues.



                                                      57
     M A L I : S E L E C T E D E C O N O M I C A N D F I N A N C I A L I N D I C AT O R S ,
                                          2014–19
                                                                     2014       2015      2016       2017      2018      2019
                                                                                 (Annual change in percentage)
National income and prices
      Real GDP                                                         7.0         6.0       5.3       5.3        4.8      4.7
      GDP deflator                                                     1.6         2.8       1.5       1.7        1.1      0.8
      Consumer price inflation (average)                               0.9         1.4      -1.6       1.0        1.4      1.7


Money and credit (contribution to broad money growth)
      Credit to the government                                         0.8         1.6       8.6       7.3        2.9      0.0
      Credit to the economy                                           12.4       14.6       17.2      10.2        5.2      5.0
      Broad money (M2)                                                 7.1       13.2       18.9      14.4        8.2      5.6


                                                                             (In % of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
National Accounts
      Private consumption                                             74.8       73.5       82.2      80.7      78.7      78.5
      Public consumption                                              16.3       16.2       17.1      17.2      16.9      16.9
      Private investment                                              11.2       10.1       10.1      10.1      10.1      10.1
      Public investment                                                6.5         7.3       9.3       9.6        9.4      9.3
      Exports of goods and services                                   22.5       22.0       21.7      22.1      21.3      20.7
      Imports of goods and services                                   38.0       38.9       40.4      39.6      36.4      35.4


Central government finances
      Overall balance (payment order basis)                           -2.9        -1.8      -4.3       -4.1      -3.5     -3.0
      Overall balance (cash basis)                                    -2.4        -3.2      -4.3       -4.1      -3.6     -3.0
      Domestic debt (end period)                                       6.3         7.5       6.8       7.0        7.0      7.0
      Total debt                                                      27.3       30.9       29.7      30.0      30.7      31.6


External sector                                                              (In % of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
      Current external balance, including official transfers          -4.7        -7.3      -7.7       -6.8      -5.3     -5.3
      Current external balance, excluding official transfers         -12.7       -14.3     -17.0     -15.9      -13.3    -12.8
      Exports of goods and services (annual change in per-
      centage)                                                        -1.9         6.7       5.2       8.9        2.5      2.2
      Imports of goods and services (annual change in per-
       centage)                                                        3.4       11.5       11.2       4.9       -2.5      2.4
      Debt service to exports of goods and services                    3.5         6.3       4.1       5.2        3.8      4.3
      External debt (end period)                                      21.0       23.4       22.9      23.0      23.7      24.6


Nominal GDP (FCFA billion)                                           7,114     7,748      8,285     8,870     9,401      9,923

    Source: Malian authorities; IMF and Bank staff estimates.

                                                                58                                       COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
NIGER
Growth gathered momentum in 2016, standing at 4.7 percent despite security threats, persisting low
commodity prices, and trade shocks. While the economy gained strength in 2016 and fiscal and external
current account deficits declined, challenges remain. This includes sustaining growth in spite of the
presence of shocks while continuing the process of fiscal consolidation. Poverty is projected to decline
only modestly over the medium term owing to moderate per capita growth.



Recent Developments
Niger’s economy is gradually recovering but persisting shocks have kept per capita growth very
low. Economic growth is estimated at 4.7 percent in 2016, compared with 3.5 percent in 2015, supported
by the good performance of agriculture. On the demand side, the impact of a sharp decline in public
investment, the persistent commodity price shock, disruptive security developments, and the spillovers
from the Nigerian crisis on trade have kept growth under the potential output level. Inflation has remained
subdued at around 2 percent of GDP.

The external current account deficit narrowed in 2016 due to cuts in high-import-content public
investment. The deficit decreased from 18.1 percent in 2015 to 15.4 percent of GDP as imports
significantly declined, offsetting lower uranium exports value and reduced net exports to Nigeria. The
deficit was financed mainly by foreign direct investment and aid (9.5 percent of GDP). Niger’s net foreign
assets remained at a comfortable level, equivalent to 4.2 months of imports.

The Government adjusted cut capital spending by about 5 percentage points of GDP in 2016. As
a result, the fiscal deficit (including grants) improved from 9.1 to 6.5 percent of GDP between 2015 and
2016, reversing the upward trend over the past three years. Although Niger’s risk of debt distress is still
deemed moderate (DSA in December 2016), public debt reached 47 percent of GDP in 2016 compared
to 22.6 percent in 2013.

Domestic credit to government increased in 2016 due to a tax revenue shortfall and a delay in
external support disbursement. This has contributed to a deceleration of credit to the private sector.
Most of the banks meet the prudential requirements but key risks stem from growing exposure to the
public sector, both through holdings of government bonds and the incurrence of domestic arrears. The
share of non-performing loans increased from 17.5 to 18.5 percent of total loans between 2015 and 2016,
above the WAEMU average of 16 percent in 2015.

Niger is a member of the WAEMU. Over the recent past, Niger has met the inflation convergence criterion
of 3 percent as monetary policy is anchored in the regional policy. The nominal exchange rate is pegged
to the Euro and the exchange rate remains broadly in line with fundamentals as suggested by an EBA-lite
methodology. Regional reserve coverage declined, standing below 4 months for the first time in 20 years
due to the widening current account deficit and delayed fiscal consolidation. The BCEAO decided to limit
access to refinancing by banks to a maximum amount of twice a bank’s capital in December 2016.




                                                     59
Based on the international poverty line (US$1.9 a day, PPP terms), Niger’s poverty rate was
50.3 percent in 2011 and dropped to 45.7 percent in 2014. Income poverty fell faster in the capital city
of Niamey and other urban areas between 2005 and 2014 thanks to food price subsidies and expansionary
government spending on investment projects. Across all regions, population growth rates are high and as
a result, the absolute number of people living in poverty continues to rise despite a 10 percentage point
decline in the poverty rate over the last decade. The poverty outlook for the period 2016-19 is expected
to decline by just 1.5 percentage points.



Outlook
The economic outlook remains positive. Growth is projected to rise to 5.2 percent in 2017 and to
5.5 percent during 2017-19, driven by the expansion of irrigated agriculture, increased oil and mining
outputs from the Madaouela Mine and the development of the telecommunications sector. Inflation
is expected to remain subdued at 2 percent, anchored in the regional policy and aided by a positive
agricultural output.

The fiscal deficit is projected to decline between 2017 and 2019. The fiscal consolidation is expected
to be sustained with a decrease in public investment (except in 2017 to finance already identified
investments in infrastructure and the social sectors) and tax and customs administration efforts kicking
in. The external current account deficit is projected to rise to about an average of 18.6 percent of GDP
in 2017-19 to reflect increased public investment in 2017 and capital and intermediate goods imports
associated with FDI. Gross official reserves are projected to stabilize at 4 months of imports of goods and
services, aided by external support.



Risks and Challenges 	
While the outlook is broadly favorable, Niger faces key challenges. The first challenge is related to
diversifying Niger’s sources of growth. Agriculture is the main contributor to growth out of which most
of the population and the poor earn their living. Niger also needs to strengthen its export base and
competitiveness, including infrastructure development. The second challenge pertains to sustaining fiscal
consolidation while ensuring that development needs are adequately financed. On the revenue side,
Niger needs to strengthen its revenue mobilization capacity in order to allow sufficient room for absorbing
the impact of security and commodity price shocks on the budget. Lastly, recurrent revenue shortfall
has either increased fiscal deficit and domestic debt or resulted in significant cuts in public investment,
thereby affecting the country’s development outcomes. Stepped-up efforts at enhancing expenditures
efficiency also feature among the priorities of the Government as fiscal consolidation entails reducing
public investment for the coming years.




                                                     60                                  COUNTRY ECONOMIC FOCUS
           S E L E C T E D E C O N O M I C A N D F I N A N C I A L I N D I C AT O R S ,
                                          2013-2020
                                   Selected	Economic	and	Financial	Indicators,	2013-2020	
	                                            			2013											2014										2015										2016												2017											2018											2019													2020	
Population		and	Poverty	                     	
Population,	total	(millions)	                						18.3											19.1										19.8														--																	--																			--																	--																					--	
Poverty	headcount	US$1.9/day	in	PPP	                n 								45.7											45.8											45.6												45.4															44.9													--																				--	
terms	
Inequality	-	Income	Gini	                    						--																	33.9										34.0													--																	--	
Population	Growth	(annual	%)	                						4.0																4.0												4.0														--																	--																			--																--																					--	
Life	Expectancy	                             							60.8											61.4													--																--																	--	
	Real	Economy	                               (annual	percentage	change,	unless	otherwise	specified)	
Real	GDP	                                            5.3	              7.0	           3.5	                4.5	                  5.2	                  5.5	                5.4	                 7.4	
			Non-resources	GDP	                                4.2	              7.9	           4.1	                4.3	                  5.0	                  5.6	                5.5	                 6.0	
Per	Capita	GDP	(US$	Atlas	Method)	               372.7	             382.7	          380.5	            383.7	                388.2	               395.3	              402.4	                     …	
Consumption		                                        4.5	             10.8	           5.9	                4.8	                  7.7	                  7.2	                6.9	                 8.7	
			Government	Consumption	                         24.5	              14.8	          20.7	               -7.3	                  7.8	                  2.1	                2.9	                 5.7	
			Private	consumption	                              2.6	             10.4	           4.0	                6.6	                  7.7	                  7.8	                7.3	                 9.1	
Investments	                                         8.7	              5.1	          12.8	               -3.0	                14.3	                   9.9	                7.9	                 1.7	
					Public	Investment	                            31.6	              28.9	           8.7	             -25.9	                 19.9	                   4.2	                2.9	                 9.1	
					Private	investment	                            -0.3	             -7.1	          15.8	              12.5	                 11.8	                12.6	               10.1	                  -1.4	
Imports	                                             6.1	              6.8	             10.3	               - 6.2	              16.2	                  9.7	               8.2	                10.3	
Exports	                                          10.6	              -0.3	              -7.8	               -3.4	               10.8	                  9.9	             10.0	                 30.5	
Consumer	price	inflation	(average)	                2.3	              -0.9	               1.0	                1.6	                1.2	                  2.1	              2.0	                  2.0	
		                                                                                                                                                               	                  		
Fiscal	Accounts	                             (Percent	GDP,	unless	otherwise	indicated)	
                                             	
Expenditures	                                   27.2	     31.0	      32.7	       26.5	                                          28.1	                27.3	              26.4	                 26.0	
Revenues	                                       16.6	     17.5	      18.1	       15.3	                                          16.1	                16.8	              17.5	                 19.1	
                                                                                                                                                                 														-
Overall	bal.(commit.basis,	incl.grants)	           -2.6	             -8.0	              -9.1	               -6.5	                -7.4	               -6.0	                 4.7	               -2.9	
		                                                                                                                                                               	                  		
                                             (Annual	change,	in	percent	of	beginning-of-period	broad	money)	
                                             	
Selected	monetary	Accounts	
Base	money	                                     10.1	     25.7	       3.6	       14.4	                                            9.4	                 9.7	             11.5	                  9.6	
Credit	to	non-government	                        2.5	       6.1	      6.8	        7.5	                                            4.2	                 4.3	              3.9	                  4.6	
Balance	of	payments	                         (Percent	GDP,	unless	otherwise	indicated)	
                                                                                                                                                                           	
Current	Account	Balance	(excl.	grants)	       -15.1	      -15.4	    -18.1	                               -15.4	               -18.0	               -18.5	             -18.1	                 -15.4	
Imports	of	goods	and	services,	f.o.b.	         26.3	       26.2	     27.5	                                25.3	                26.7	                27.3	              27.7	                  28.1	
Exports	of	goods	and	services,	f.o.b.	         20.7	       17.5	     15.2	                                13.8	                13.8	                14.3	              14.8	                  17.9	
Foreign	Direct	Investment	                       8.1	       8.9	       6.9	                                7.7	                 8.8	                10.5	              10.9	                   8.9	
Gross	reserves	(months	of	imp.	Eq)	              4.2	       4.8        4.6                                 4.2                  3.9                  4.0                4.0	                   4.1	
Total	Public	Debt	                             27.2	       33.7	     41.9	                                47.0	                51.5	                53.0	              53.9	                  52.4	
Public	External	Debt		                         22.6	       25.1	     30.4	                                34.1	                35.8	                37.1	              36.8	                  38.5	
Public	Domestic	Debt	                            4.6	       8.7	     11.5	                                12.9	                15.3	                16.0	              15.8	                   14	
Foreign	aid	                                   11.1	        8.9	     10.4	                                 9.5	                 9.0	                 8.9	               8.4	                   7.5	
Terms	of	trade	(percentage	change)	             -3.1	      -9.4	      -7.5	                               11.0	                -4.9	                 1.2	              -4.7	                  -4.7	
Exchange	rate	(average)	                      494.2	     536.8	     596.9	                               596.9	               596.9	                  …	                 …	                     …	
Memorandum	items:	                                                                                                                                               	                  		
GDP	(Nominal-LCU,	billions)	                	 3,703	     4,077	     4,242	                               4,430	               4,761	              5,130	              5,504	                 5,993	
GDP	(current	US$,	billions)	                        	           	          	                                  	                    	                   	                   	                      	
Source:	Nigerien	authorities;	IMF	and	World	Bank	staff	estimates,	2016.	




                                                                                    	
                                                                                    	
                                                                                61
ENABLING THE DIGITAL REVOLUTION
    IN SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA:
    What Role for Policy Reforms?

              SPRING 2017
