The Socio-Economic Impacts of Ebola in Sierra Leone
          Results from a High Frequency Cell Phone Survey

                             Round 2

                          April 15, 2015
This note was prepared by Abubakarr Turay (Statistics Sierra Leone), Samuel Turay (Statistics Sierra
Leone), Rachel Glennerster (MIT), Kristen Himelein (World Bank Poverty Global Practice), Nina Rosas
(World Bank Social Protection Global Practice), Tavneet Suri (MIT), and Ning Fu (World Bank Poverty
Global Practice). The data collection was conducted jointly by Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL) and
Innovations for Poverty Action (IPA). Very capable research assistance was provided by Shweta Bhogale
(MIT and Innovations for Poverty Action). In addition, the team benefitted from useful advice and
comments from World Bank Group colleagues, including Kathleen Beegle (Program Leader, AFCW1),
Hardwick Tchale (Senior Economist, AFADR), Francisca Ayodeji Akala (Senior Health Specialist, GHNDR),
and Pablo Fajnzylber (Sector Manager, GPVDR).




                              Vice President                 Makhtar Diop
                              Country Director               Yusupha Crookes


                              Poverty
                              Senior Director                Ana Revenga
                              Practice Manager               Pablo Fajnzylber
                              Task Manager                   Kristen Himelein


                              Social Protection
                              Senior Director                Arup Banerji
                              Practice Manager               Stefano Paternostro
                              Task Manager                   Nina Rosas




                                                                                                        2
                                              Overview
As of April 8, 2015, Sierra Leone had reported more than 12,000 cases of Ebola Virus Disease (EVD), and
over 3,800 deaths. Recent World Health Organization (WHO) reports show that Sierra Leone has seen a
decrease in new cases each week in the month leading up to April 5, and that week’s infection rate was
the lowest seen since May 2014. This is cause for cautious optimism.

The Government of Sierra Leone, with support from the World Bank Group and in partnership with
Innovations for Poverty Action, is conducting mobile phone surveys with the aim of capturing the key
socio-economic effects of the virus. The results focus mainly on employment, agriculture, food security
and prices, and health service utilization, covering predominantly urban areas where cell phone coverage
is highest, but including rural areas as much as possible given the sample available.

Based on the second round of data collection in January-February 2015, it is clear that the impact of EVD
on household wellbeing continues to be widespread, and that despite some improvements in the health
situation, the economic situation remains uneven. The overall employment situation has improved since
November, driven by increases in employment rates in urban areas. However, youth employment in
Freetown has seen a continued decline and the percentage of households in non-farm enterprise work
who reported that their business is no longer operating is now at four times the pre-crisis level.

Changes in earnings have depended on the employment sector. Wage workers are earning around the
same as they did pre-crisis, while those operating non-farm household enterprises are seeing revenues
well below what they earned before the crisis – a 54 percent drop from the Labor Force Survey conducted
in July-August 2014. Women in particular are more affected, mostly due to the fact that they are more
likely to be working in non-farm household enterprises, the sector most heavily impacted by the EVD
crisis.

Rural areas continue to appear to have been the most resilient to EVD based on these data. However,
food insecurity, which was high in Sierra Leone even before the crisis, continues to be a concern, with
nearly 70 percent of households taking at least one action to cope with food shortages in the week leading
up to the survey. Rural workers also continued to work less than before the crisis – by five hours per week
– despite the harvest.

Delivery of social services has generally improved. The utilization of maternal care services has increased
significantly since November: the percentage of women who gave birth in a clinic up from 28 percent to
64 percent and the percentage who received at least one prenatal visit up from 56 percent to 71 percent.
National educational radio programs have also generally been successful in reaching the population, with
72 percent of households with school-aged children reporting that at least some children listened to these
programs. Coverage of social assistance, mostly in the form of food, reflects targeting of high infection
areas during the emergency response, suggesting efforts to reach the poorest are needed as the country
moves toward recovery.

A third round of data collection is planned for April 2015, to continue to pinpoint the most pressing
socioeconomic issues arising for households, and to help the country prepare for economic recovery.

                                                                                                         3
Map




      4
Background & Motivation
Since the initial appearance of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) in rural Guinea in December 2013, the virus
has caused more than 10,000 deaths with over 25,000 cases in the region.1 Sierra Leone has reported
the highest level of cases of the three most affected countries, 11,974 as of April 1, 2015, with 3,799
deaths. Following a peak of around 500 new cases a week in early December, substantial progress has
been made in controlling the outbreak: the case incidence fell sharply through December and January,
levelled off in February, and then decreased again in March, dropping to 25 cases in the last week.

The trajectory of the outbreak has also changed. Kailahun and Kenema, the districts which were initially
the most impacted by EVD, experienced very few new cases after November 2014. Districts in the North
and West regions, including Freetown, Port Loko, and Bombali, also had a large number of cases but cases
have continued to rise through January. Of those areas which were largely untouched by the initial wave,
some saw sharp increases in new cases, such as Kono district, while others continued to have low
numbers, including Bonthe and Pujehun.

In response to improving medical situation, on January 22, the Government of Sierra Leone scaled back
some of the measures imposed to slow the spread of the disease. The quarantine of Kailahun and Kenema
districts was lifted, as were other district travel restrictions and regulations on the hours markets could
operate. While reports of sporadic closures continue, the international land borders with Liberia and
Guinea are now open, and trade has resumed, albeit at a lower volume and with additional health
measures in place. Air links remain limited, and many countries still have special visa restrictions on Sierra
Leoneans because of EVD. Schools did not open in September for the 2014-15 academic year. The latest
expected date for reopening is April 14th, with some schools opening sooner to allow national
standardized examinations to take place. Resumption of classes will be national except in chiefdoms that
have not reached zero cases in time. Overall, however, the situation remains unpredictable. On February
27, responding to a new outbreak of cases in a Freetown fishing community, the government re-imposed
some restrictions, including on the number of people traveling in taxis and on motorcycles, and
reintroduced checkpoints monitoring the flow of people. Also, in an effort to identify any remaining
infections not in treatment, there was a second three day lockdown held from March 27 to 29.

The rate of depreciation of the Leone/U.S. dollar exchange rate which had averaged around three
percent over the first seven months of 2014, picked up significantly with the Leone ending the year
about 13 percent lower. In parallel with the EVD crisis, the Sierra Leonean economy has been impacted
by continued falls in the world price for iron ore, the country’s main export, which fell by a record
50 percent in 2014. Production was interrupted at both iron ore mines in late 2014, and one mine
remains closed through the first quarter of 2015. While relatively few Sierra Leoneans are directly
employed in the mining sector, currently estimated around 8,000 total, more than 60 percent are in iron
ore and many of these are well paid formal sector jobs. The decline in the price of iron ore and mine
closures are likely to have had important negative impacts on other aspects of the economy, particularly
on suppliers and on exports and government revenues.

1
 These figures are from WHO Situation Report, available at: http://apps.who.int/gho/data. They differ slightly from
NERC report of 8,563 cases and 3,491 deaths as of April 8, due to differences in tallying suspected cases.

                                                                                                                 5
 Figure 1: Geographic spread of Ebola cases January 2015: total and new cases since November 2014




     Total cases: Jan 31, 2015                                      New cases: Nov 12, 2014 to Jan 31, 2015

 Source: Ministry of Health and Sanitation, Sierra Leone. As of June 29, 2014, the start of the LFS, there were only
 27 cases in Kenema and 153 Kailahun. Shading represents areas that experienced quarantine (dark shading) or
 faced travel restrictions (light shading), at some point during the outbreak.


Objectives and Methodology
To monitor the socioeconomic impacts of the EVD crisis, the Government of Sierra Leone is conducting a
series of cell phone surveys. The first two surveys were conducted by Statistics Sierra Leone from
November 12 to November 25, 2014, and from January 22 to February 4, 2015, with a third round
expected in April 2015. This report provides results from the second of these surveys. Funding was
provided by the World Bank and technical assistance from Innovations for Poverty Action.

The survey followed household heads for whom cell phone numbers were recorded during the nationally-
representative Labor Force Survey (LFS) conducted in July and August 2014. Overall, 66 percent (2,764) of
LFS households had cellphones although this coverage was uneven across the country, with higher levels
in urban areas (82 percent) than rural areas (43 percent). Of those with cell phones, 69 percent were
reached during round 1, 68 percent in round 2, and 60 percent in both round 1 and round 2. Throughout
the report, LFS data are for those who responded either in round 1, round 2, or both rounds (see the
methodology appendix for more detail).

The report is structured in eight sections covering employment, agriculture, food security and prices,
social assistance, remittances, migration, education, and health facility utilization. While the previous
report on the round 1 data disaggregated the results based on three groups of districts that had
experienced different levels of the disease, changes in the areas most affected makes it more
complicated to disaggregate in the same way in this report. The previous report also suggested that the
main geographic differences in socioeconomic impact were between urban areas and rural areas and
not between areas that had different levels of EVD cases. Data in this report are therefore consistently
disaggregated into three groups: rural areas, Freetown, and other urban areas.



                                                                                                                       6
Employment
Employment rates in urban areas recovered some of the losses seen during the earlier phase of the
EVD outbreak. Overall employment rates, which fell slightly between the Labor Force Survey and the
first round of the cell phone survey from 83 to 79 percent, have stabilized in round 2 (80 percent).2 The
main employment impacts have been felt in urban areas, where there are now some signs of recovery:
the employment rate in urban areas had fallen from 74 percent to 66 percent in round 1, but showed a
statistically significant improvement to 69 percent between round 1 and 2. In Freetown, the
employment rate fell from 71 percent to 61 percent between the LFS and round 1, but then rebounded
to 66 percent in round 2. Other urban areas followed a similar pattern: the employment rate fell from
76 percent in the LFS to 68 percent in round 1 and 71 percent in round 2. Taken together, employment
in Freetown and other urban areas is significantly higher than in round 1.3

    Figure 2: Employment rates

                                            Working         Not Working

                       LFS                        83%                                     17%
     Overall




                   Round 1                       79%                                   21%

                   Round 2                       80%                                   20%

                       LFS                            87%                                   13%
     Rural




                   Round 1                        84%                                     16%

                   Round 2                        85%                                     15%

                       LFS                  71%                                     29%
     Freetown




                   Round 1              61%                                   39%

                   Round 2                66%                                   34%

                       LFS                      76%                                   24%
     Other Urban




                   Round 1                 68%                                   32%

                   Round 2                  71%                                     29%

                             0%   20%            40%             60%          80%                 100%

    Source: Sierra Leone LFS (July-August 2014) and cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014) and round
    2 (January-February 2015).



2
  There are small changes in the employment rates shown here for LFS and round 1 compared to the round 1 report
since respondents are considered in the labor force in all rounds if they are in the labor force in any round, given
these survey rounds are conducted at high frequencies. Given this approach, the changes observed cannot be driven
by changes in the size of the labor force, including changes in the number of discouraged workers who drop out of
the labor force. See methodological annex for details.
3
  Taken separately there is no significant increase in Freetown and other urban areas between rounds 1 and 2.

                                                                                                                  7
Substantial churning in the labor market is observed, particularly among workers in non-farm
household enterprises. For those household heads who responded to the LFS and both cell phone
survey rounds, it is possible to track flows into and out of employment. Across all sectors ten percent of
those in employment during the LFS returned to work and eight percent left work between rounds 1
and 2. Figure 6 shows labor market churning by main sector of employment (wage work, non-wage
agricultural activities, non-farm household enterprises) and unpaid work. There is significant instability
in all sectors of employment across survey periods; however, churning is highest among those whose
main activity is self-employment in the non-farm household enterprise. Among the non-farm self-
employed, twelve percent restarted work while nine percent stopped working, for an overall
employment rate of 83 percent in round 2 (insignificantly different from round 1). It is not possible to
judge how unusual this level of churning is in the labor market as there was no nationally representative
survey on labor market outcomes in almost 30 years prior to the LFS in 2014.

Figure 3: Inflows and outflows from employment by sector

                                              Returned to Work   Working   Left Work         Not Working

                              Round 1
               Wage




                              Round 2
Unpaid Agriculture employed




                              Round 1
                     Self-




                              Round 2

                              Round 1

                              Round 2

                              Round 1

                              Round 2

                                        0.4    0.2      0.0      0.2       0.4         0.6        0.8      1.0
Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014) and round 2 (January-February 2015). An individual’s sector
is defined by their sector of employment in the LFS.

Districts with declining EVD rates did not see more people re-entering the workforce. Regression
analysis suggests that neither the level of EVD nor the change in the level of EVD was a significant
predictor of the number of people starting work between rounds 1 and 2 of the cell phone survey (see
Table A4 in the methodology appendix). While there is a statistically significant relationship between
the number of cases of EVD in November and being out of work in all the baseline and both cell phone
rounds, the size of the effect is very small. An additional 100 EVD cases was associated with a one
percentage point higher likelihood of being out of work in all three rounds. In addition, the change in
EVD between round 1 and round 2 is associated with a fall in the likelihood of being out of work in all
three rounds. A similar pattern is seen for those not working in LFS but working in rounds 1 and 2.


                                                                                                                 8
The frequency of Ebola being cited as the main reason for work absence is decreasing, but has been
replaced by business closures. Respondents who were absent from work during the previous week
because their place of work was temporarily shut down (e.g., because of Ebola restrictions, lack of
customers) could cite Ebola directly as a reason or report being absent because of a lock out. While the
percentage of household heads who mentioned Ebola directly as a reason for absence decreased from
20 percent to three percent between rounds 1 and 2, when combined with lockouts, this rose to 34
percent from 24 percent. The other most common reasons for absence include seasonal work (18
percent), temporary layoffs (12 percent), health reasons (9 percent), and family obligations (9 percent)
which were (statistically) similarly prevalent reasons in round 1.

Figure 4: Top five reasons for temporary absence from work in the past week
 100%                                                  3%
  90%
                                   20%
  80%           22%                                                 Ebola
                                                      30%
  70%
                                    5%                              Strike/Stayaway/Lockout
  60%
  50%                                                               Seasonal Work
                12%                13%
  40%                                                 18%           Temp Layoff
  30%
                                   15%                              Health
  20%                                                 11%
                19%
  10%
                                    8%                 9%
   0%
                LFS              Round 1            Round 2

Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014) and round 2 (January-February 2015).


Overall earnings among wage workers remain at pre-crisis levels, with the exception of the non-
agricultural private enterprise sector. Only nine percent of those who worked in LFS earned a wage
income. Among wage earners, which comprise mostly (83 percent) public sector employees and non-
agricultural private enterprise workers, average earnings decreased from 680,000 Leones
(approximately USD 159) in the baseline to 583,000 Leones (approximately USD 136) in round 2. This
decline was not statistically significant; however, there was a significant wage decline among non-
agricultural private enterprise sector workers, whose wages were 544,000 Leones (approximately US
127) in round 2, down 28 percent from LFS. This is consistent with the expectation that the business
environment would experience more volatility than government and public sector employment due to
EVD conditions such as transport disruptions and closure of large private enterprises. This decline is
across the sector and not just caused by exit of high wage earners, as the pre-crisis wage level is not
different between those who remained in this sector and those who left.

Business operations continue to be disrupted, but the constraints are shifting as the disease
transmission decelerates. Among households engaged in non-farm enterprise work in the last six
months, the percent reporting a business is no longer operating continued to increase, reaching four

                                                                                                           9
times the pre-EVD level. This figure was at 22 percent in round 2, up from 13 percent in round 1, and 5
percent in the LFS (8 and 17 percentage point increases, respectively).4 However, compared to round 1,
fewer people directly cited Ebola as the reason for closure (9 percent versus 33 percent). There was also
an increase between round 1 and round 2 in seasonal closures; while it is difficult to know if this is typical,
the recall period includes the Christmas holiday season. On the other hand, lack of customers –
potentially due to the Ebola outbreak – and capital are becoming more prevalent reasons for closure.
Lack of labor was less of a constraint (5 percent versus 31 percent). This shift reflects the evolution of
the crisis, as emergency conditions associated with high disease transmission become less severe and
visible (e.g., prevalence of roadblocks) while the indirect economic effects persist. The higher capital
constraint may signal that the extended duration of the slowdown has meant household enterprises
have been forced to use working capital for consumption or – given the covariate nature of the shock –
are unable to secure capital to restart, as this is typically sourced from family or friends. This finding is
consistent with the upcoming Markets and Food Security Joint Assessment Mission report, which finds
that many agricultural traders whose businesses closed during the crisis now lack capital to reopen.

Figure 5: Reasons for closures of non-farm household enterprises

      100%                                                              Ebola
       90%
                                                                        Lack of capital
       80%
       70%                                                              Input supply problems
       60%                                                              Labour not available
       50%
       40%
                                                                        No customers
       30%                                                              Illness/care for relative
       20%
                                                                        Seasonal closure
       10%
        0%                                                              Other
                      Round 1                   Round 2

Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014) and round 2 (January-February 2015).


Revenues of non-farm household enterprises remain well below pre-crisis levels. Among households
with at least one enterprise operating, average revenues per household fell to 680,000 Leones
(approximately 160 USD), a 17 percent fall from round 1 and a 54 percent fall from LFS. While revenues
are often reported with considerable noise and the fall between round 1 and round 2 is not robust to
different ways of excluding outliers, the fall in revenues between LFS and rounds 1 and 2 is large and
robust to dropping different outliers. However, average revenues among these households across all
methods do not surpass 60 percent of LFS levels, suggesting the household enterprise sector still has a
long road to recovery.

4
 These estimates are slightly different than the ones in the round 1 report due to the additional households added
to the sample in round 2, which are then also added to LFS baseline estimates.

                                                                                                               10
The reduction in hours worked Figure 6: Hours worked last week among those employed, by area
outside Freetown persisted
despite the ongoing harvest. The                       Baseline    Round 1      Round 2
average number of hours worked 60
in the last week among those
                                        50
working remained at the round 1
level at 40 hours compared to 47 40
hours in LFS (rounds 1 and 2 are
statistically indistinguishable). 30
The decline in hours worked
compared       to     LFS       was 20
concentrated in areas outside of
                                        10
Freetown (47 hours versus 40
hours), of which the agricultural         0
self-employment and unpaid                         Rural            Freetown          Other Urban
sectors saw the largest decline in Source: Sierra Leone LFS (July-August 2014) and cell phone surveys round
average       hours        worked, 1 (November 2014) and round 2 (January-February 2015).
decreasing from 45 hours to 37
hours and 45 hours to 35 hours between the baseline and round 2, respectively. The changes in the
other sectors are statistically insignificant. Hours worked for workers in Freetown remained unchanged
across all three rounds. The decline in hours worked in rural areas since the baseline is unlikely to be
entirely driven by the agricultural harvest as the number of hours worked are indistinguishable between
round 1 and round 2, while the percentage of rice farmers who report having completed their harvest
rose from 34 to 88 between the two rounds.

Youth employment rates in Freetown have been disproportionally affected and young workers outside
Freetown are working less hours. Although the overall youth5 employment rate does not exhibit any
statistically significant decline between the three survey rounds, it decreases significantly in Freetown,
and this decline is larger than for Freetown’s older population. In round 2, the employment rate among
youth in Freetown was 60 percent, statistically indistinguishable from round 1 but down significantly from
75 percent in the LFS. In the meantime, the employment rate for the rest of the working age population
in Freetown rebounded to 70 percent in round 2, a significant rise from 60 percent in round 1 and
statistically indistinguishable to LFS levels (69 percent). Although employment rates among youth are
stable outside Freetown, hours worked decreased both in rural areas and other urban areas. However,
these decreases are similar to the general working age population. In round 2, hours worked in the last
week reported by youth was 39 hours, down significantly from 45 hours in round 1 and 49 hours in LFS.
In rural areas, the reported hours by youth were 38, statistically indistinguishable from round 1 but down
significantly from 46 hours in LFS. Hours worked for youth working in Freetown remained stable between
survey rounds.


5
    Youth defined as those between ages 15 to 35, which represents 34 percent of survey respondents.

                                                                                                          11
Youth business operations were also more severely disrupted, but revenue declines were similar to
non-youth owned enterprises. In round 2, 25 percent of young respondents reported a household
enterprise was no longer operating, up from 15 percent in round 1. This is compared to 20 percent and
12 percent in these rounds for non-youth. Since these groups have the same baseline level of 5 percent,
this implies the share no longer operating among youth-headed households is five times higher than the
pre-EVD level compared to four times among the non-youth businesses. However, young households
with surviving enterprises did not experience larger declines in average revenues households: in round
2, average revenues among youth-headed households declined to 574,000 Leones (approximately USD
135), a 42 percent fall from LFS compared to 52 among the older cohort.

There is some evidence that women are also facing more severe employment effects from the EVD
crisis. While the number of female household heads is relatively small in the sample, regression analysis
suggests female headed households have been hit harder by EVD than male headed households (see
Table A4 in the methodology appendix). Compared to female heads, male heads were 12 percentage
points more likely to have worked in all three survey rounds and 12 percentage points more likely to
have worked in round 1 and 2 if not working in LFS. As noted in the previous report, much of this is
related to the fact that women disproportionately worked in the self-employment sector, which has
suffered the largest losses.


Agriculture
EVD does not appear to have substantially disrupted the rice harvest. Though the completion of the
harvest may have been later than in previous years, the delays appear to be more related to abnormal
weather patterns than EVD. Rainfall was well above seasonal norms in October and November, but
returned to normal levels in December and January. In round 1, only 34 percent of rice farmers had
completed their harvest. This percentage rose to 88 percent in round 2. In both rounds, 70 percent of
those who had not completed the harvest said it was because the rice was not yet ready. The second
most common reason was insufficient household labor, cited by 17 percent.

Harvest size was comparable to previous data but the challenge of collecting data by phone preclude
certainty on trends. While agricultural data is difficult to collect within the time constraints of the cell
phone survey and therefore no directly comparable data exists, average rice harvests per household were
not substantially different to the Agriculture Household Tracking Survey, collected in 2010. The total
output per rice-farming household was 605 kg in round 2 of the cell phone survey. In the AHTS, the
average output per rice farming household across the country was 697 kg, though the range varied
between 270 kg in Bonthe and 1016 kg in Kambia. These findings are also consistent with the upcoming
Markets and Food Security Joint Assessment Mission report estimation that 2014/2015 rice production
was down slightly compared to the above-average 2013/2014 harvest. The rice harvest was in addition
substantially higher in the second round of the cell phone compared to the first, though the small sample
in the first round precludes statistical testing. There are, however, caveats to the above results. The
sample of cell phone owning agricultural households is likely to differ from agricultural households
generally, and the sample size is too small to perform sub-national analysis. The two of the three districts

                                                                                                         12
considered the “breadbasket” of Sierra Leone, Kenema and Kailahun, which normally produce
approximately 20 percent of the total rice crop, have only 70 and 33 observations respectively.6 The
Ministry of Agriculture has expressed concerns that the limited mobility due to the cordon of these areas
early in the epidemic may have limited household’s abilities to properly tend crops during the growing
season, leading to lower yields or the abandonment of some household plots. Should this be the case,
the cell phone survey might not fully reflect these losses especially if these farmers were less likely to
respond to the cell phone survey.

Sales have increased with completed harvests. In November, 16 percent of rice farmers had sold at least
some portion of their crop. By January, this figure had risen to 26 percent suggesting that local rice is
entering the domestic market. Though as noted above the figures are not directly comparable, the AHTS
recorded 21 percent of households selling rice in 2010. The slightly higher rate of sales in the cell phone
survey may reflect that those answering a cell phone survey are likely to be less remote and thus more
connected to markets.


Food Security and Prices                      Figure 7: Food insecurity
Food insecurity remained unchanged
since round 1. At least once in the week                          Round 1       Round 2
                                               100%
previous to the survey, 52 percent of
households ate less expensive or less           80%
preferred foods, 51 percent of households
reduced portion size, 43 percent reduced        60%
the number of meals they ate, 37 percent
restricted consumption by adults in order       40%
for small children to eat, 30 percent had to
                                                20%
sell assets to buy food, and 18 percent
borrowed food. Overall, 67 percent of
                                                 0%
households took at least one of these six                  Rural          Freetown      Other Urban
actions in the last week, and more may Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014) and
have taken other actions not specifically round 2 (January-February 2015).
included in the questionnaire. General
levels of food insecurity remained high across Sierra Leone despite the completion of the harvest by most
households. Only urban areas outside Freetown saw a statistically significant fall since November in the
percentage of households taking any copying strategy, and the magnitude of that decline was less than
five percentage points.

Rice prices have risen since November outside of Freetown. The median price for a kilogram of rice
increased from 3200 Le in rural areas in November to 3600 Le in January - February, while the price
increased from 3200 Le to 3400 Le in urban areas outside Freetown. The median price remained 3200 Le

6
 Kambia is also a large producer of rice with among the highest output per household and was less impacted by
EVD than some other areas.

                                                                                                                13
in Freetown. Historical data from WFP VAM and International Growth Center indicate the prices generally
begin to rise from post-harvest lows beginning in January, but subsequent rounds will continue to
monitory these trends.7


Remittances
 The percent of households Figure 8: Value of remittances for those receiving them
receiving remittances remained
unchanged although the value of                                Round 1        Round 2
these remittances rose. In the               7
month prior to the round 2 survey,
nine percent of households                   6
received     remittances      either       100,000s of Leones
                                             5
internationally or domestically.
About 16 percent of urban                    4
households, including Freetown,
received remittances, compared to            3
five percent of rural households.
                                             2
The value of remittances in the
previous month for those who                 1
received them was 400,000 Leones
(70 USD) in round 2, an increase of          0
72     percent     compared       to                   Rural           Freetown       Other Urban
November. Similar to the first
                                        Source: Cell phone surveys round 1 (November 2014) and round 2
round, two households which (January-February 2015).
received more than $2,000 USD
were excluded from these calculations. It is likely that the increased amount of remittances were related
to the holiday period, which fell within a month prior to the round 2 survey.


Migration
Migration was limited in most areas and does not appear to be related to outbreak levels. Only five
percent of household heads reported living in a different location in round 2 than in LFS. The highest levels
of migration were found in Kono and Moyamba districts, 18 percent and 15 percent respectively. Both of
these areas had relatively low levels of Ebola cases, though Kono experienced an increase more recently.
The districts with the lowest levels of migration, however, Tonkolili, Bonthe, and Koinadugu, also had
relatively low levels of Ebola infection. It is likely that a number of factors, including the general economic
slowdown, infection levels, and proximity to other opportunities contributed to individual migration
decisions, but it does appear that the motivations were more economic than related to a fear of infection.


7
 See http://www.theigc.org/country/sierra-leone/ and http://foodprices.vam.wfp.org/Analysis-Monthly-Price-
DataADV.aspx for further detail.

                                                                                                             14
Overall, one-third of this migration was to Freetown, which had both the highest numbers of infections
and the most employment options. It should also be noted that the remote nature of the cell phone
survey makes the measure of migration more challenging because respondents do not always accurately
self-report their location, and the cell phone surveys have found differences in the level of migration based
on the methodology used (see appendix for details). Nevertheless, the overall level remains low.

    Figure 9: Proportion migrated since LFS and number of Ebola cases by district

                                Migrated   Total Cases: Jan 31st 2015     New Cases: Nov 12, 2014-Jan 31,2015
                          20%
                                                                                                             2000


                          15%
                                                                                                             1500
       Percent Migrated




                                                                                                                    Ebola cases
                          10%                                                                                1000


                          5%                                                                                 500


                          0%                                                                                 0




    Source: Cell phone survey round 2 (January-February 2015) and Ebola Situation Report March 11, 2015 (World
    Health Organization).



Social assistance
Social assistance in response to the crisis thus far has mostly been in the form of in-kind support. In the
six months prior to the round 2 survey, nine percent of households reported receiving any social assistance
excluding non-food in-kind transfers. Of these, only four percent were cash transfers including cash for
work, with the other 96 percent in the form of food. The incidence of social assistance was highest outside
Freetown (ten percent compared to three percent in Freetown).8 When including those receiving other
in-kind support, the overall percent receiving assistance increases to 26 percent and incidence is highest
in Freetown (35 percent versus 25 percent). However, most other in-kind support is likely to have been
disease-related, including medicine, soap, chlorine, and other hygiene and disinfectant products.




8
    The difference in the social assistance incidence between rural and other urban areas is not statistically significant.

                                                                                                                                  15
Figure 10: Percentage of households receiving social assistance in the last 6 months

                          Cash or food only           Cash, food, and other in-kind
 40%
 35%
 30%
 25%
 20%
 15%
 10%
  5%
  0%
           Overall           Rural         Freetown     Other Urban          Poor        Non-Poor

Source: Cell phone survey round 2 (January-February 2015).

Food distribution since the outbreak intensified was mostly carried out by non-governmental
organizations. Of households receiving food assistance, 73 percent reported that the food was distributed
by an NGO, one percent reported it was distributed by district officials, 20 percent said it was from other
government officials, and six percent reported it was from other sources. Other sources include faith- and
community-based organizations and the World Food Program (which also distribute through NGOs).
Interestingly, non-poor households (i.e., above median wealth index levels) are more likely to receive
support from sources other than NGOs. However, this result should be interpreted with caution as Ebola
treatment centers (ETU), quarantine zones, and other hot spots were intentionally targeted based on
disease-specific rather than poverty criteria and are also the areas where transfers are more likely to be
delivered through Government channels.

Figure 11: Source of food assistance, among those receiving support

                    NGO       District official   Other Govt worker          Other source

100%
 90%
 80%
 70%
 60%
 50%
 40%
 30%
 20%
 10%
  0%
          Overall          Rural       Freetown Other Urban           Poor          Non-Poor

Source: Cell phone survey round 2 (January-February 2015).

                                                                                                        16
The poor are less likely to receive assistance than the non-poor in other urban areas. Among households
with below the median level wealth index, the percentage receiving social assistance in the form of food
or cash transfers in the six months prior to the round 2 survey was nine percent, statistically
indistinguishable from the percentage receiving assistance among those with above the median wealth
index (9.5 percent). However, in other urban areas, the non-poor were more likely to receive social
assistance than the poor. One important caveat to this is that many of the poorest households in rural
areas are not included in the sample because only 43 percent of rural households have cell phones. As
mentioned above, this is to a certain extent expected given the emergency context and emphasis on
ensuring households in ETUs, quarantine and other high EVD intensity zones had access to basic
necessities. However, these data also highlight the need to ensure that social assistance reaches the
poorest as the country moves into the recovery phase.


Health Facility Utilization
 There have been significant increases in utilization of health clinics for maternal care since November.
The percentage of women who had given birth in a clinic in the last two months increased from 28 percent
in the first round in November to 64 percent in the second round in January.9 This is similar to the 71
percent found among households owning a cell phone in the 2013 Demographic and Health Survey (DHS).
This jump may reflect a supply as well as a demand response. Between round 1 and round 2, many
hospitals and birthing clinics took steps to provide protective equipment and training to health workers
involved in deliveries, easing health worker’s fears of infection if they assisted during deliveries. Women
who received at least one prenatal visit increased from 56 percent in round 1 to 71 percent in round 2,
compared to 84 percent in the
                                      Figure 12: Pregnancy related visits for mothers of babies born
DHS. The percentage of women within two months of interview date
receiving postnatal visits was not
statistically different between                              DHS 2013 Round 1 Round 2
                                       90%
round 1 and round 2 of the cell
phone survey, but there was a          80%
large increase within Freetown.        70%
Direct comparisons with the DHS        60%
also likely underreport the            50%
frequency of health facility           40%
utilization prior to the outbreak      30%
of EVD as maternal care has been       20%
increasing with the Free               10%
Healthcare        Initiative,    as     0%
demonstrated by the low                       Pre-Natal Care Birth in Clinic Post-Natal Care     No Care
percentage of women seeking no
                                      Source: Households with cell phones only, DHS (2013) and cell phone
care in the cell phone surveys.       surveys round 1 (November 2014) and round 2 (January-February 2015).



9
    Unlike the round 1 report, only DHS households with cell phones are included as this sample is more comparable.

                                                                                                                17
There is no evidence in round 2 of a reduction in the reliance on government health care facilities for
the treatment of diarrhea among children under five. In round 2, seven percent of households with a
child under five reported an incidence of diarrhea in the last two weeks, compared to 14 percent among
those with a cell phone in the DHS in 2013. The lower rate of reported diarrhea could reflect misreporting
(diarrhea is one of the symptoms of Ebola), or it could also potentially reflect the different timing of the
surveys. The DHS was conducted between June and November which included the rainy season, while
round 2 of the cell phone survey was conducted in January and February, among the driest months of the
year. Though there are comparability issues between the two surveys (see appendix), all respondents
indicated their children had been treated, compared to 72 percent in the DHS. In rural areas, roughly the
same percentage of households sought treatment in government facilities, although the percentage going
to district hospitals increased.

The usage of private hospital and purchasing medication at a shop or pharmacy also increased. In
Freetown none of the respondents indicated seeking treatment for diarrhea at a district hospital, many
of which served as triage locations for initial diagnosis of EVD. The percentage seeking care at government
clinics increased, however, to offset the decrease at hospitals, though this may also be due to confusion
among respondents as to the difference. Purchasing medication at a shop also dramatically increased.
Similar trends were seen in urban areas outside Freetown, but the increase in usage of government clinics
was much more dramatic. There are caveats due to potential misreporting, a relatively small sample size
(80 households), and changes in the form of responses between surveys. However, overall the results
suggest households were not avoiding health care facilities for treatment of non-EVD conditions in round
2, and in many cases were actually more likely to seek treatment at that time, but were cautious in their
choice of provider.

 Figure 13: Source of treatment for symptoms of diarrhea

                            District Hospital      Government Clinic     Private Hospital      Shop    Other        No Treatment


                          DHS 2013          15%                              50%                      5%1%            28%
   Overall




                           Round 2           18%                                   54%                         9%         10%         7%

                          DHS 2013 3%                                  65%                            3%3%                27%
   Rural




                           Round 2              21%                                50%                       11%          9%      9%
   Other Urban Freetown




                          DHS 2013                    35%                          21%         12%                   33%

                           Round 2                             59%                             5%                   37%

                          DHS 2013                    32%                                36%           5%              27%

                           Round 2     6%                                          79%                                          11%    3%


 Source: Households with cell phones only, DHS (2013) and cell phone survey round 2 (January-February 2015).

                                                                                                                                            18
Education
Radio education programs are reaching most households with school-age children. Since schools have
been closed since July of last year to prevent infection, the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology
has developed hour-long radio lessons, which are broadcasted daily. Overall, 72 percent of households
with school aged children report that at least some of the children listened to educational programs on
the radio. The percentage varies from 69 percent in rural areas to 85 percent in Freetown. In rural areas,
the main reason households is a lack of access to a radio, 55 percent of households not listening, followed
by not enough time, 30 percent. Also in urban areas outside of Freetown the main reason was a lack of
access, 47 percent, compared to 40 percent citing no time. In Freetown a lack of time was the main issue,
40 percent, followed by a lack of access, 30 percent. Since the data is collected at the household level, it
is not possible to determine which children within the household are listening and how often. As the
average household with school age children has 2.5 children between the ages 6 and 16, access is unlikely
to be equal, and some have expressed concerns that girls, who generally have a larger share of household
responsibilities, are less likely to be reached by radio education programs.


Conclusions
Though there has been substantial progress in containing the EVD outbreak in Sierra Leone in the last few
months, this has translated into uneven improvements in economic outcomes. The overall employment
situation has improved since the first round, led by increases in urban areas. Round 1 data showed
significant declines in employment rate in these areas, but by round 2, about 40 percent of these losses
had been recouped. An exception to this is youth employment in Freetown, which has declined since the
baseline to a higher degree than for older workers. The employment rate has also remained unchanged
between rounds, signaling greater difficulties of youth re-entering the work force. In addition and
consistent with earlier data indicating an economy-wide slowdown, the impacts of EVD are not
concentrated in areas that have seen the highest number of cases, nor are the modest gains seen in 2015
observed in areas that have made most progress in combatting the disease.

Despite the return to work, there is continued evidence of the impact of EVD on household well-being.
Though wages in the limited wage employment sector are consistent with pre-crisis levels for nearly all
workers, the non-farm household enterprises are, if anything, worse off than in November. Among
households engaged in non-farm enterprise work in the last six months, the percent reporting a business
is no longer operating continued to increase, reaching four times the pre-EVD level. Revenues of those
remaining open were well below pre-crisis levels. These continuing difficulties highlight the gender
dimension of the crisis as women were disproportionately working in this sector prior to the crisis.

Rural areas continue to show more resilience than urban, though they have not been unaffected. Rural
employment levels have been consistently high across rounds, but hours worked per week remains below
pre-crisis levels. In the agricultural sector, unseasonal weather patterns which may have delayed the
harvest in round 1 returned to normal and by round 2 harvest activities were largely complete across the
country. While the household harvest size appeared to comparable to previous years, this may mask
regional differences, particularly in the high-production areas in Kenema and Kailahun that were initially


                                                                                                         19
under quarantine. Food security levels remain high despite the harvest and there have been price
increases for rice observed outside Freetown.

Most social support received by households was in-kind, such as food, medicines, or disinfectant products,
reflecting the humanitarian emergency nature of the response. Formal social assistance in the form of
cash transfers was rare. Food distribution was more widespread and mainly carried out through NGOs.
The data indicate the poorest have not benefitted the most from social assistance in the form of food and
cash, but this is in line with the fact that the emergency response intentionally targeted based on disease-
specific criteria, such as Ebola treatment centers, quarantine zones, and other hot spots, rather than the
poverty criteria. Safety nets in the form of remittances increased sharply since round 1, though this is
may be at least partially attributable to the holiday season.

There appears to be some encouraging progress on health utilization for non-Ebola related health issues
and diffusion of educational radio programs. In round 1, pregnant women and new mothers, particularly
those in Freetown, were seeking less care than prior to the crisis. By round 2, however, these levels had
largely rebounded. Similarly for the treatment of diarrhea for children under five, overall treatment levels
have increased, likely due to a combination of diarrhea being a symptom of EVD and seasonal differences
in infection rates. Where treatment is sought, however, has shifted away from district hospitals, where
many EVD patients received initial care, to smaller clinics and private hospitals. Large numbers also
reported purchasing medications from shops. While schools remained closed, the majority of households
with school aged children are listening to at least some of the education programs on the radio.




                                                                                                         20
Methodological Appendix
The high frequency socio-economic impact of Ebola survey was conducted jointly by Innovations for
Poverty Action (IPA) and Statistics Sierra Leone (SSL), with funding from the World Bank’s Poverty and
Social Protection Global Practices and close collaboration with researchers at Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), to estimate the impact on well-being of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) crisis. The first
round was conducted from November 12 to November 25, 2014 and the second round from January 22
to February 4, 2015. This note describes changes in the survey methodology since round 1 and any
comparability concerns between the baseline and subsequent rounds.

Questionnaire
Knowledge of Ebola – These questions were dropped as the round 1 analysis indicated widespread
knowledge of the disease.

Earnings – Questions on earnings were revised to match the Labor Force Survey questions more closely,
in particular to account for earnings that were expressed in time unit other than months.

Migration – The vast majority of questions were identical in their wording to the previous round of the
questionnaire, but a few changes were made. The section on information about EVD was dropped. As
the round 1 analysis found inconsistencies in the migration reporting, the related questions were
redesigned. The method of calculating migration is therefore different in this report than that used in
the round 1 report. In the round 1 report a household head was considered to have migrated if they
reported living in a different district than they lived in during the LFS. However, if respondents are
unclear about which district they live in, this methodology could inflate the level of migration. An
examination of the data suggests this may well be the case. For example, while seven percent of
respondents gave as their current district in round 1 a different district from that in which they lived in
LFS, only two percent reported having moved since the LFS when asked specifically if they had moved.
In round 2, the survey was pre-loaded with the district that respondents lived in during the LFS and then
prompted them to confirm it was indeed different from LFS. Only if the answer to this second question
was yes was the respondent classified as having moved.

Social Assistance – A section was added on social support to estimate coverage and main sources of
social assistance received during the EVD crisis.

Health – Questions on the incidence and treatment of child diarrhea were adding using identical wording
to the DHS.

Education – Questions were added on listening to educational programs on the radio were added.
Response Rate
Round 2 contacted 1878 (67.9 percent) of the 2764 households which provided cell phone numbers in
the LFS and 44.7 percent of the total LFS households. Of these 1530 households appeared in both
rounds. Of the households reached, 96 percent were household heads in round 1 and 99.7 were
household heads in round 2. If the respondent was not an original household member, the call was
ended and an incorrect number was recorded. Table A2 shows a breakdown of the call outcomes for
round 2 including unanswered calls, phone being switched off, rescheduled but never completed,
refusal, bad network/call drops off, incorrect phone number, and number disconnected, by round. Table
A3 shows the distribution of employment and geographic locations for the two rounds of the cell phone
survey respondents and the original LFS sample.

Weights
Note that there are a number of different sets of weights. There is a set of weights for each repeated
cross section of data used in this report, i.e. three sets, one each for LFS, cell phone survey round 1 and
cell phone survey round 2. There is a separate set of weights for the 3 period panel of households (i.e.
the set of households that are in all three rounds of LFS, cell phone survey round 1 and cell phone survey
round 2). There is another separate set of weights for the sample that is a panel between only LFS and
round 2 and similarly for the sample that is a panel only across rounds 1 and 2. That makes a total of 5
sets of weights.

Definitions
Eligible households – For most of the report, the LFS and the two rounds of the cell phone survey are
used as repeated cross sections and not a panel. To be as consistent with the round 1 report as possible,
the repeated cross sections were created as follows. The round 1 and round 2 households are the full
sample of households for which cell phone survey data was collected in November 2014 and January –
February 2015 respectively. The LFS cross section includes all the households that were surveyed in
round 1 and round 2 (some of those surveyed in round 1 were not found in round 2 and some of those
surveyed in round 2 had not been found in round 1). In the round 1 report, the LFS data and the round
1 survey were treated as a pure panel, i.e. the only households included from the LFS were those that
were subsequently found in round 1. That has been changed in this report to a focus on repeated cross
sections. For the employment section, the sample is slightly different as it was in the round 1 report.
There are some household heads in rounds 1 and 2 for whom there is no employment data in LFS as
they were considered not part of the labor force during the LFS. In round 1, the employment analysis
was therefore restricted to the panel sample of household heads that had employment data in the LFS.
In this report, for the employment section, the round 1 and round 2 samples are restricted to those
household heads for whom employment data was collected in the LFS. Most of the results in the
employment section are based on using repeated cross sections of LFS, round 1 and round 2, except for
two sub-sections where the sample is restricted to being the panel sample of households across all three
rounds (i.e. the sample of households that are in LFS, round 1 and round 2). The two sub-sections where
the panel sample is used are those on employment transitions, earnings and the regression analyses
(see more below for the regression analyses).


                                                                                                          22
Employment Definition – Given the high frequency nature of the three surveys used and the nature of
the EVD crisis, a slightly modified definition of employment was used in the analysis. Households heads
were categorized as in the labor force in any given round of the surveys if they were working, looking
for work or expected to return to work. For the round 1 report, if a household head was in the labor
force in either the LFS or round 1 of the cell phone survey, he was categorized as in the labor force in
both rounds. This was done because both rounds of the survey were conducted within three months or
less of the previous round and it is unlikely that someone who was working in the LFS suddenly decided
to exit the labor force rather than become unemployed due to EVD. Such high frequency labor force
surveys are contrary to most other employment surveys and thus necessitate different definitions of
labor force participation. In this report, to be consistent with the round 1 report’s approach and because
of the high frequency nature of these employment surveys, a household head was categorized as in the
labor force in all three rounds of surveys if they were in the labor force in any one round. As a result,
none of the changes observed in employment rates are due to changes in the composition of the labor
force.

Calculation for monthly wage earnings – Most wage workers (83 percent) reporting earnings in monthly
terms, and therefore results associated with wage earnings are reported this way. For respondents who
report wage income in other time units, the analysis translates their wages into monthly terms under
the assumption they work at a standard capacity, i.e., 8 hours a day, 22 days or 4.3 weeks a month, and
12 months a year. The earnings data was not collected in round 1 in a way that allowed direct
comparison to the LFS, which is the reason only LFS and round 2 are compared. Since earnings data tend
to be noisy and a few large outliers can have a big impact on average wages, the figures reported here
exclude earnings for the highest 5 percent. As a robustness check, median earnings were also analyzed
and the same trends held.

Correction of outliers in household enterprise revenues – Business revenues are noisy so the main results
in the report have the top percentile of revenues trimmed. As LFS has the highest revenues a large
fraction of the outliers are from LFS. An alternative approach is to drop the top 1 percent of revenues in
each round which gives the following results: LFS 2,700,000 Leones, round 1 830,000 Leones, and round
2, 780,000 Leones (round 1 and round 2 are not significantly different from each other with this trim).

Pregnancy definitions in the DHS - In the DHS each woman in the household was interviewed individually
whereas in the cell phone surveys the respondent was the household head. It is possible that the cell
phone survey underreports utilization if household heads are not always aware of clinic visits made by
household members. It is also possible that the cell phone survey over reports pregnancies if the
household head misremembers dates of birth and include pregnancies and child births that took place
more than 2 months prior to the interview. A final difference is that while the DHS reports on current
pregnancies and births in the last 2 months the cell phone survey captures anyone who was pregnant in
the last two months i.e., the cell phone survey also captures visits from those who had miscarriages or
abortions in the last 2 months while these are not include in the DHS utilization figures.



                                                                                                         23
Regressions
The employment section includes a descriptive discussion of regression results that use the panel sample
across the three rounds (LFS and rounds 1 and 2 of the cell phone survey) to better understand the types
of household heads who were able to retain their jobs or the types of household heads that were unable
to do so. The following five regressions were run (see the results in Table A4):
    (i) Among those not working in round 1 and have round 2 observations: Regression of the
          probability a household head entered work in round 2 as a function of age, male, urban, married,
          education, young children in household, working age adults in household, urban/rural, level of
          total Ebola cases and change since round 1 in Ebola cases
    (ii) Among those working in round 1 and have round 2 observations: Regression of the probability a
          household head is still working in round 2 as a function of age, male, urban, married, education,
          young children in household, working age adults in household, urban/rural, level of total Ebola
          cases and change since round 1 in Ebola cases
    (iii) Among those not working in LFS and have both round 1 and round 2 observations: Regression of
          the probability a household head worked in both rounds 1 and 2 as a function of age, male, urban,
          married, education, young children in household, working age adults in household, urban/rural,
          level of total Ebola cases and change since round 1 in Ebola cases
    (iv) Among those not working in LFS and have round 1 and round 2 observations: Regression of the
          probability a household head is not working in both rounds 1 and 2 as a function of age, male,
          urban, married, education, young children in household, working age adults in household,
          urban/rural, level of total Ebola cases and change since round 1 in Ebola cases
    (v) Among those working in LFS and have round 1 and round 2 observations: Regression of the
          probability a household head is working in both rounds 1 and 2 as a function of age, male, urban,
          married, education, young children in household, working age adults in household, urban/rural,
          level of total Ebola cases and change since round 1 in Ebola cases




                                                                                                        24
Table A1: Geographical Distribution of LFS and Sample

                           Labor Force Survey           % of LFS Found   % of LFS Found in
                         Freq.         Percent           in Nov 2014       Jan-Feb 2015
 Kailahun                 210             5                 17.62             19.05
 Kenema                   420            10                 50.95             49.76
 Kono                     420            10                 58.10             55.95
 Bombali                  330           7.86                47.58             47.27
 Kambia                   181           4.31                32.60             37.57
 Koinadugu                180           4.29                31.11             29.44
 Port Loko                179           4.26                27.37             28.49
 Tonkolili                180           4.29                25.56             25.56
 Bo                       421           10.03               43.94             44.66
 Bonthe                   269           6.41                42.01             37.92
 Moyamba                  180           4.29                34.44             40.00
 Pujehun                  180           4.29                24.44             28.33
 Western Rural            288           6.86                51.74             37.85
 Western Urban            761           18.12               63.21             64.26
 Total                   4,199           100                45.15             44.72



Table A2: Non-Response

                                        November 2014          January-February 2015
 Survey Completed                           1896                       1878
 Phone switched off                         745                         789
 Incomplete                                  37                          28
 Wrong number                                36                          17
 Mobile company no longer active             22                          21
 Call unanswered                             13                           0
 Rescheduled but never completed              6                           5
 Refusal                                      5                          16
 Bad network/call drops off                   4                          10
 Total                                      2764                       2764




                                                                                             25
Table A3: Employment Status Distribution of LFS and Sample

                                             Employment Status in LFS   Employment      Employment
                                                                        Status in Nov   Status in Jan-
                                                                            2014          Feb 2015
                                                Freq.        Percent       Percent        Percent
 Employee regular                                535          17.1          22.7            22.4
 Employee, casual or seasonal                    119           3.8           7.8            7.2
 Self-employed, without regular employee        2,165         69.4          58.7            53.2
 Self-employed, with regular employees           98            3.1           5.3            5.4
 Member of producer's cooperative                 7            0.2           0.1            0.1
 Help without pay in own or another house        29            0.9           1.2            3.1
 Help without pay in own or another house        137           4.4           2.5            6.3
 Paid apprenticeship                             30            1.0           0.7            1.2
 Unpaid apprenticeship                            2            0.1           1.4            1.0
 Total                                          3,122          100           100            100




                                                                                                  26
Table A4: Regression Results (Three Period Panel Sample)


                             Entered work      Worked in   Worked 1 and 2    Not working      Working
                            between 1 and 2     1 and 2     but not in LFS    LFS, 1 or 2   LFS, 1 and 2

  Age                           0.024***          -0.003     -0.017***            0.002        -0.003
                                 (.0069)         (.0035)       (.0054)           (.005)       (.0057)
  Age Squared (x 100)          -0.020***          0.004        0.013**           0.000          0.001
                                 (.0064)         (.0036)       (.0051)          (.0047)       (.0058)
  Male                             0.082         0.048*         0.118*           -0.078      0.119***
                                  (.053)          (.025)        (.063)           (.058)        (.033)
  Urban                        -0.155***       -0.077***      -0.132**           0.032      -0.157***
                                  (.053)          (.025)        (.057)           (.053)        (.033)
  Married                      -0.175***          0.028      0.229***            0.091          0.004
                                  (.057)          (.033)        (.062)           (.057)        (.046)
  Education (8 years of        -0.219***          0.026        -0.183*           0.076          0.048
     education or more)           (.077)          (.039)        (.098)            (.09)         (.05)
  Can read and write               0.037          -0.017        0.143            -0.093     -0.141***
                                  (.076)          (.036)        (.097)           (.089)        (.046)
  Children Under Age 5            -0.022        0.018**         0.005            -0.027      0.035***
                                  (.027)         (.0092)        (.024)           (.022)        (.013)
  Children Aged 5 to 9          0.109***          0.005      0.072***         -0.102***        -0.005
                                  (.025)         (.0096)        (.024)           (.022)        (.013)
  Working Age Adults              -0.000        0.013***       0.027**         -0.023**      0.020***
                                  (.012)         (.0048)        (.011)           (.011)       (.0067)
  District Level Ebola            -0.009          0.001       -0.096**        0.139***          0.019
      Cases Rd 1 (X1,000)         (.036)           (.02)        (.038)           (.035)        (.026)
  Change in Ebola Cases            0.057           0.003     0.141***           -0.089*         0.008
      Rd 1-Rd2 (percent)          (.051)          (.017)        (.052)           (.048)        (.024)
  Constant                        0.026        0.837***      0.621***          0.341**      0.747***
                                   (.18)          (.083)         (.15)            (.13)         (.14)
  R-squared                       0.138           0.035         0.200            0.160          0.080
  N                                 473            1,007          384              384          1,096



Note: *p<0.10; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                                                  27
