              FYR Macedonia

Supplier Development Pilot Program Toolkit:

      Materials and Lessons Learned




               October 2016
Contents
List of Figures and Boxes ....................................................................................................................ii
Acronyms ......................................................................................................................................... iii
Acknowledgements........................................................................................................................... iv
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................1
1     Review of International Experience .............................................................................................4
   1.1     The Importance of Creating Linkages between Local Suppliers and Foreign Investors ............ 4
   1.2        Success Factors for SDPs .............................................................................................................. 5
   1.3        Working with the Private Sector.................................................................................................. 5
    1.3.1    Foreign Direct Investment and Vertical Spillovers ................................................................ 5
    1.3.2    Local Companies ................................................................................................................... 6
    1.3.3    Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................................... 6
2   Supplier Development Pilot Program in FYR Macedonia ..............................................................9
3   Development and Implementation of the Pilot SDP ................................................................... 11
  3.1    Assessing Potential Regulatory Barriers .................................................................................... 11
   3.2        Working with the Key Government Counterparts .................................................................... 13
     3.2.1   Stakeholder Identification ................................................................................................. 13
     3.2.2   Coordination ....................................................................................................................... 14
   3.3    Working with the Private Sector................................................................................................ 16
    3.3.1      Working with Local Companies.......................................................................................... 18
    3.3.2      Criteria and Methodology for Identification of Companies (in fYR Macedonia) ............. 20
    3.3.3      Business Review ................................................................................................................. 24
    3.3.4      Access to Finance................................................................................................................ 29
    3.3.5      Reverse Exhibition .............................................................................................................. 30
    3.3.6      Supporting Local Companies with Advisory Assistance .................................................... 31
4   Summary of Lessons Learned .................................................................................................... 33
ANNEXES ......................................................................................................................................... 35
  Annex 1: Example of ToRs of Key Experts ............................................................................................. 35
   Annex 2: Supplier Development Pilot Program Draft Concept (January 2015) ................................... 37
   Annex 3: Macedonian Supplier Database: The Option of the UK’s Automotive Supplier Finder (ASF)
   service ..................................................................................................................................................... 46
   Annex 4: Database of potential suppliers, Improvement of Macedonian database of potential
   suppliers ................................................................................................................................................. 51
   Annex 5: Request for Expressions of Interest ....................................................................................... 58
   Annex 6: Letter for Expression of Interest............................................................................................. 60
   Annex 7: Expression of Interest Format ................................................................................................ 62




                                                                                                                                                                  i
List of Figures and Boxes


Figure 1: Activities Implemented in the Pilot SDP ...................................................................................... 2
Figure 2: M & E Hierarchy of Relationships ................................................................................................. 7
Figure 3: The Process of Identifying Suppliers to Participate ................................................................... 20
Figure 4: EFQM Excellence Model – 9 Criteria........................................................................................... 24
Figure 5: Using the Business Review as a Tool in a SDP ............................................................................ 26
Figure 6: External Advisor Role: Example of an Approach Taken in the UK ............................................ 32

Box 1: Technological Industrial Development Zones                                                                                         10
Box 2: Analysis of Regulatory Barriers                                                                                                    12
Box 3: Roles of the Key Government Counterparts                                                                                           13
Box 4: Regular Communication with All Concerned Parties                                                                                   15
Box 5: Capacity Building Workshops for Government Agencies in fYR Macedonia                                                               16
Box 6: Working with Foreign Investors in the Pilot SDP                                                                                    17
Box 7: Findings from the Financial Analysis of Suppliers                                                                                  22
Box 8: Takeaways from the Site Visits: Selling to Foreign Investors in FYR Macedonia                                                      23
Box 9: Main Conclusions from the Business Reviews                                                                                         25
Box 10: Appling EFQM Excellence Model - Findings on SMEs in FYR Macedonia                                                                 27
Box 11: Site Visits: Areas in which Companies Requested Support                                                                           31




                                                                                                                                            ii
Acronyms


AFIEP - Agency for Foreign Investments and Export Promotion of the Republic of Macedonia
DTIDZ – Directorate for Technological Industrial Development Zones
EBITDA – Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization
EBRD – European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EFQM - European Foundation for Quality Management
FDI – Foreign Direct Investment
FIC - Foreign Investment Council
FITD - Fund for Innovation and Technology Development
FYR – Former Yugoslav Republic
GVC – Global Value Chain
IBRD – International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IFC – International Finance Corporation
KPI – Key Performance Indicators
MBDP - Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion
MNC – Multinational Company
M&E – Monitoring & Evaluation
OEM – Original Equipment Manufacturer
QCD indicators – Quality, Cost, Delivery indicators
R&D – Research and Development
ROA – Return of Assets
ROE – Return of Equity
RVC – Regional Value Chain
SBS – Small Business Support
SDP – Supplier Development Program
SME - Small and Medium Sized Enterprise
TIDZ – Technological Industrial Development Zones
UNCTAD – United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
WBG – World Bank Group




                                                                                           iii
Acknowledgements

This toolkit documents the experience of developing and implementing a pilot supplier development
program (SDP) in fYR Macedonia. On the World Bank Group’s side, the pilot SDP was developed and
supported by a team from the Trade and Competitiveness (T&C) Global Practice that was led by John
Gabriel Goddard (Senior Economist) and Gordana Popovikj Friedman (Private Sector Development
Specialist), and included as core team members Ravi Gupta, Karuna Elizabeth Phillips, Perica Vrboski, and
Todor Milchevski (Consultants). Four international experts with experience working with automotive
suppliers and/or supplier development programs were involved in the pilot program. Vít Švajcr and
Stephen Martin (Supplier Development Programs Specialists) shared their expertise on the best practice
Supplier development programs in the Czech Republic and the United Kingdom; Vladimir Braun (Supplier
Development and Quality Management Consultant) led Business reviews; and Michel Bacher (Automotive
Sector Supply Chain Specialist) contributed to the Business reviews and Action plans. Harald Jedlicka
(Senior Investment Policy Officer) and Wim Douw (Senior Operations Officer) led the Regulatory review.
A Technical Note on Supplier Development, which accompanies this toolkit, was drafted by Ravi Gupta
(Consultant) and peer reviewed by Thomas Farole (Senior Economist).

This toolkit was developed by a team that included Melissa Rekas Metz (Senior Private Sector Specialist),
Gordana Popovikj Friedman (Private Sector Specialist), Kara Adamon (Private Sector Specialist), Perica
Vrboski and Iryna Bilotserkivska (Consultants), all from the Trade and Competitiveness (T&C) Global
Practice. It was peer reviewed by Willem Douw (Senior Private Sector Specialist).

The team is grateful for the support from Ellen Goldstein (Country Director), Javier Suarez (Acting Practice
Manager), Marco Mantovanelli (Country Manager), Goran Tinjic (Senior Operations Officer), Cveta
Peruseska Joncevska (Senior Executive Assistant), Anita Bozinovska (Communications Assistant), and
Fahma Nur (Program Assistant) and Djamilya Salieva (Program Assistant).




                                                                                                          iv
Executive Summary

1. A Supplier Development Pilot Program (Pilot SDP) was designed upon request from the Macedonian
   Government aiming to stimulate linkages between local SMEs and large foreign companies
   operating in fYR Macedonia. The program piloted a group of targeted and coordinated interventions
   to support local SMEs to increase their sophistication, compete more effectively and integrate into
   the global and regional supply chains of the large foreign companies located in and outside the special
   economic zones (TIDZs). The Program was a joint effort of the International Bank for Reconstruction
   and Development (IBRD) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC).

2. International experience suggests that SDPs can make a substantial impact in generating increased
   domestic value added. The Czech and Serbian experience showed that having SDP in place is a win-
   win for all parties involved in the process (Government, foreign investors and local companies).
   Countries that attract Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) but do not develop linkages do not fully benefit
   from FDI; SDPs are instrumental in attracting additional FDI, and thus government should promote
   SDPs as part of their FDI strategy.

3. The design of the program drew on successful international examples of supplier development
   programs. Successful programs on supplier development have been implemented in Europe and
   Central Asia (e.g. Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Russia, Serbia), and Latin America (e.g. Coast Rica,
   Chile), among others. Lessons learned from international experience conclude that successful SDP
   share the following characteristics:
            a. Technical support, particularly on quality standards, lean manufacturing, etc.;
            b. Management support – guidance on business and financial planning, tendering advice,
               regulatory navigation advice, marketing;
            c. Support to skills through improved human capital in the human resources departments;
            d. Sourcing database to match local suppliers with investors;
            e. Organizational support – ‘meet the buyer’ match-making and B2B events;
            f. Merging and matching business to business networks;
            g. Joint venture support;
            h. Introduction of participant companies for joint tendering and possible cluster initiation;
            i. Development of national quality standards;
            j. Financial products – mix of loans, leasing, venture capital, credit guarantee funds, micro
               loans, export credit insurance, etc.1

4. This toolkit presents practical information of the implementation phase of SDP. It describes various
   steps that needs to be undertaken prior the implementation and during the implementation of the
   program (see figure 1). The key messages from the pilot SDP are summarized below:




1
 Macedonia: Supplier Development Program Analytical Note, Ascending the Global Value Chain by Developing Linkages among
Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs) and Multinational Corporations (MNCs), Ravi Gupta
Senior Consultant, World Bank, April, 2015

                                                                                                                      1
     a. It is important to identify stakeholders and the key agency that would be responsible for
        managing and coordinating the program as early as possible, and to have strong
        coordination mechanisms
     b. Building relationships, communication with government stakeholders and mobilizing the
        private sector are key elements for success
     c. It is important to work with the foreign investors and include them in the entire process
        of the implementation
     d. The criteria and methodology applied for identification of local companies to participate
        in the program should be in details described prior the start of the program. The criteria
        should contain both quantitative and qualitative measurements
     e. Advisory support for the companies that participate in the program should be envisaged
        at the beginning of the program and should be clearly communicated
     f. Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) is also an important element of program design and
        implementation. It is important to create clear objectives, expected results and metrics
        from the beginning of the program.


                     Figure 1: Activities Implemented in the Pilot SDP

        ACTIVITY                                       SUB – ACTIVITIES
Pre-Implementation               a) Engagement with government and private sector; need for
                                    pilot SDP identified
                                 b) Review of international experiences and literature
                                 c) Identification of team members
Activity #1: Collection and      a) Assessment of regulatory incentives and constraints
Analysis of Information on       b) Review of database of potential suppliers – identification of
Foreign Investors and               200+ potential suppliers
Potential Suppliers              c) Identification of foreign direct investors/buyers for
                                    participation in the program
                                 d) Survey of FDI/buyer needs
                                 e) Review of 200+ suppliers against established criteria to
                                    shortlist 50 suppliers
Activity #2: Capacity            a) Training workshops on how to build a successful SDP, how
Building and Training               to use the EFQM excellence model, and how to establish an
                                    M&E system
                                 b) Knowledge sharing on successfully implemented SDPs,
                                    Macedonia’s positioning in regional value chains, and how
                                    multi-national enterprises build supplier networks
Activity #3: Upgrading of        a) Short list of firms’ applications; 5 companies selected for
Suppliers and Technology            upgrading
Extension                        b) Gap analysis: local firm/supplier challenges vs. buyer/FDI
                                    needs
                                 c) Development of firm-level action plans for suppliers on
                                    what would be needed to upgrade production to meet
                                    buyer/FDI needs
                                 d) Advice to suppliers on programs that can support their
                                    implementation of the action plans developed

                                                                                                2
      Activity #4: Facilitating         a) Financial analysis of supplier firms to identify needs
      Access to Finance


5. This toolkit focuses on the activities carried out during the period of implementation of the program
   (February – December 2015). It compiles materials used and lessons learned during the
   implementation of the pilot SDP activities and it records actions taken in those activities.




                                                                                                      3
1     Review of International Experience
1.1    The Importance of Creating Linkages between Local Suppliers and Foreign Investors

6. Countries that attract FDI but do not simulate linkages between the foreign and local companies do
   not fully benefit from FDI2. As global competition increases, FDI place higher demands on their SME
   partners which meet international standards concerning product quality, price, and terms of delivery.
   If local companies lack these prerequisites, FDI often prefer to induce their proven international
   partners to relocate. Producing high quality goods and services in Global Value Chains (GVCs) involves
   more than trading goods and services – it also entails cross-border movement of know-how,
   investments and human capital3. As a result, transnational clusters may emerge which very few links
   to the local economy, leaving the country isolated from such transnational clusters.

7. Attracting FDI is not enough for developing countries to benefit from global value chains. A strategy
   that supports linkages between local firms and foreign investors for greater value addition is critical,
   as linkages lay the foundation for long term industrial diversification and export growth. The last two
   decades of economic research on the role of FDI in development outcomes tells us that while results
   are mixed, what is clear is that the benefits of FDI spill-overs do not accrue automatically with the
   presence of FDI. Rather, a wide range of factors appear to mediate these outcomes, and linkages
   programs are one of the critical interventions to facilitate spill-overs4. One of the key inferences of
   the research is that developing countries can now industrialize by joining GVCs instead of building
   their own value chains from scratch, as Japan or South Korea did in the 20th century5. There is also
   strong evidence that the key spill-over benefit from foreign investors is their potential to help
   internationalize domestic firms, particularly their suppliers. This is often achieved indirectly by raising
   demands to meet international standards (e.g., in quality and delivery) and by helping build scale and
   boost productivity of domestic suppliers6.

8. Supplier Development Programs or other linkages projects are instrumental in attracting additional
   FDI, and thus government should promote them as part of their FDI strategy. A major benefit of
   implementing these programs is that it has a potential to contribute to the rooting of FDI in the
   country7. Foreign investors that have developed strong linkages to the host country’s econom y are
   less likely to leave due to the expense of building new supplier networks. Thriving SMEs base, which
   has established credentials of supplying to Multinational companies (MNCs) is viewed as a reason for
   other foreign companies to establish business in the country. Thus FDI promotion and linkages
   projects are both complementary agenda of the government8.


2 Enhancing the competitiveness of SMEs through linkages, UNCTAD.
3 Global value chains and Competitiveness Assessments -Some lessons learned, Jose Reis, World Bank
4 Making Foreign Direct Investment Work for Sub-Saharan Africa. Farole and Winkler, World Bank, 2014.
5 Global value chains and Competitiveness Assessments -Some lessons learned, Jose Reis, World Bank.
6 Macedonia: Supplier Development Program Analytical Note, Ascending the Global Value Chain by Developing Linkages among

Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs) and Multinational Corporations (MNCs), Ravi Gupta
Senior Consultant, World Bank, April, 2015.
7 UNCTAD 2001, and Czech Suppliers of Multinational Corporations – Benefits and Challenges.
8 Innovation Drivers, Value Chains and the Geography of Multinational Firms in European Regions, Crescenzi et al.



                                                                                                                       4
1.2    Success Factors for SDPs

9. All successful SDPs have a few things in common: (i) Close and active involvement of foreign
   investors, (ii) Enthusiastic commitment and ambition of participating supplier, (iii) Input of specialist
   support and expert advice in a coordinated and customized package; and (iv) a strong lead agency to
   anchor the effort and drive its implementation.

10. Experience from programs designed with those elements showed that having an SDP in place is a
    win-win for all parties involved in the process. The government creates a platform for better linkages
    between foreign companies and local suppliers, thus increasing the spillover effect of attracting
    foreign investors in the country. Additionally, this kind of programs could be a powerful model for
    effective use of support and improve competitiveness of local companies and bring wider benefits to
    the economy. Foreign investors are able to reduce total costs by sourcing from local companies and
    local companies are able to take advantage of opportunities for doing business created by locally-
    based MNCs, move up the value chain and become globally competitive.

11. For example, the Czech experience demonstrated performance improvement of the companies in
    the initial 21 months of implementation of the program (improvement in companies’ internal &
    external performance, measured by European Foundation for Quality Management methodology
    checklist). Around 80% of the improvements were attributed to the program. Out of 45 companies
    that participated in the program, 15 companies gained new contracts with value of $18m annually
    due to the engagement in the program. Only 4 of 45 participating companies reported no direct
    business benefits. In the UK pilot SDP with the Japanese vehicle manufacturers, a partial estimate at
    end of 18 month program showed that £1 of public money produced more than £5 of immediate
    business benefits9.


1.3    Working with the Private Sector
1.3.1 Foreign Direct Investment and Vertical Spillovers
12. Foreign direct investment through foreign and multinational companies can catalyze the
    development of domestic firms by providing access to existing international marketing, supply, and
    distribution networks. The phenomenon, referred to as a vertical10 spill-over, can take place through:
    (i) direct knowledge transfer from foreign customers to domestic suppliers; (ii) higher requirements
    regarding product quality and on-time delivery introduced by multinationals, which provide incentive
    to domestic suppliers to upgrade their production management or technology; (iii) indirect knowledge
    transfers through movement of labor; or (iv) increased demand for intermediate products due to the
    entry of a multinational into the market, which in turn allows local suppliers to reap the benefits of
    scale economies. While the first tier of suppliers are the most obvious beneficiaries of supplier
    development programs, suppliers down the value chain also benefit, leading to increased

9 Presentation on Czech Supplier Linkage Programme: Pilot Phase, April 16, 2015, Skopje, fYR Macedonia, Stephen Martin, Vit
Svajcr.
10
   A horizontal spillover refers to knowledge dissemination between firms of equal sizes or involved in similar core business

                                                                                                                                5
       employment and knowledge spill-overs. SDP that creates the SME-MNC linkage is however needed
       for such vertical spill-overs to happen so that SMEs are connected to GVCs11.

13. It is vital that foreign companies are actively involved during the entire process. Customer pull can
    be a key motivator and facilitator in the program and that’s why it is important to have an active
    participation of MNCs on a partnership basis throughout the program. It is also important that key
    senior management is interested and endorses the involvement of other departments in order to
    ensure sustainability and commitment during the program, e.g. purchasing, quality department, etc.
    Foreign investors could be involved in:

                Nomination and assessment of participating companies;
                Organizing and delivering workshops as well as meet the buyer and networking events;
                Providing engineering/quality support.

1.3.2 Local Companies

14. The shift in corporate production strategies from simple integration to more complex integration
    has widened the opportunities for SMEs in developing countries for entering GVCs via FDI. To fully
    capture the developmental effects of FDI, developing countries first need to adopt policies to attract
    FDI through FDI and then undertake measures to forge linkages between the foreign companies and
    local SMEs. The type and strength of linkages established depends to a large extent on the size,
    specialization, technological and resource capabilities of local firms. Special support measures and
    programs have been deployed to nurture these capabilities. Supplier development program is an
    example of such a measure. MNCs have become an increasingly important means for SMEs to gain
    access to new technologies and management know-how, and a good supplier development program
    can help not only for SMEs to become suppliers to MNCs but also for SMEs to become exporters and
    more strongly linked to GVCs located in other countries12.

1.3.3 Monitoring and Evaluation
15. The program’s monitoring and evaluation activities should ideally be established at the onset of the
    program. The normal staring point would be the business case/plan for the program, which should
    provide clear objectives and expected benefits and metrics upfront, both at the company and wider
    economy level, to set the basis for rigorous review process.
16. A useful hierarchy of relationships in looking at indicators/measures for reviewing the relative success
    of programs is:
                Inputs: including well-structured process
                Outputs: company operational performance
                Outcomes: company sales, growth, etc.
                Impact: at overall sector or national level (Figure 2).

11
     Czech Suppliers of Multinational Corporations – Benefits and Challenges
12   Global Value Chains and World Trade, Hernandez et al.


                                                                                                          6
Figure 2: M & E Hierarchy of Relationships




17. Possible Monitoring indicators, based on the experience of the Czech and UK programs, could
    include:

       Inputs/activities: spend (public & private), companies involved, projects, consultancy time, etc.
       Company profiles (financial, etc.)
       Business review data, such as changes in EFQM scores
       Attainment of Approved Supplier status
       Outputs/KPIs, such as increased productivity; Quality, Costs, Delivery (QCD) indicators,
        employee qualifications gained
       Supplier outcomes, such as increased value added/new products introduced, new jobs, new
        sales, domestic & export markets
       Foreign investors outcomes - lower total costs, increased local content
       Engagement/wider policy indicators: use of other public sector support agencies/programs
        (export, innovation, etc.); take up of funds, certification, etc.; ongoing use of consultants; etc.

18. The selection of M&E indicators should be done very carefully. A general principle to follow is to
    focus on priority requirements only and to select a limited number of key indicators in order to avoid
    unnecessary burden on both company participants and the SDP. Indicators should be clearly defined,
    easy to obtain, objectively measurable and preferably independently verifiable. The UK and Czech
    experience shows value of:

       early indicators through assessment tools;
       obtaining regular qualitative feedback from MNCs/OEMs/Tier1s and suppliers;
       focusing on the bottom line, such as increased sales and added value.

19. The frequency as well as the extent of data collection need to be considered. The UK experience also
    shows the value of making the provision of selected key measures mandatory, as a requirement for
    companies receiving assistance. In refining and taking corrective action on the program but as an


                                                                                                              7
    illustration, systematic reporting of monitoring data to a steering group for regular review is good
    practice, and was the approach taken in the UK.

20. An independent evaluation, led by a company hired in a competitive tender is recommended for
    evaluation process. The evaluation process should focus on the analysis of program inputs and all
    monitoring data. Participating companies should be interviewed (customers and suppliers) to express
    their views on the coverage and delivery of the program and its benefits and updating and review of
    outputs and outcomes. Experience with M&E for private sector development programs shows that if
    such an independent evaluation is conducted, it should be designed at the beginning of the program.
    This helps establish a robust methodology – including, for instance, identifying how the control group
    will be constituted and monitored in order to more specifically identify the impact of the program.

21. Evaluation could happen immediately after the program’s end or later focusing on longer -term
    effects; both approaches have inevitable trade-offs. Sometimes the pressure is to do it immediately,
    due to, for instance, the need to consider a successor program. The advantage of waiting one year or
    longer is that it should give a better indication of outcomes and impacts. One way of squaring the
    circle is to have programs managers carry out an immediate evaluation/overview report, with an
    independent evaluation completed later, which was the case with some of the UK and Czech
    programs. Both UK and Czech experiences have shown the limitations on quantifying not only the
    longer term effects, but also all the immediate benefits, with a tendency to underestimate outputs
    and outcomes, and this is something which needs to be borne in mind in undertaking any evaluation.
    This applies to the harder, more readily quantifiable measures, but particularly to the softer indicators
    in terms of behavioral change and the effect of skills at shop floor, technical and leadership and
    management levels, and the ongoing and cumulative effect these can have on company
    competitiveness and growth.

22. There could be variations in the topics covered by evaluation depending on the scale and nature of
    different programs, but some of the topics below, used in the evaluation process of the major national
    Supply Chain Group program in the UK, could be helpful:

       Review of gross and net outputs/outcomes, and impact at sectoral level (EBITDA and impact to
        sector)
       Extent to which market failures addressed
       Additionally: deadweight & displacement; via interview or control groups
       Cost effectiveness evaluation of public spending
       Job creation evaluation
       Added value of program to company’s revenues
       Assessment of operational requirements for running such a scheme
       Leverage of program and lessons learned.

23. Both UK and Czech experiences have shown the limitations on quantifying not only the longer term
    effects, but also all the immediate benefits, with a tendency to underestimate outputs and

                                                                                                           8
     outcomes, and this is something which needs to be borne in mind in undertaking any evaluation. This
     applies to the harder, more readily quantifiable measures, but particularly to the softer indicators in
     terms of behavioral change and the effect of skills at shop-floor, technical and leadership and
     management levels, and the ongoing and cumulative effect these can have on company
     competitiveness and growth.

2    Supplier Development Pilot Program in FYR Macedonia

24. Over the past 10 years, fYR Macedonia had success attracting FDI in manufacturing. This increased
    the diversification of its export portfolio and created jobs.13 Although this segment has been relatively
    successful, on the other hand, building local suppliers is still missing support measures to increase the
    level of integration into the GVCs. In order to address this issue and to enhance linkages between
    domestic firms and foreign companies and capture the value described in the preceding section, the
    government asked for a pilot SDP to be developed.

25. The goal of the pilot SDP was to conduct a pilot exercise that would: i) assess the current state of
    linkages (including identification of bottlenecks to deeper linkages) between foreign direct investors
    in the country and domestic firms, and ii) working with a small group of enterprises, equip suppliers
    with the information, skills and technical capacity to meet MNCs requirements, enabling them to
    win more and higher value-added contracts. Two elements impacted the focus of the program: first,
    it intended to test the supplier development approaches and prepare the ground for a potential
    future, larger SDP; and second, the budget available for the pilot was modest. During the pilot
    implementation, led by the World Bank team, eight government institutions were involved, 223
    companies were listed and subject to desk review, before a selection process based on a set of criteria
    (international standards, links with foreign companies, etc.), identified fifty companies to be visited.
    Out of the fifty, five companies were selected for in-depth business reviews and technical assistance.
    Additionally, four foreign companies participated in the pilot.

26. The pilot SDP focused on identifying opportunities and constraints to linkages between local
    producers – mainly SMEs – and large foreign companies operating in Macedonia –(particularly in the
    Technological Industrial Development Zones, please see Box 1). It focused on light manufacturing
    sector. Targeted interventions piloted under the program addressed the following:
             a. Assessed and identified which foreign investors to work with
             b. Assessed and identified which local manufacturing companies have the most potential
             c. Gathered information on foreign investors’ needs and conveyed them to local
                manufacturing companies
             d. Conducted business reviews of local manufacturing companies to compare their existing
                practices with what would be required to meet the foreign investors’ needs/standards
                and be competitive suppliers to them
             e. Provided reports to the local manufacturing companies on what they would need to do

13
 See note on the impact of reforms and investment promotion in fYR Macedonia’s automobile components
manufacturing sector, forthcoming from WBG

                                                                                                           9
           f.   Facilitated linking firms interested in proceeding with further advisory services and
                support to implement the recommendations (e.g. through EBRD SBS program).

                         Box 1: Technological Industrial Development Zones


        TIDZs are special economic zones first established in 2000 and managed by the Directorate for
        Technological Industrial Development Zones. TIDZs are customs areas within the territory of
        fYR Macedonia where special customs and tax incentives prescribed by the Law on TIDZs are
        applied. Users of TIDZs can be any domestic or foreign entity registered in the country.

        The TIDZs provide infrastructure for investors and help them overcome other physical
        barriers. Difficulties in gaining access to land and, or shortages of quality industrial
        infrastructure, are addressed by the TIDZs. Investors in the zones have ready access to roads,
        electricity, water, high-bandwidth telecommunications network connections, central heating,
        lighting, fire safety systems, security monitoring systems, water, sewage and waste treatment
        plants, and gas pipeline hookups. Companies have to build their own facilities, but they
        benefit from the ability to secure a long-term land lease for a period of up to 99 years at
        “symbolic prices”. Subsidies of up to EUR 500,000 for construction costs are also available
        depending on the number of jobs to be created and the level of investments made.

        While the ready infrastructure is attractive, by most measures it is the favorable tax policy
        applied within the TIDZs that raises the level of attention of foreign firms. TIDZs provide a 10-
        year corporate tax holiday and a broad range of additional benefits that include:

                No customs duties and VAT on imported raw materials, equipment, and construction
                 materials.
                Zero % personal income tax for 10 years. Investors are not required to withhold the
                 personal income tax (10%) from gross wages paid to their employees.
                Zero % property tax.
                Zero % excise taxes.
                A ‘green’ customs channel at the border for expeditious export to EU countries.
                Grants for training and job creation.

        The DTIDZ plans to establish a total of fifteen zones in the country, eight of which are
        currently in operation. The largest zones in operation (as shown in Figure 2) are Skopje 1,
        Skopje 2, Stip, Kicevo, Prilep, Struga, Strumica, and Tetovo. So far, the automotive sector has
        been the most successful in the TIDZs. Of the 16 active companies present in the zones, 11
        are in the automotive sector.

27. The design of the program incorporated lessons learned from international experience (described
    in the previous section), particularly:
            a. The level of commitment of the suppliers in the program is a vital success factor.
                Participating in SDPs is demanding in terms of management time. Thus, the strength of
                managements’ commitment to dedicate this time to the program should be considered
                as a factor when identifying/selecting firms for participation.


                                                                                                          10
            b. The potential of the local firms to improve their ability to meet the buyers’ needs is also
               critical. Ways to gauge such potential in the beginning stages of the program include
               success stories and recognition by other customers.

28. The activities were focused on collection and dissemination of supplier information, capacity building
    and improving of suppliers’ knowledge and skills. Each activity was broken out into specific sub-
    activities as described in the pilot Supplier Development Program concept note (Annex 2).

29. The pilot SDP has prepared grounds for a broader program to be implemented. It enabled the
    companies to take such initiative further, improved government understanding of the importance of
    such programs for development of competitiveness of SMEs and built their capacity to run such
    programs. This toolkit aims to assist different stakeholders in the process of developing and delivering
    SDP or similar program that enables linkages between local companies and foreign investors as well
    as increasing the competitiveness of SMEs.

3   Development and Implementation of the Pilot SDP


30. In the early development of the program, an analytical underpinning to the linkages program was
    provided by drawing on lessons learned and best practices of similar initiatives around the world.
    An Analytical Note “Ascending the Global Value Chain by Developing Linkages among Small and
    Medium-Sized Enterprises (SMEs) and Multinational Corporations (MNCs)” was prepared by Ravi
    Gupta, Consultant (World Bank, Washington DC) and reviewed by the World Bank team for the fYR
    Macedonia pilot SDP. A comprehensive literature review and research of case studies was conducted
    to obtain insights into best practices and economic benefits of such programs. The analytical note
    covered the value propositions of such programs for overall economic development, as well as
    practices and principles that make SDP successful. It was aimed at both policymakers—to sharpen
    their understanding of the economic significance of SDP and their connection with exports, SME
    development, and FDI—as well as at practitioners—to present them best practices and insights from
    various examples. The note also provided examples of national strategies that integrated SDP into the
    broader competitiveness, innovation and regional/global economic integration agendas.

3.1 Assessing Potential Regulatory Barriers
31. During the pilot program, several activities were focused on the possible regulatory barriers and
    other impediments to the development of stronger linkages between foreign anchor investors in
    the automotive sector and domestic supplier firms. The team looked into regulatory incentives and
    other potential policy measures that the Government could consider to pro-actively support the
    development of such linkages. The WB team reviewed all relevant available reports, including written
    feedback on challenges and opportunities around supplier development in fYR Macedonia as
    perceived by the foreign investors. Additionally, the team conducted in-depth interviews with
    relevant government agencies (such as DTIDZ, Customs Administration and InvestMacedonia) as well
    as with both foreign and domestic companies. The regulatory review was preliminary and identified



                                                                                                         11
few potential policy and regulatory barriers. Key issues identified are grouped in three categories as
shown in the box 2 below.

                              Box 2: Analysis of Regulatory Barriers


     I. Regulatory Barriers
        a) Additional transaction costs for delivering goods into the TIDZs. This might represent an
           obstacle for domestic suppliers, in particular SMEs, as they are facing bureaucratic burden
           of preparing specific documentation and paperwork before they can do a delivery.
        b) Differential treatment of local suppliers of inputs vis-a-vis international suppliers of the
           same inputs in payment of VAT when supplying investors located outside the zones. This
           issue puts domestic suppliers at a cost disadvantage vis-a-vis imports by foreign investors
           based outside of the zones. However, more research to be done as information received
           is inconsistent.
        c) Operating hours of the customs offices located in the zones. Domestic suppliers are more
           likely to receive contracts for unplanned deliveries than international ones. Such deliveries
           would usually need to be done after work hours or on weekends when customs are closed.
        d) Lack of understanding of frequently changing regulations and unpredictability of thereof.
           Frequent changes to legislation and regulations, as well as lack of an effective public
           private dialogue and consultation mechanism, have led to a sense of unpredictability and
           perceived lack of clarity for both foreign and domestic investors. An example of such
           misunderstanding was the interpretation of the Law on Financial Discipline effective as of
           Jan.1, 2015.
        e) Access to information. Counterparts often provided conflicting information even on basic
           operational matters (e.g. working hours of customs). Communication and transparency of
           information could be improved.
        f) Identifying an agency that would anchor a supplier development program. There are two
           candidate agencies that can take on broadening this initiative (InvestMacedonia and
           Agency for Support of Entrepreneurship). Linkage or consolidation between the two
           agencies would strengthen the institutional support structure.

     II. Incentives and Policy Support Measures
           a) Absence of targeted approach to further development of the program. While there is a
               strong interest in the topic, support measures to further build the program are
               scattered across many different initiatives and implementing agencies. A more
               targeted approach would benefit suppliers.
     III. Economy-wide Policy Barriers
         a) Cost effectiveness of incentives to attract foreign investors. As the policy focus seems to
             shift from 'pure’ investment attraction to better linking investors with the domestic
             economy and realizing the benefits of those investments, it would be beneficial to assess
             the effectiveness of the current package of locational incentives to attract investment.


                                                                                                      12
             b) Overlapping mandates of Government agencies and lack of coordination. Multiple
                agencies and Ministries are involved in investment promotion activities, which further
                compounds the perceived lack of clarity on regulations and policies in this area. Such
                structure can also result in inefficiencies and coordination failures, difficulties in the
                planning of resources for state aid incentives and, even more importantly, challenges
                with monitoring and control.
             c) Visas and work permits for foreign employees. Despite some reforms undertaken
                recently, the regime still seems to represent an obstacle, primarily for foreign investors,
                but potentially also for domestic firms seeking to upgrade their production technology
                and skills sophistication by tapping into the know-how of foreign managers/ technology
                consultants.


3.2     Working with the Key Government Counterparts


  32. In the case of the fYR Macedonia’s pilot SDP, the key counterparts were government institutions,
      perceived as a future implementation organizations. However, the implementing organization/s
      of SDP could be both private and public organizations such as consulting companies, specialized
      agencies for private sector development, agencies for entrepreneurship etc. It is also important to
      have one “owner/champion” institution that drives the necessary coordination and SDP
      implementation.

3.2.1    Stakeholder Identification


  33. Identification of key government counterpart(s) that may contribute to the program should be
      done as early as possible. This is important from two reasons: identifying number of institutions
      involved and including all of them in the training program and in the everyday activities of the
      program. It’s likely that there will be more than one institution involved because SDPs are usually
      tacking multiple issues that are likely to be under responsibility of various government agencies.
      For example, including an access to finance component into SDP requires engagement of financial
      institutions, companies, state-owned financial institutions etc. In addition, since identification of
      gaps in backward linkages requires contacting foreign investors and domestic companies, there
      are likely to be different agencies responsible for this collaboration (please see Box 3). Since all of
      these agencies would be involved in managing and coordinating various program’s components, it
      is important to include them from the very beginning of the program.

                                Box 3: Roles of the Key Government Counterparts

          The World Bank Group team worked closely with a number of institutions, each of them
          covering different segments relevant to SDP. A Government Working Group designated to
          coordinate and monitor the implementation was the primary counterpart, which consisted of
          representatives of the Ministry of Finance, the Agency for Foreign Investment and Export


                                                                                                          13
         Promotion, the Directorate for Technological Industrial Development Zones, the Macedonian
         Bank for Development and Promotion, Cabinet of the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic
         Affairs, Ministry of Economy, Ministry of Labor and Social Science, Fund for Innovation and
         Development.

         Some of the institutions had very active role during the pilot:
                - The Ministry of Finance chaired the Working Group and had coordinating role on
                    behalf of the government in the pilot SDP.
                - The Agency for Foreign Investment and Export Promotion played an essential role
                    as it had a mandate of attracting foreign investors and overseeing relations with
                    them after they established presence in the country.
                - The Directorate for Technological Industrial Development Zones was responsible
                    for all the foreign investors located in the zones. Its contribution to the SDP was on
                    buyer (foreign companies) needs (“the carrot” of a SDP).
                - The Macedonian Bank for Development and Promotion (100% state owned
                    development bank) provided valuable input in the process of reviewing domestic
                    companies and identifying those with greatest potential to be part of the SDP. This
                    institution interacts with many domestic companies, is well familiar with their
                    capabilities, capacities and plans and contributed to the firm financial analysis.
                - Other were actively involved in the process of capacity building by their direct
                    participation on the workshop organized as part of the SDP.

         The Government has established an Economic Council which has held regular meetings with
         the foreign investors in the TIRZs to discuss their operational and regulatory issues and
         proposals. The WB team members participated on one of the meetings where the pilot SDP
         activities were presented.


3.2.2   Coordination


  34. Communication with all stakeholders should be done as frequently as possible. Running a SDP
      requires interaction with a variety of stakeholders on a variety of topics. Of course, it depends on
      the scope of the program that one will decide on, however, this type of project by its nature has
      quite the cross-cutting character. Such program may involve interaction with public institutions
      with different competencies and portfolios, interaction with private sector representatives such as
      associations, individual companies working in different sectors (plastics, metal processing etc.),
      banks etc. Considering holistic approach when implementing SDP, would require inclusion of
      components related to strengthening capacity of key government counterparts, access to finance,
      organization of networking events (meet the buyer), working with individual companies (both local
      ones and MNCs) etc. All of these aspects make the coordination of SDP to be quite difficult one.
      For that reason, it is necessary to communicate frequently with all the different stakeholders
      (contact persons should be assigned from the stakeholders), to establish regular meetings with the

                                                                                                        14
    internal team, with the key counterparts etc. Also, many of the involved stakeholders may provide
    valuable input to certain work that is ongoing, and for that reason, for any outputs and suggestions
    make sure that all interested parties are kept abreast of the most recent developments. Details on
    what was done in the pilot SDP can be found in box 4.

                    Box 4: Regular Communication with All Concerned Parties

     Due to the diverse character and intensity of the activities under the fYR Macedonia SDP Pilot,
     the team established regular communication since the beginning. In a short period of time (10
     months), the project carried out a lot of activities and had plenty of outputs, for example, 4
     workshops, 5 business reviews, field visits to 50+ companies, technical notes, reports, analyses
     etc.). In order to accomplish this, there were regular meetings where issues would be discussed,
     to provide update to everyone etc. In addition to the frequent written correspondence, the
     following took place:
               - Weekly video conference among the internal team
               - Weekly video conference with the key counterpart, i.e. the Government Backward
                  Linkages Working Group, foremost with Ministry of finance, Invest in Macedonia and
                  DTIDZ
               - At least biweekly meetings between the local WB team and the key government
                  counterparts
               - Series of country visits of supplier development, automotive and regulatory experts
                  that were consulting the project
               - Series of meetings with both domestic companies and MNCs.

     The communication that was set up, did not only allow effective coordination of the project, but
     also contributed to getting commitment by all stakeholders. The effort that the WB team
     displayed, motivated the other counterparts to include in the project proactively.



35. It is important to strengthen the institutional capacities of the key government agencies. An
    important aspect of the pilot was capacity building and training of the government institutions
    participating in the program (see Box 5). This was a cross-cutting activity ongoing throughout the
    implementation of the pilot and was crucial for the sustainability of the program and its further
    scale-up. The key counterpart agencies and the inter-ministerial Working Group received relevant
    training to develop skills for the program management and support services at firm level focused
    on supplier development.

36. The intention of the capacity-building component is to establish a long-term in-house capability
    to develop, manage and evaluate SDPs, and to be able to effectively coordinate and monitor
    employed consultants and other external support to the program, once certain (if any) donor
    support is over. It is about administrative and management skills. Those responsible for the


                                                                                                     15
      program need to have enough knowledge on how to effectively evaluate and deploy such
      specialists, for example those contracted to carry out business reviews.

  37. One of the first activities is to prepare and communicate capacity-building plan within
      government ministries and agencies that interact with foreign investors and whose work is
      relevant to SDP. The plan should include workshops, study tours and other training activities. The
      approach should be gradual, starting from introductory sessions to specific topics of direct
      relevance to segments of SDP. At first, the participants should familiarize with the process of
      planning SDP, what are the key elements, which players should be involved and what their roles
      should be. In combination with example(s) from another country (-ies) that the participants could
      relate to, this introductory training provides good overview of key aspects to consider prior to
      starting SDP. Further, detailed and targeted workshops should be organized on collaboration with
      the private sector, particularly on the subject of methodology of identifying the upgrading needs
      of the domestic companies and the requirements of the foreign investors. This would help to
      achieve the aim of creating linkages between domestic companies and the foreign companies.

  38. In designing an SDP it is important to make the distinction between possible options for
      institutional capacity building and specify the model chosen for the SDP. Administrative and
      management skills were developed for the government officials in the case of the Macedonian SDP
      pilot, however, this is not always the chosen model. Running the program and especially the
      activities which are related with the private sector could be outsourced. In the Czech SDP,
      international consulting company was chosen to conduct the business reviews (assessment of the
      companies). Opposite example is the Serbia SDP. Capacity to conduct business reviews was
      developed in-house (in depth specialist knowledge) where government officials were trained to
      conduct the business reviews.

               Box 5: Capacity Building Workshops for Government Agencies in fYR Macedonia

       Four capacity building workshops were held during the implementation of the pilot program.
       Experts from UK and the Czech Republic were invited on the first workshop to share the
       experience of the Czech SDP. The content of the workshop was focused on the design of the
       program, the objectives, as well promotion and incentives provided to the local companies to
       participate in the program. The results of the program were presented as well. The discussions
       on this workshop were later on used to refine the implementation strategy of the Macedonian
       Pilot Program. The following workshops were more focused on developing methodology for
       selection of companies that could be part of this kind of program as well how foreign companies
       can add value to the process. The capacity building process ended with guidance how to
       establish proper Monitoring and evaluation framework.


3.3   Working with the Private Sector




                                                                                                     16
     39. International experience shows that a key success factor is for foreign companies to be actively
         involved during the entire process of developing and implementing an SDP. The Agency for Foreign
         Investment had conducted a survey and meeting with foreign companies and shared the findings
         in terms of their supply needs. The WB team held several meetings with the CEOs and in some
         cases with the procurement managers of the largest foreign companies in the TIDZs (SEZs) in
         Macedonia. The discussion was focused on their view of the capacity of the local suppliers, the
         procurement process of the foreign companies, and potential for local sourcing. The WB experts
         also participated on the meetings. The knowledge was used in their presentations during
         information sessions and capacity building of the government institutions with the working group
         from the public sector institutions. The WB team shared all training materials from the workshops
         with the members of the working group.

     40. In the case of the fYR Macedonian pilot SDP, foreign companies were involved during the
         assessment of “buyer needs” (what the companies source locally) and identification of potential
         suppliers14. During this process, four foreign companies that are among the largest foreign direct
         investors in fYR Macedonia were selected to cooperate in the pilot program. These companies
         were sourcing locally and had the potential to increase the number of suppliers. The meetings of
         the WB team with the foreign companies discussed the possibilities for expansion of their local
         sourcing. All four companies were considering to expand their production (two of them have in
         meantime) and the remaining two are gradually increasing their supplier base. The type of
         production (plastic components, busses, car seats) and the current level of local sourcing (as per
         the discussion with the CEOs of the foreign companies) in the selected foreign companies gave
         assurances that they were going to increase the level of local sourcing and number of local
         suppliers (SMEs). For the pilot program, having four foreign investors in the process was sufficient.
         However, the number of companies to be involved depends on how many local suppliers would
         benefit from the program and how many sectors would be covered. More details are presented in
         Box 6.

                                  Box 6: Working with Foreign Investors in the Pilot SDP

         The CEOs and the procurement managers were involved in the selection process of the final 5
         companies through review of the company profiles of the 20 shortlisted companies. The
         procurement managers provided feedback if the companies are current suppliers, if they had
         previous cooperation but not current, and whether or not they are potential suppliers.
          (more details are presented in the section where Criteria and Methodology for identification of
         companies is discussed). In addition, a study on Macedonia and the European periphery
         automotive regional value chain (RVC) was done by the WBG15. Recommendations have been
         made on strategic repositioning and on backward linkages programs.


14
   Each of the four foreign investors had a chance to provide comments on the potential of the shortlisted 20 companies to
become global suppliers.
15
   FYR Macedonia and the European Periphery Automotive Regional Value Chain, industry-specific global value chain analytics
project (p149454), Alberto Criscuolo, 2015

                                                                                                                         17
         Among these recommendations are:
                Engage procurement managers of foreign direct investors in the regional
                   headquarters of original equipment manufacturers, Tier 1, and Tier 2 present in the
                   Macedonia as partners of any supplier development program;
                Invest upfront in business intelligence activities to factor in the global and regional
                   corporate strategies of the automotive foreign direct investments in the European
                   Regional Value Chain (RVC) in the design of any SDP;
                Calibrate the level of effort of the supplier development program targeted at specific
                   value chain activity according to their upgrading potential, as determined by the
                   competitive dynamics of the strategic segment;
                Move towards a regional platform for FDI attraction in automotive in the Western
                   Balkans and design supplier development programs to leverage the regional
                   dimension of the European automotive RVC;
                Set realistic localization targets for supplier development programs in line with the
                   minimum efficient scale of operation for the localization of value chain activities
                   according to the structural production requirements of the global automotive
                   industry;
                Identify and minimize switching costs for FDI to localize sourcing to local suppliers.




3.3.1     Working with Local Companies

     41. The first step in working with local companies is to identify high potential companies that can
         become reliable suppliers. Simple and most practical tool that can assist this process is creating a
         database of potential suppliers. The supplier database should be designed to proactively match
         foreign investors to the right suppliers. Depending on the objective of the program and target
         companies, a decision should be made whether the database should contain only domestically
         owned potential suppliers or companies with foreign ownership as well.

     42. The process of developing a database could be the following:

          a) Define and agree on company information

          The information could contain the following elements16:

                  Mandatory information:

                                 Company name
                                 Address

16
  Please see the UK’s Automotive Supplier Finder (ASF) service example in the Annex 2 and the experience from
the SDP in Czech Republic as suggestions to the Macedonian Database in Annex 3.

                                                                                                                18
                                       Contact details (e-mail, web page, telephone numbers)
                                       Main sector (metal; plastic etc.)
                                       At least one product/product category and its attributes

                     Non-mandatory information:

                                       Year of establishment
                                       Turnover
                                       Number of employees
                                       Quality standards (Certifications)
                                       Process capabilities (Technological / technical capacities)
                                       Supply chain position - direct to OEM (Tier I), indirect (Tier II, III, etc.),
                                        aftermarket
                                       Client reference list

            b) Collect information on companies

      43. This could be done through questionnaire and an open call for companies to share their
          information on voluntary basis (see Annex 5 for the Czech example). If this path is chosen, the
          objective and information about the program as well as the benefit for the companies should be
          widely disseminated and well explained in order to increase companies’ interest in the program.
          Another option is to collect publicly available information on the companies or upgrade and
          structure according to program needs an already existing database.

            c) Consolidate and validate information collected

      44. It is critically important to have all the relevant data (please see the mandatory and non-mandatory
          information that should be included in the database discussed above) in the database in order to
          show that the database is useful for different interested parties and could be reliable. Since some
          of the collected information could be poor or even missing, there should be an institution that
          would take a responsibility for the accurateness of the database and validation of the data17.

            d) Publishing and maintaining the database

      45. It is important to make such database available to the wider public as well as to update it on
          continuous basis. The most successful programs in order to provide for continuity once SDP is over,
          managed to publish such database (as in the case in Czech Republic and Slovakia). Web platform is
          the most convenient and user-friendly tool for publishing this data (please see Annex 3 and 4 for
          more information). It could be updated either through web application by companies themselves
          or by the responsible institution based on the company’s request. There should be mechanisms
          to also exclude companies from the database, for example if the company declines to update its
          record, does not respond, has entered bankruptcy proceedings or simply no longer wants to be
          part of the database.


17
     In fYR Macedonia this is done by the Agency for Foreign Investments and Export Promotion - Invest Macedonia.

                                                                                                                    19
3.3.2    Criteria and Methodology for Identification of Companies (in fYR Macedonia)


  46. Short-listing candidates from the database happened in several rounds. The first cut helped to
      identify companies that fit general criteria. The second identified enterprises to which detailed
      analysis would be applied. Finally, among those final candidates could be chosen these steps
      allowed to select the companies that have a potential to meet the strict criteria required by the
      foreign investors and therefore, become their suppliers (please see figure 4).

                      Figure 3: The Process of Identifying Suppliers to Participate




STEP 1

  47. The identification process of potential suppliers to be included in the pilot program started with
      improving an already existing database of companies in light manufacturing industries. Various
      donors have established the initial database by 2014. It was later updated and improved by the
      World Bank by adding approximately 60 companies recommended by the Chamber of Commerce
      and the Foreign Investment Council (FIC). The database in consisted of 223 companies. It contained
      information on name of company; address; ZIP City; telephone number; e-mail; Web page;
      Languages; Main sector; Year of establishment; No. of employees; Revenues; Exports (% of
      revenue); Main products and services; Technological / technical capacities; Certifications; Client
      reference list. The general criteria used for the initial selection were:
           a. Contracts with foreign investors – having a contract assumes that the company has
               implemented standards, has reliable management and technical, technological and

                                                                                                     20
                 financial capacity to be suppliers of the foreign investors. Additionally, working with one
                 foreign investor would make it likely and easier to get a contract with second or more.
              b. Number of countries where it exports to - this is important indicator that a company is
                 doing well and could be a potential supplier of local foreign company. The more countries
                 a company exports to, the more it’s likely to be able to meet the needs of various clients.
                 Having an exposure to foreign markets help to enrich the product offer Exporting assumes
                 implemented standards, reliable management and technical, technological and financial
                 capacities of companies.
              c. Number of implemented standards – in case the company is not yet a supplier, having
                 implemented a certain number of standards serves as a good proxy of identifying its
                 potential.

     48. Through this process, 53 companies were identified as possible suppliers to participate in the
         program.


STEP 2

     49. The next step was to narrow down the list of 50 companies. More rigorous qualitative/
         quantitative criteria were used at this time and resulted in narrowing the list to 20 companies.

     50. This process was done by using quantitative and qualitative methods. The team analyzed
         different financial indicators of the companies with more detailed focus on the size (number of
         employees), net profit amount, EBITDA margin, debt/equity ratio. To complement this theoretical
         information, the team also visited these companies to check their facilities on the ground and
         interview senior management, as well as analyzed market trends and companies’ experience in
         managing contracts with foreign investors.

     51. The company site visits (more than 50 companies were visited) followed a set of questions that
         resulted in information organized in a consistent format of company profiles. The site visits
         included meetings with the CEO/ owner for 1-2 hours and walkthrough the factory in order to learn
         more about the evolution of the company, validate information about the company (e.g., products
         and services offered) and rough assessment of technical and technological capacities (e.g.,
         standards, equipment, human capacity). In addition, the World Bank team examined the market
         trends and customer base, look into the experience approaching and managing contracts with
         foreign companies and to identify competitive advantages of the companies (costs, efficiency and
         quality).

     52. The financial capacity analysis included:

 Horizontal Trend Analysis                                         Ratio Analysis
 •         Operating Revenue                                       •       Debt/Equity ratio (below 2.333 in the last
 •         Net Profit (Positive results in the last three years)   three years on average )


                                                                                                              21
•         Total Assets                                           •      Productivity (Net profit per employee)
•         Total Debt                                             •      Profitability (ROE = Net profit / Equity)
•         Equity                                                 •      ROA = Net Profit / Total assets
•         EBITDA margin (average in the last three years, ≥6%)   •      Current Liquidity Ratio


    53. The above mentioned financial indicators indicated that all companies were in a good financial
        position. Therefore, 4 additional indicators were analyzed:
             a. Suitable size of the company (10 - 250 employees): Experience in more developed
                 countries demonstrates that SMEs are the most suitable for SDP. The companies are not
                 very small (micro) but also not very large and usually are already established as serious
                 players on the market. SMEs have the most potential of becoming suppliers due to their
                 fast growing potential, flexibility and readiness to learn and invest in further enhance of
                 their capacitates.
             b. Net profit: Looking at the net profit in the past three years allows to identify whether the
                 company has the ability to create constant profit or not, which is crucial for its stability
                 and the sustainability. Companies that have positive results are keener on investing in
                 new technology and in increasing capacitates, which is important for becoming a
                 prospective supplier.
             c. EBITDA margin: According to Machinery Guide developed by the IFC investment and
                 advisory experts in the automotive industry, companies that have EBITDA margin ≥6%,
                 demonstrate bigger potential for becoming more successful suppliers.
             d. Debt / Equity ratio: It indicates what proportion of equity and debt the company is using
                 to finance its assets. A high debt/equity ratio generally means that a company has been
                 aggressive in financing its growth with debt. This can result in volatile earnings. For the
                 purpose of our analysis we have used debt / equity ratio which is used when commercial
                 banks are analyzing one particular company. This ratio should not be higher than 2.333.
                 The rationale behind this is that the company should work with maximum of 70%
                 borrowed funds (debt) and minimum of 30% of own funds (equity).

     The General findings from the financial analysis of the 53 shortlisted companies are summarized in
     Box 7.

                            Box 7: Findings from the Financial Analysis of Suppliers

                 General findings from the financial analysis of the 50 shortlisted companies: Upward
                  revenue trend in over half of companies
                 Average revenue growth rate 6%
                 Only 6 out of 53 companies have recorded losses in the last three years.
                 Low risk-taking and low-growth companies tend not to invest in new assets
                 Companies that have contracts with foreign investors are investing in assets or are
                  planning to do so
                 More than half of companies increased total debt


                                                                                                               22
                E.g. Increased short term liabilities due to working with a larger base of suppliers of
                 their raw materials
                Low risk-taking among local suppliers evidenced by incremental trend of capital and
                 reserves
                Suitable EBITDA margin (average in the last three years, ≥6%) have 76% (38 out of 50)
                 of the companies. This companies could be eligible for potential investment by
                 different stakeholders.
                Debt/Equity ratio below 2,333 in the last three years on average have 86% of the
                 companies (43 out of 50) which indicates that majority of the companies have space
                 for additional funding.


STEP 3

  54. Since participation in the program has to come from a will of the company, final step was to
      invite 20 short-listed companies to express their interest. As additional criteria, four of the largest
      foreign investors in the country (as explained above in the text) provided feedback on the 20
      shortlisted companies and Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion (MBDP) provided
      comments on the financial capacity of the companies.

  55. Based on the submitted Letters for Expression of Interest (please see annex 6), feedback form
      the foreign companies, comments from the MBDP and the Company profiles from the site visits
      developed during the Step 25 companies and 3 reserve companies (suppliers) were identified to
      be included in the program. This was based on analysis and recommendations by three foreign
      consultants with more than 30 years of experience in this area and the World Bank team. The
      number of selected participating SMEs was determined by the available resources in a short-term
      pilot SDP. Larger, longer term pilots, such as the one in the Czech Republic (model for the
      methodology used in fYR Macedonia), included around 40 participating companies, and one in
      Russia included 10 companies. In addition and based on their experience in the automotive sector,
      during the review of the companies profiles the consultants have used the following selection
      criteria: the type of products companies produce (both plastic and metal producers we included),
      how well they can be integrated into the production process, interest by the foreign investors, how
      focused they are in the production process. The takeaways from the site visit are presented in box
      8.

             Box 8: Takeaways from the Site Visits: Selling to Foreign Investors in FYR Macedonia

         The site visits helped to identify some of the challenges of doing business with foreign
         investors:
              Lack of publicly available information about foreign investors and their supplier
                 needs
              Approaching foreign investors is a quite difficult process, especially getting in
                 touch with the procurement managers (in cases when there was already a


                                                                                                          23
                contract and established relations, the local suppliers have been approached by
                the foreign investors)
               Many companies claim that implementation of certain technical standards has
                not been required by the foreign investors as prerequisite to obtain a contract
                with them
               Even if local SMEs manage to obtain a contract with the foreign investors, it’s
                likely to be ad hoc and rarely leads to a long-term engagement
               If the inputs supplied by local SME are to be included in the production process,
                the process of negotiations, including quality testing, usually takes more than a
                year

3.3.3   Business Review

  56. The purpose of the Business review is to map and understand the capabilities and areas of
      potential improvement of the local companies. Not only does the analysis help to structure the
      support given to a specific company to address certain gaps it also serves as a source of information
      in the selection process for inclusion in the program.

  57. The model chosen for the review came from the European Foundation for Quality Management,
      which uses nine criteria, upon which to assess company capacity (figure 5). These criteria help to
      identify key areas for improvement that are in line with requirements of foreign investors and
      assign a score to the overall level of readiness of the supplier.

                             Figure 4: EFQM Excellence Model – 9 Criteria




  58. There are several key characteristics of this model:
          a. It is an entirely confidential process, and depends on a full and frank exchange of
              information between the company and the assessors/consultants.


                                                                                                        24
                b. The review is not an external audit. It is based on a participative approach, with the
                   assessors working together with the company’s management and staff, and it focuses on
                   facilitating of a self-assessment of the company against international benchmarks.
                c. It provides the company with a management system for continuous assessment of
                   performance and improvement.
                d. The company still has the opportunity to access to additional support to help it improve
                   performance.
                e. It requires a considerable commitment of management time, both in carrying out the
                   reviews and following through with improvement plans.

      59. The EFQM model was chosen because it is a proven methodology developed by leading European
          companies as a tool for identification of areas for continues improvement of all aspects of the
          business. This model was used in SDPs in Czech Republic and Serbia and as such it was used in the
          Macedonian SDP pilot. The model is holistic as it covers all of the important aspects of company
          management, and is applicable to companies of all sizes and from all sectors.18.

      60. There are two options of using the EFQM model in SDP as presented in Figure 6. In both cases
          EFQM based assessment is used to find areas for improvement and in certain way monitor impact
          of the program through identified progress between first and second business review. The main
          conclusions from the Business reviews conducted under the Macedonian Pilot SDP are presented
          in Box 9.

                                     Box 9: Main Conclusions from the Business Reviews

            The main conclusions from the business reviews were:
                 The result of the business reviews (BR) should be mainly used for selection of type
                   support for the companies in SDP.
                 BR allows participants to customize companies’ actions plans and the type and amount
                   of support from which they could benefit in line with their individual priorities and
                   needs.
                 Since the companies are in different stage of development they should not receive the
                   same amount of support. The amount of support should be defined based on more
                   detailed action plan and related specified support.
                 Local companies have achieved growth on traditional markets, but to scale up sales to
                   the global market requires significant effort and a long term vision with concrete
                   improvement actions over a 5-year horizon.
                 Company management know the local market very well, and need to invest more time
                   to improve their understanding of the global market and the requirements of foreign
                   investors, and thereby develop a strategy that can help them to compete with low cost
                   suppliers in emerging countries.



18   For more information please visit: http://www.efqm.org/the-efqm-excellence-model

                                                                                                        25
                 No scarcity of investment in machinery & equipment, however, there is sub-utilization
                  of resources and a need to optimize production according to the principles of lean
                  manufacturing and continuous improvement.
                 Further investment in training for managerial skills as well as for technical, quality and
                  sales personnel are essential for long-term development and contracts with foreign
                  investors.


                               Figure 5: Using the Business Review as a Tool in a SDP



                                                                           Selection      Consultancy support
                  First                                       Second
                                    Action plan                 BR
                                                                         for Intensive        to selected
                   BR                                                        phase            companies



                  First                                                                                     Second
                                            Action plan and consultancy support
                   BR                                                                                         BR



                                              Note: BR signifies “business review”

     61. In the first option, the first business review is conducted and areas for improvement are mutually
         selected by consultants and top management of the company. Companies are then given time
         (around 6 months) to implement the action plan. After the period of implementation, a second
         business review is conducted where the score is updated in line with achieved improvements.
         Additionally, fulfillment of action plan is measured and scored separately. Only those companies
         that have demonstrated the highest improvement were invited to participate in the program and
         to receive intensive consultancy support for their capacity building19. This selection process was
         used in first two rounds of the Czech SDP and in Serbian SDP in order to select the companies which
         will demonstrate certain level of commitment during the process. One very important aspect is to
         make the right selection of consultant that will carry out the business reviews. The best practice is
         to have a team with official EFQM assessor/s and industry expert (either internationally or local
         consultant). The second option was used in the third round of Czech SDP and in the Macedonian
         pilot SDP is presented later in the text20.


19 The application for this stage in the Czech program mainly contained identification data on the applicant. It also included the
following: a. Number of employees, b. Branch in which the company operates, c. Balance sheet, income statement for the last 3
years, d. Tax returns for the last 2 years, e. Certificates awarded, f. Ratio of own production program to cooperation, g. Affidavit
on proper settlement of all obligations towards the institutions defined under the program, h. Affidavit on not damaging the
environment, i. Affidavit of the applicant stating that that bankruptcy has not been declared on his assets, that he has not
received permission to settle with creditors, that a petition to declare bankruptcy on his assets for insufficient assets has not
been rejected, that an execution of a decision has not been conducted against him, and that he is not in liquidation.
20
   During the period of writing this document, the second business review was not conducted yet.

                                                                                                                                 26
     62. The business reviews were part of the World Bank activities to increase and strengthen the
         capacities of the government agencies (especially Agency for Foreign Investments and Export
         Promotion of the Republic of Macedonia - AFIEP and DTIDZ). In this segment, World Bank
         activities were focused in assisting the public agencies and building local capacity by transferring
         world-class knowledge and testing it locally in order to jointly (with the institutions) develop tools
         and mechanisms for a design and implementation of an effective supplier development program,
         which may be financially supported by public resources in the future.

     63. To the 5 companies participating in the program, expert consultants provided a 2-day review of
         company’s total business21. The program of the first day included orientation of key managers in
         the Development program and a methodology of self-assessment. The business reviews were
         based on existing European Union experience, incorporating the EFQM, and other methodologies
         such as lean manufacturing, to maximize the scope for early performance gains by companies.
         Managers of the company were also asked to fill self-assessment workbook during the course of
         first day. They spent considerable time on interviews with the assessors. These interviews were
         necessary for forming of independent view on company operation and performance. This external
         assessment and information gathering allow to external assessors to help management team with
         the self-assessment and identification of strengths and areas for improvement. Second day of the
         business review is dedicated to presentation of self-assessment findings by management team,
         presentation of assessors’ view on the company, and discussion of areas for improvement. Result
         of the collaborative work of the management team and the assessors is a realistic assessment of
         company operation and performance including strengths and weaknesses in performance against
         international benchmarks (summary is presented in Box 10). Main output was plan for
         improvement for horizon of following 6 months of the project.

              Box 10: Appling EFQM Excellence Model - Findings on SMEs in FYR Macedonia

                   CRITERIA                   POSITIVE ASPECTS                   AREAS FOR IMPROVEMENT
         Leadership and                   Deep involvement of                   Long term focus and vision
         management                        management in day to day              Deeper knowledge of
                                           work and deep knowledge of             international market and
                                           the company                            requirements of foreign
                                          Focus on results (short term)          companies
                                          Ambition to make the                  Broader management and
                                           company successful                     leadership knowledge and
                                                                                  capabilities at every level of
                                                                                  the company



21
  Before starting the Business review process, the EFQM excellence model and the checklist for assessment was adjusted to
address better the local market conditions. Introductory and preparatory documents for the top management were prepared
and send in advance (overview of the program, draft agenda, methodology of work).

                                                                                                                        27
Strategy and planning      Knowledge of their current         Medium term planning, 3 to
                            customers’ expectations             5 years
                           Opportunistic approach to          Annual budgeting supporting
                            business                            medium term plan
                                                               Monthly tracking of the
                                                                results:
                                                               Financial results
                                                               Sales and new orders
                                                               Quality
                                                               Customer satisfaction
People                     Personal relationship of           Alignment of people behind
                            management with people              shared vision
                           In general, people are very        Development of knowledge,
                            loyal to the companies              capabilities and skills of
                                                                people in line with business
                                                                plan
                                                               Empowerment of people
                                                               Involvement of people in day
                                                                to day improvement
Resources                  Companies are able to invest       Investment decisions are not
                            from their own resources            based on longer term plan
                            and from bank loans                Decision process for
                           Quite adequate machinery            investment is informal and is
                           Relatively low utilization of       done in close circle of people
                            machines and space
Processes                  Companies are process              Processes are usually not
                            oriented                            designed to maximize
                           Good understanding of               productivity and quality
                            technological processes            There is no process flow
                                                                approach from material to
                                                                finished product
                                                               Lean production principles
                                                                are not systematically used
                                                               Focus on continuous
                                                                improvement is not
                                                                recognized as priority




                                                                                                 28
  64. It is important to point out that specific tools, based on the EFQM Excellence model, were
      developed for Supplier Development Pilot Program: Checklist, which is used by external assessors,
      and Work Book, which is used by management of supplier for self-assessment. These tools were
      initially developed as part of Czech SDP and updated during Serbian SDP. In Macedonian pilot
      program the Checklist was used as it is and Workbook was partly updated.

  65. Certified EFQM assessor together with other consultants (automotive expert and World Bank
      consultants) carried out the business reviews. The areas covered with the Business review were
      focused on the Leadership and Management Capabilities of the top management and how the
      policy and strategy is developed and communicated in the company. Furthermore, Human
      Resource (HR) policies and processes were analyzed, how people are recruited, trained and
      involved in the decision making process on every level. Regarding the production process,
      discussions were focused on the production control, quality management systems, health, safety
      and environment management, product design, development and introduction process and lean
      manufacturing capability. At the end of the process, detailed report covering the strengths of the
      company and areas of improvement was developed and discussed with the top management of
      the company. Once the business reviews were completed companies were expected to work
      according to the improvement plan on the identified areas for improvement over a period of 6
      months.

  66. The participating local SMEs, through the Business reviews, worked closely with experienced
      industry experts who conducted in-depth reviews, identified issues and provided valuable inputs
      and suggestions for further improvement of the company’s operations. Template documents (ex.
      cost calculation model) was provided to some of the companies, as needed. Collaboration with
      EBRD Small Business Support project was developed. EBRD SBS continued the cooperation with
      the participating SMEs and provided advisory services for specific areas of need of the SMEs. This
      will enable the SMEs to improve their operations towards becoming more reliable supplier to the
      foreign companies. By including the foreign companies in the selection process the pilot SDP
      managed to establish initial communication between some of the foreign companies and some of
      the local suppliers. EBRD is still active providing advisory with local and international consultants
      in some of the SMEs. A second round of Business reviews in near future might be good to be
      conducted in order to measure in more details the impact of the pilot.



3.3.4   Access to Finance

  67. Facilitating access to finance is defined as the ability of enterprises to obtain financial services ,
      including credit, deposit, payment, insurance, and other risk management services. In the SDP,
      access to finance could be helpful in upgrading the suppliers’ capacities. In the Executive Opinions




                                                                                                         29
         Survey of the Global Competitiveness Report22, access to finance was identified by managers of
         firms in various sectors as one of the most problematic factors for doing business in the country.

     68. SDP can facilitate access to finance though different activities such as:
             a. Financial analysis of supplier firms
             b. Catalogue developed of public and private (banking and non-banking) financing products
                 and sources
             c. Assisting in preparation of applications for suitable financial products

     69. In fYR Macedonia, sources of funding support available for enterprises include:
              a. Public sources - through matching grants, innovation vouchers, credit guarantee and
                 export credit insurance, respectively: the Fund for Innovation and Technology
                 Development (FITD), the Ministry of Economy - Agency for Support to Entrepreneurship
                 and the Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion (MBDP).
              b. Private sources: include banks with short-term and long-term credit products (from
                 internal/bank sources and external funding such as the International Finance
                 Corporation- IFC, European Investment Bank - EIB, European Bank for Reconstruction and
                 Development - EBRD) for SMEs. Non-bank sources/products include leasing, venture
                 capital and equity finance, as well as donor-funded matching grants.

3.3.5     Reverse Exhibition

     70. A reverse exhibition is an industry event or conference where the "buyers”, which typically are
         foreign investors staff, meet the "vendors", or local companies. These “meet the buyer” events
         are fairly one-sided in the sense that they represent more of an opportunity for MNCs to display
         or convey information about products and components that they need now, or will need in the
         future, rather than a forum for hearing about seller capabilities. But they can be an efficient way
         for local suppliers to directly meet with foreign investors, collect contact information, ask
         questions about their operations and expectations, and get a better understand their needs and
         requirements. In the case of the Czech SDP, several exhibitions were organized during the period
         of 2003 and 2008 that opened doors for many Czech companies to cooperate with foreign
         investors. Currently in the case of Macedonia, such an activity is more suitable for a SDP that is
         fully scaled-up, rather than just a pilot, but they represent an important objective that could be
         reached if the program flourishes.




22
  Global Competitiveness Report, World Economic Forum, 2015-2016. http://www3.weforum.org/docs/gcr/2015-
2016/MKD.pdf


                                                                                                         30
3.3.6   Supporting Local Companies with Advisory Assistance

  71. While many companies in the country need improving, they don’t always have the capacity to
      do so, and building that capacity can be a challenge. The time and resources that senior managers
      and staff have to devote to big-picture issues and long-term competitiveness competes with urgent
      day-to-day activities. But it is particularly important to find this time as the benefits that can accrue
      to a company that successfully engages a foreign investor can be manifold. With this in mind,
      participants in the SDP might benefit from certain forms of customized advisory support to address
      specific needs depending on the stage of particular company’s development. This could be done
      through action plans developed together with the company during the business review process.

  72. The WB team had regular coordination meetings with technical assistance providers and was
      advising and pointing out to the Working Group different programs that could be used as a
      source for providing technical assistance to the companies participating in the pilot SDP . Those
      programs included EBRD Small Business Support Program, the Dutch Embassy PUM program for
      supporting SMEs, and the Fund for Innovation and Technology Development. Several of the
      companies participating in the pilot were approached by representatives from EBRD and the PUM
      program. Examples of TA support point out by the suppliers during the site visits is presented in
      box 11.

                       Box 11: Site Visits: Areas in which Companies Requested Support

         All companies were interested in participating in networking (e.g. business forums). Specific
         areas of technical assistance identified in order of priority were:
                      Developing marketing and promotion strategy
                      Facilitating communications with the foreign investors
                      Implementation of technical standards
                      Implementation of Corporate Governance best practices (succession
                         planning, improving internal processes)
                      Optimization of the production process
                      Developing feasibility studies for new investments


  73. The quality of mentors/experts working with companies is critical. Credibility and sound solutions
      based on hands-on business experience is important. Experts could be invited from private sector
      management consulting companies (or individual consultants) or/and public sector agencies. Most
      of their contribution would be to:
           a. Mentoring and coaching
           b. Transferring skills to company’s staff to ensure sustained improvement
           c. Providing tailored advice (please see figure 7 for the UK experience)
           d. Agreeing/ monitoring/ modifying improvement plans.




                                                                                                            31
74. For example, in the Czech pilot, KPMG won a contract to carry out the Business Reviews in a
    competitive tender, but the EU experts who were the lead mentors in the individual mentoring
    teams were appointed by Czech Invest from a cadre which was set up in the UK.

            Figure 6: External Advisor Role: Example of an Approach Taken in the UK




75. Sanctions for withdrawal from the program could be imposed. A company that decides to take
    part in the project agrees to actively participate throughout the entire length of the project and to
    use the support throughout the length of the project. Premature withdrawal from the project must
    be done in writing with a statement of the reasons that led to withdraw. Should the company
    withdraw, it shall pay the amount of funds allocated for the company’s participation in the project.
    Should the company use up the assigned consultation days of the expert sooner than the project
    officially terminates, this shall not be deemed premature withdrawal.

76. If the company breaks the terms and conditions of the project or its affirmations, it shall be
    disqualified from the project. Disqualification should be sanctioned in a similar way as premature
    withdrawal.




                                                                                                      32
4    Summary of Lessons Learned


    77. The SDP pilot had been envisioned as a segment (pre-implementation, diagnostic phase) of a
        potential larger undertaking on backward linkages and it was not a stand-alone, longer term
        initiative. The outputs were of diagnostic nature - literature review of international experience and
        best practices in supplier development, needs assessment of foreign companies and local SMEs'
        challenges, and capacity building with knowledge and tools of the local SMEs and members of the
        working group from the public institutions.

    78. The key lessons learned from the Macedonian SDP pilot are summarized below:

             a. Scope of activities: The scope of activities might vary between diagnostics activities and
                to observe the current situation in the country/region/sector to providing concrete and
                tailor made technical assistance to the companies in order to increase their capacities. It
                is important from the very beginning to have clear vision of what the program needs to
                achieve. For example, in the case of fYR Macedonia, if it is to prepare the ground for larger
                program that will focus only on technical assistance to the companies, than smaller
                budget and team with consultants with specific knowledge of programing and
                implementing similar programs and industry specialist is needed in order to make sure
                the right approach is considered.

             b. Duration and budgeting of the program: Naturally it mainly depends from the scope of
                activities. Based on the international experience, only the diagnostic activities last
                between 8 and 12 months and might cost between 300,000 – 500,000 USD. Larger
                program including direct technical assistance to the companies might cost of a minimum
                of 2,000,000 USD for a two-year program. In the case of fYR Macedonia, it is suggested
                the larger program to last at least 2 years in order to have tangible results and
                improvements in the companies. The cost for the program is depending pretty much on
                the number of companies that are targeted and the availability of consultants to provide
                specific technical assistance (SDP is a very labor intensive program). Proper budgeting is
                vital for the sustainability of the program.

             c. Stakeholders: The biggest challenges probably arise when it comes to selecting and
                working with different stakeholders. It is of utmost importance of identifying as early as
                possible the key agency (government institution) which would be responsible for
                managing and coordinating the program. Even though from organizational point of view
                it is better to have one agency that will lead and coordinate the program (if the
                government is leading the initiative) it might also be the case that several institutions
                could be equally able to run such a program, so coordination body might be establishes
                (as in the case of Macedonia, compared to Czech experience where only institution was
                responsible for implementing the program). Selection of MNCs and local potential
                suppliers is a big and key challenge that needs to be properly addressed and is crucial for

                                                                                                          33
             the program to be successful. Finding the right incentive for both MNCs and local
             suppliers to participate in the program sometimes it could not be very straightforward
             even though there are obvious benefits for participating in the program. In most of the
             cases the top management is very busy and it creates delays. Well targeted (specific
             sector, previously established relations) and defining optimal number of companies that
             could be included in the program will increase the chance for success. Constant dialogue
             with and ensuring the active involvement of MNCs and local companies throughout in
             setting up any larger program is vital. Another important aspect is the consultants that
             will work on the program. Besides consultants who will be involved in the organization
             and coordination activities, quality of mentors/experts working with companies is critical.
             Credibility & soundly based solutions from own business experience is important in order
             to assure the right approach when assisting the companies in their capacity building.

         d. One very important aspect is the coordination activities. Bringing together relevant
            public sector stakeholders to increase understanding and support for the program (as in
            the case of Macedonia during the pilot program) is crucial, however, more and different
            coordination would be required in implementing a large program, and the delivery
            implications of that. This would be something on which the managing agency would have
            to lead, in terms of, for example, ensuring the provision of appropriate government or
            consultancy support in a customized and straightforward way for participating SMEs.

79. The activities under the pilot program show the potential of companies in fYR Macedonia to
    become approved suppliers to many of the foreign investors operating in the country. This
    potential should be unlocked and with the assistance of an SDP will increase the spillover effect
    from the FDI. Additionally, such a program will assist the companies’ in developing their expert
    capacity. Working with the government institutions clearly showed that there are several
    institutions (such as InvestMacedonia and DTIDZ) that have the capacity (built during the SDP) to
    start and run an SDP as a key “ingredient” of a larger program. Until new scaled-up activities begin,
    designating a state institution with strong private sector development experience that can take a
    lead role in addressing the needs of the local companies and combine resources from various
    sources would be a good way to maintain momentum and continue helping companies build
    linkages with foreign investors.




                                                                                                      34
     ANNEXES


      Annex 1: Example of TORs of Key Experts


                                          Terms of Reference for

                        Supplier Development Pilot Program Project Coordinator

                               Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice

                                          The World Bank Group



Background

The Minister of Finance has requested support from the World Bank Group to design and pilot a supplier
development program. Funded using by the fYR Macedonia Competitive Industries and Innovation
Support Program (funded by a Multi-donor Trust Fund), the initial focus will be on light manufacturing
including automotive parts. The proposed six-month pilot initiative described in this concept note will aim
to increase the integration of local companies with successful large foreign companies currently operating
in Macedonia. Local companies with the most potential to become reliable suppliers will be identified
using a database of potential suppliers developed with support from USAID. Active participation is
expected from the Directorate of TIDZs, the Agency for Foreign Investment and Export Promotion
(InvestMacedonia) and other institutions represented in an inter-ministerial Working Group chaired by
the Ministry of Finance and set up to lead the initiative on the government side.

Activities under the fYR Macedonia Supplier Development Program will stimulate linkages between local
SMEs and large foreign companies operating in Macedonia (particularly in the TIDZs) in selected light
manufacturing and services sectors. The program will pilot a group of targeted and coordinated
interventions to support local SMEs to increase their sophistication and compete more effectively by
investing in innovation and new technologies and integrating with their products and services into the
global and regional supply chains of the large foreign companies located in and outside the special
economic zones (TIDZs).

The overall goal is to equip participating suppliers with the information, skills and technical capacity to
meet investors’ requirements, enabling them to win more and higher value-added contracts. The project
will also benefit foreign and other domestic companies by helping to improve the quality and reliability of
supply of products and services that they can source on the local, Macedonian market.

Duties and Responsibilities:

The consultant’s main responsibility will be to coordinate the day-to-day project management and
implementation of the 6-month pilot program and to be the key contact point in Skopje. The consultant
assist in managing the implementation of all tasks related to the specific sub-activities under the four main
activities envisioned in the pilot: (1) Collection and dissemination of supplier information; (2) Capacity
building and training; (3) Upgrading of suppliers and technology extension; and (4) Facilitating access to
finance.

                                                                                                          35
Consultant’s main responsibilities will be:

    •   Coordinate the implementation of or Pilot development and implementation, which includes, but
        is not limited to, liaising with government and private sector counterparts and data collect
        requests
    •   Draft terms of reference for expert consultants, study tours and workshops for the pilot program
    •   Assist in the selection of target foreign investors in fYR Macedonia and contribute to identification
        of their supply needs (products and services) based on surveys ad interviews
    •   Organize and coordinate workshops and study tours, in coordination with the World Bank team
    •   Contribute to the development of reporting and analytical outputs including supplier analyses,
        surveys, terms of reference for study tours, and lessons learned, according to the Action Plan and
        Timeframe of the Pilot Project

Outputs and timeline for completion:

-       Supplier analysis: End March
-       Survey: End March
-       Interview notes and recommendations: End March
-       Terms of reference for consultants: End March
-       Organize Workshop #1: End March
-       Organize Workshop #2: End April
-       Organize study tour(s): End April and end June
-       Lesson learned: End June


Qualifications Required:

    1. Advanced degree in economics, public policy, engineering and/or management with at least with
       at least 5 years of relevant work experience in private sector development, including previous
       interaction with suppliers and FDI in fYR Macedonia;
    2. Demonstrated expertise building effective working relations and partnerships with private and
       public sector institutions; exhibiting a collaborative and proactive approach to problem solving;
    3. Strong and proven organizational, research, analytical and quantitative skills;
    4. Ability to deliver in a dynamic environment with multiple demands and quick turnaround of
       outputs;
    5. Leverages available data and makes timely decisions;
    6. Understands project management concepts sufficiently to propose and develop action plans and
       implementation strategies; can apply standard project management tools, methodologies, and
       processes; is able to identify and mitigate project risks as well as manage project issues;
    7. High levels of initiative, judgment, and decisiveness in accomplishing tasks; proven ability to work
       independently; good time-management skills and an eye for detail; ability to work effectively
       under stress and to juggle multiple tasks within tight deadlines;
    8. Fluent Macedonian and English language skills.




                                                                                                          36
      Annex 2: Supplier Development Pilot Program Draft Concept (January 2015)


Background and Rationale

Export, competitiveness and private investment

FYR Macedonia has done well in maintaining macroeconomic stability through a time of global and
European crisis, creating a stable environment for investment with low inflation and manageable
external balances. However, moving to a higher growth trajectory requires continued macroeconomic
stability and development of a competitive export sector in fYR Macedonia. In a small open economy like
Macedonia, firms must look to export markets for growth. Today, only 5 percent of manufacturing firms
in Macedonia export, but this group of firms generates 55 percent of the total sales revenue in the
manufacturing sector23. The key to accessing export markets is to boost firm productivity in the conditions
of a pegged exchange rate as there is a strong relationship between exporting and productivity: exporting
firms have six times more revenue per employee than the average firm in fYR Macedonia. Moreover,
international evidence suggests that participation in export markets helps to improve firm-level
productivity, so that a competitive export sector will translate into a more competitive and dynamic
economy.

The Government scaled up export promotion through the adoption of the Export Promotion Strategy
and implementation of exporter support programs. The strategy aims to ensure that appropriate
institutional mechanisms are operating at the ministerial and agency levels, and that programs with high
potential impact are put in place. The exporter support programs help build the capabilities of those
exporters aiming to increase the quality of their products or reach new markets, which could progressively
increase Macedonia’s share of medium and high-tech exports.
Recent and ongoing analytic work confirms the need to continue and deepen reforms in the area of
competitiveness. The Global Competitiveness Report (GCR) 2013-14 ranks fYR Macedonia in the middle
of the range (73 out of 148). The country ranks highest for goods markets efficiency (44) and
macroeconomic environment (59), and lowest for market size (109) and business sophistication (100).
The report identifies the top three obstacles for doing business in fYR Macedonia as access to financing,
infrastructure and skills of the labor force. In the past several years the country has made significant
progress in improving the business climate beyond the "first generation” of reforms often related to the
methodology of the Doing Business (DB) Report. A series of two Competitiveness Development Policy
Loans (DPL) recently implemented reforms in the governance and efficiency of public spending for private
sector and foreign investment. However, many challenges remain with implementation of business
regulations for investment at the municipal and regional levels, due to uneven capacity at lower levels of
administration and lack of experience in dealing with foreign companies.

A key pillar of the Government’s competitiveness strategy focuses attracting foreign direct investment
(FDI) through a package of proactive promotion in key markets, incentives and special economic zones
(SEZ) around Skopje, Stip, Tetovo and other cities. These measures and SEZ infrastructure, which receive


23
  World Bank, 2012. Modular Competitiveness Assessment Making Exports a Catalyst for Economic Growth: An
Assessment of fYR Macedonia’s Trade Competitiveness. The exporter analysis is based on firm level datasets from
the Customs Administration and the Central Registry up to 2010.

                                                                                                             37
high ratings in global comparisons24, resulted in increased FDI inflows, especially in medium- and high-
tech manufacturing industries. These investments jumped to EUR 78 million in 2013, accounting for net
exports of EUR 87 million in 2013 and are expected to be up to EUR 190 million in 2014, with total exports
of EUR 1.2 billion. The new FDI located in and outside the SEZs employed around 5,000 workers in 2013,
and this is expected to increase to 9,000 by end 2014. Companies received state aid packages, which
include tax incentives and skills training for the employees. They are also developing cooperation with
local universities and some of the companies have developed supply linkages with domestic producers of
plastic and metal products.
Constraints to linkages with FDI and export competitiveness of domestic firms are related to firm-level
productivity, skills, business sophistication, and some aspects of the business environment at the local
level. By end 2013, supply linkages between Macedonian companies and foreign investors was only
estimated at EUR50 million in goods and services (including construction), with potential for increase in
the medium and long term. The government is determined to stimulate partnerships among foreign
manufacturing companies operating in fYR Macedonia, local Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) and
financial institutions by providing assistance to upgrade product quality, quantity and reliability through
technical and managerial skills, business planning and access to capital. One important element of this
support is the Fund for Innovation and Technological Development (FITD or Innovation Fund). Established
in 2014, the Fund receives funding support from the World Bank.

The Minister of Finance has requested support from the World Bank Group to design and pilot a supplier
development /backward linkages support program. Funded by the fYR Macedonia Competitive
Industries and Innovation Support Program (funded by a Multi-donor Trust Fund), the initial focus will be
on light manufacturing including automotive parts. The proposed six-month pilot initiative described in
this concept note will aim to increase the integration of local companies with successful large foreign
companies currently operating in fYR Macedonia. Local companies with the most potential to become
reliable suppliers will be identified using a database of potential suppliers developed with support from
USAID. Active participation is expected from the Directorate of TIDZs, the Agency for Foreign Investment
and Export Promotion (InvestMacedonia) and other institutions represented in an inter-ministerial
Working Group chaired by the Ministry of Finance and set up to lead the initiative on the government
side.

The Supplier Development Pilot Program will draw upon strong analytical and operational experience
from similar programs in Europe and Central Asia (Czech Republic, Kazakhstan, Russia, Serbia), Latin
America (Costa Rica, Chile) as well as from SME support program globally. Lessons drawn from
international experience conclude that successful supplier development programs share the following
characteristics: (i) Technical support particularly on quality standards, lean manufacturing, etc.; (ii)
Management support – guidance on business and financial planning, tendering advice, regulatory
navigation advice, marketing; (iii) Support to skills through improved human capital in the human
resources departments. (iv) Sourcing database to match local suppliers with investors (v) Organizational
support – ‘meet the buyer’ match-making and B2B events; (v) Merging and matching business to business
networks, (vi) Joint venture support, (vii) Introductions of participant companies for joint tendering and

24
  Financial Times study European Cities and Regions for the Future 2014/15 rates several regions in fYR Macedonia
among the top ten in nine out of ten categories. Ratings for price efficiency, business cooperation and FDI strategy
were particularly favorable.

                                                                                                                 38
possible cluster initiation; (viii) Development of national quality standards; (ix) Financial products – mix of
loans, leasing, venture capital, credit guarantee funds, micro loans, export credit insurance, etc. A study
of successful small and medium enterprises in Macedonia showed that cooperation with international
companies is one of the top three factors of success of these companies.

Program Objectives

Activities under the fYR Macedonia Supplier Development Pilot Program will assess and stimulate linkages
between local SMEs and large foreign companies operating in fYR Macedonia (particularly in the TIDZs) in
selected light manufacturing and services sectors. The program will pilot a group of targeted and
coordinated interventions to support local SMEs to increase their sophistication and compete more
effectively by investing in innovation and new technologies and integrating with their products and
services into the global and regional supply chains of the large foreign companies located in and outside
the special economic zones (TIDZs).

The overall goal is to address information asymmetries and equip participating suppliers with the
information, skills and technical capacity to meet investors’ requirements, enabling them to win more and
higher value-added contracts.

Program Description

The six-month pilot program will be carried out with assistance and international expertise provided under
the auspices of the fYR Macedonia Competitive Industries and Innovation Support Program (MCIISP). The
activities under the program, described in detail below, will be rolled out starting in the second half of
December 2014 and ending in June 2015. The activities are grouped into four main categories: (i) supplier
information dissemination; (ii) capacity building and training; (iii) provision of international expertise; and
(iv) assistance accessing financing sources. To the extent possible, the analysis and dissemination activities
will seek to engage in-country stakeholders through workshops and high-level meetings in order to
contribute to more robust outcomes with strong potential for scale-up. Taking the short timeframe and
ambitious results into account, it will be necessary to secure a strong and shared sense of ownership of
the activities by the responsible institutions/public agencies as well as a strong partnership with relevant
organizations from the private sector and donor agencies.

Value proposition: The World Bank will conduct an assessment (diagnostics) of the market needs, gaps
and results, which will further inform the design of pilot program and the future broader engagement in
supplier development and backward linkages. Under the auspices of the Competitive Industries and
Innovation Support Program, the World Bank will assist with the design and implementation of the
program and monitoring and evaluation of results. In doing so, the World Bank will provide international
expertise and lessons from similar programs and, in cooperation with the public and private sector entities
and donor agencies, will contribute to institutional strengthening of the partner (public) agencies to
implement a successful and sustainable (scalable) pilot program for supplier development in fYR
Macedonia.




                                                                                                            39
The proposed pilot program will be launched with a presentation of the program to counterparts in
January 2015. The presentation will present (a) findings in an analytical note, which summarizes relevant
international experiences and best practices in support to supplier development and backward linkages
from different countries and regions; (b) successful cases and lessons learned from domestic companies
(SMEs) who have already established business linkages for supply of goods and services to large foreign
investors25 in Macedonia.

The pilot program is demand-driven and based on a practical approach, which consists of the following
and interlinked four elements:


      (i) Collection and dissemination of supplier information of the products and capabilities of potential
Macedonia suppliers, so as to enable foreign manufacturers to shortlist and contact potential suppliers.
This will be achieved by the following activities: (a) Review of Database of Potential Suppliers – to
determine quality and relevance of entries, information gap and ease of search; installation and upgrade
possibilities; develop a user manual and administration agreement between agencies. The firm-level data
(financial, jobs, exports, references) will serve as baseline for ex-ante assessment of firm (supplier)
performance. This information will be important for the company analysis and selection criteria; (b)
Survey of FDI/Buyer Needs– to identify the types of products and services that potential buying companies
– large foreign investors foreign are expecting to source from local companies; quantities and quality
standards sought, payment terms, regulatory constraints, etc. This activity would follow up on
assessments that may have been previously conducted by partner agencies and private sector
organizations; (c) Assessment of regulatory incentives and constraints, which stimulate or impede
opportunities for supplier development. The activities (a-c) would be conducted in a concurrent and
efficient manner.

       Timeframe: December 2014 - February 2015
       Outputs: (a) Database assessment and installation, (b) Buyer needs assessment (survey results) and
       (c) assessment (analytical note) on regulatory incentives and constraints.
       Resources: 2 T&C specialists (GF level): 1 economist/private sector development and 1 investment
       regulation specialist and 2 local consultants (survey/needs assessment).
       Partners:     Directorate for Technological Industrial Development Zones, Agency for Foreign
       Investment and Export Promotion, Council of Foreign Investors at the Chamber of Commerce and
       relevant (sector-specific) business associations.

Result indicator: Information resources (database, buyer needs assessment, and regulatory assessment)
are completed and available to public agencies and interested companies.

    (ii) Capacity Building and Training: The key counterpart agencies and the inter-ministerial working
group need to receive relevant training to ensure that there are skills for program management and
support services at firm level focused on supplier development. The activities under this component will
be carried out at the onset of the pilot program and at the time around the completion of the program.

25
     E.g. e.g. Van Hool, Tehnohoze, Kemet Electronics, Johnson Matthey, all located in the TIDZs.

                                                                                                         40
In the initial phase, it will incorporate the results, i.e., feedback received from the Survey of FDI/Buyer
Needs and the baseline performance of the supplier firms, so that the agencies have knowledge from the
end users (buyers and supplier firms) during the capacity building activities.

Firm selection criteria: As part of the capacity building, the project will help with development of criteria
and methodology for selection of companies which will receive support to upgrade their technology,
expand the business and enter the supply chains of large foreign companies. The selection criteria and
methodology will be based on best international practice and will be competitive based on proposals for
upgrading and performance indicators.

At program completion, the capacity building and training activities will be adjusted to and inclusive of
lessons learned (from public agencies and private sector participants) during the implementation of the
activities.

    Timeframe: January – February 2015 and June 2015.
    Output: (a) Two training workshops in program administration and management, supplier assessment
    and selection. The training workshops will include case studies and targeted interviews with
    management and staff involved in supplier development and backward linkages in other countries.
    The interviews with relevant managers and staff at or from agencies in other countries (e.g. Czech
    Republic, Chile, Costa Rica) or with World Bank technical specialists could be organized with a video
    conference or via virtual connection (Webex) from the World Bank office.
    (b) Potentially 1 study tour to relevant agency/agencies in another country (Austria, Czech Republic
    or Poland).
    (c) Methodology and criteria for company selection, which will include but not be limited to company
    performance and ownership records, quality of technical proposals, etc.

    Resources: 1 T&C specialist, 2 international expert consultants/trainers

Result indicator: Improved capacity of public agencies to manage a design and deliver services for supplier
development to local firms, as demonstrated by the number of technical staff trained and quality of
outputs (surveys, back to office reports, and methodology and criteria for firm selection).

     (iii) Upgrading of suppliers and technology extension: Based on the pre-defined methodology and
criteria for selection, companies in target sectors/industries will be invited to propose specific areas of
support, which they need from adequate industry and/or management experts (both international and
local). The proposals and documentation will be assessed and based on the assessment, a small number
of companies (3-5) will be selected as potential candidates to receive support which would help them to
enter into the supply to foreign companies in fYR Macedonia.

Provision of international and local expertise: Resources from MCIISP will be deployed to competitively
engage international and local expertise in management and industry or technology specific issues.
Additional targeted local expert support could be sought through the EBRD supported Small Business
Support (SBS) Program. The Team of the SBS Program has expressed readiness to cooperate with the Bank
team in the pilot program. The technical assistance interventions will focus on operations, production and


                                                                                                          41
quality management, supply and standards gap analysis, financial management, marketing, supply chain
management, organizational change as well as on communication and negotiations with the foreign
partners. The companies and experts will produce an assessment and upgrading plan in consultation with
the potential Buyer/partner (foreign company) who will also have a consultative role in the
implementation of the upgrading plan (standards adoption, product test run, etc.). At the end of the
program, the suppliers will be evaluated on the level of technological upgrading and business
improvement. The type of technical support which companies will need based on the assessments and
consultations with the FDI will inform the understanding and diagnostics of the gaps between suppliers’
operations, product quality and skills and buyer/FDI needs. This knowledge will further inform the design
of the follow-up larger program on backward linkages, as well as the design of a scope of activities of a
Center of Excellence in manufacturing, which could be supported by MCIISP.

        Timeframe: March - June 2015

        Outputs: (b) Assessment of companies’ proposals and selection of 3-5 companies for upgrading
        services; and (b) Support to selected firms/potential suppliers with successful interventions and
        quality upgrading; (c) Gap analysis summarizing local firms/supplier challenges vs. buyer/FDI
        needs, (d) Terms of reference for a Center of Excellence in Manufacturing which could be
        developed by a relevant industry association and could apply for funding and technical support
        from the Fund for Innovation and Technological Development (FITD).
        Partners: Directorate for Technological Industrial Development Zones, Agency for Foreign
        Investment and Export Promotion, Council of Foreign Investors at the Chamber of Commerce;
        Business Associations including Association of Certified Management Consultants, EBRD Small
        Business Support Program in fYR Macedonia and FITD.

Result indicators: (a) at least 3 local companies have upgraded their technological capacity and have
initiated supply linkages with large foreign investors by the end of the pilot program; (b) local institutions
and business organizations enhanced their understanding of local supplier capacity needs and gaps, (c)
public agencies and business organizations increased their capacity to respond to the needs and gaps.

    (iv) Facilitating Access to Finance: On as needed basis, this component will help selected suppliers
with financial analysis, planning and information about relevant funding sources and products through
the public and private (banking and non-banking) sectors in fYR Macedonia. The public sources of funding
support (through matching grants, innovation vouchers, credit guarantee and export credit insurance,
respectively) include the Fund for Innovation and Technology Development (FITD), the Ministry of
Economy, Agency for Support to Entrepreneurship and the Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion
(MBDP). Private sources of finance include banks with short term and long term credit products (from
internal/bank sources and external funding such as the IFC, EIB, EBRD) for SMEs. Non-bank
sources/products include leasing, venture capital and equity finance, as well as donor-funded matching
grants. The goal of this activity is to assist with improved financial capability of local firms in order to
develop and improve their processes and capacity.

        Timeframe: May - June 2015


                                                                                                           42
        Outputs: (a) financial analysis for supplier firms; (b) catalog of financial products and sources in
        the public and private (banking and non-banking) sectors; (b) at least 3 applications for a suitable
        financial product.

        Partners: Public: Fund for Innovation and Technological Development (FITD), Ministry of Economy
        and Agency for Support of Entrepreneurship; Macedonian Bank for Development Promotion
        (MBDP); Private: Bankers Association, IFC, EBRD, SEAF, KfW, USAID (Small Business Expansion
        Project, Center for Entrepreneurship and Executive Development/CEED), Crimson Capital.
        Resources needed: 2 local consultants (financial specialists)

Result indicator: At least 5 companies are assisted with financial analysis and information about
appropriate sources of funding from public and private (bank and non-bank financial sources).

Monitoring and Evaluation

The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of progress of the program activities will be a joint effort by the key
counterpart agencies and the World Bank Team. An M&E framework will be established at the onset of
the program and will be managed by one of the key counterpart agencies. Training on M&E will be part
of the Training and Capacity Building activities at both the initial and completion stages of the program,
so that the staff in the implementing/counterpart agencies gain and/or improve their skills in M&E. The
feedback loop will inform the public agencies of (a) the firm (domestic and foreign) needs and gaps, (b)
capacity of public agencies to design and manage a program which responds to those needs; (c) availability
and efficiency of local and international expertise, (d) efficiency and adequacy of public funding schemes,
and their complementarity to private funding products, so that the public programs/schemes would be
adequately adjusted.

The table below indicates the outcome(s) and related indicator(s) which the proposed backward
linkages program is expected to achieve.

           Outcome                                              Indicator
  Development Finance                Preparation of new operation informed
  Informed
                                     Existing operations informed
                                     Mobilization of non-Bank resources informed
                                     Government expenditure informed
  Policy/Strategy Informed           Government policy / strategy informed
                                     Public debate stimulated / initiated
                                     Contributed to stakeholder involvement
                                     Development community/partner policy/strategy informed
                                     Bank country strategy (CAS/CPS) informed/influenced
                                     Bank sector strategy informed/influenced


                                                                                                         43
  Client Capacity Increased           Design capacity strengthened
                                      Implementation capacity strengthened
                                      Monitoring & evaluation capacity increased
                                      Clients are recognized with good practice award
  Knowledge Increased                 Facilitated exchange of best practice with clients
                                      Facilitated exchange of best practice with partners
                                      Disseminated best practices
                                      New innovative approach fostered
                                      New innovative approach developed
                                      Client is able to adopt/harness new technologies, innovative ideas,
                                      know-how


Risks

Risks to the implementation and sustainability of the supplier development pilot program are moderate.
There is strong interest from the Minister of Finance and his team for this pilot program, but the
timeframe is tight and resources for a future scale-up are not guaranteed. There may be operational risks
both on the Bank and client side, including delays in engagement of technical specialists (both internal
and external) and the slow deployment of resources. There is also the risk of not getting response or
interest by local SMEs and potential suppliers under the program criteria. The fledgling implementation
capacity and the sustainability risk are substantial. A steep learning curve in terms of project
implementation and governance is anticipated. Close supervision and capacity building from the Bank and
trainings in specific functions to ensure availability of competent staff with adequate skills will be critical.
Additional institutional risks include the possibility of weakening of the level of ownership and
engagement over time by the key institutional partners. This may in turn impede access to supplier
information which could retard the speed and efficacy of implementation. Political risks include
management or staffing changes in counterpart agencies in the next six months.

Mitigation Measures

To minimize these risks, early and interactive presentation of the concept for the pilot project to the
counterparts will take place in December 2014 and a strong dialogue particularly about the necessity for
strong commitment by the agency staff. Additional mitigating measures include: (i) ongoing consultation
with stakeholders to ensure the program responds to their objectives; (ii) lessons from other countries in
addressing the institutional and other risks; (iii) a strong focus on capacity building and institutional
strengthening; and, (iv) leveraging of the Working Group in the early stages of project implementation to
ensure positive momentum is built. The World Bank team will continue to coordinate with other
government authorities, private sector associations, donors, and other stakeholders as necessary to
support successful program implementation.



                                                                                                             44
Team

The pilot program will be co-led by John Gabriel Goddard (Senior Economist, GTCDR) and Gordana
Popovikj Friedman (Private Sector Development Specialist, GTCDR). The activities under the supplier
development program will be managed and executed by a group of technical specialists (staff and
consultants) in the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice in the Bank. On as needed basis and when
opportunities arise, cross support will be sought from other Global Practices (e.g. Finance & Markets,
Education, Agriculture, etc.), and from Cross-Cutting Solution Areas (Jobs and Employment), as well as
from other parts of the World Bank Group (IFC Investment and Advisory Services, etc.).




                                                                                                   45
         Annex 3: Macedonian Supplier Database: The Option of the UK’s Automotive Supplier Finder (ASF)
         service26



The ASF is the UK’s online automotive supplier database designed to proactively match buyers to the right
suppliers. It was developed and is run by the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders (SMMT), the
UK’s automotive trade association.

It now has the details of about 8,000 individual sites, or about 6,000 companies, currently in its system. It
has features in common with the Czech Invest database, but two significant differences are:
    • a detailed product classification system developed by the industry with 4,000 product classifications
      on a branch/leaf basis down to 7 levels of detail
    • the ability to process RFIs/RFQs, including supporting CAD drawings, with built-in monitoring and
      alert functions.

Further details of the coverage of the database and the services offered are given below.

Offer from SMMT

If such a database format was of interest to InvestMacedonia, SMMT would be prepared to provide the
system for them on one of 2 bases:
    • a managed service
    • set up the system and provide training on its use for an upfront charge, which covered their costs

A further independent option would be to link such a system with the main ASF, so that Macedonian
suppliers could have access to the RFIs/RFQs handled by that system, if they met the criteria set by the
buyers.

SMMT would be happy to provide further details on both the system, and what they could offer. If It is
planned to put the setting up of the Macedonian supplier database out to tender, it would certainly make
sense for them to be one of the organizations invited to respond.

Some further details of the ASF

(i) Coverage

The information held includes on (a) a mandatory basis:
   • Company name


26
     This annex was drafted by Steve Martin, Senior Private Sector Development Consultant

                                                                                                          46
   • Address
   • Site type (ie office, manufacturing, R&D etc)
   • Member status
   • A contact (which is hidden)
   • At least one product/product category and its attributes (i.e. is it for car, LCV etc)
   • Data protection/terms and conditions acceptance

and on (b) a non-mandatory basis:
   • turnover
   • number of employees
   • quality standards
   • process capabilities
   • supply chain position - direct OE, indirect, aftermarket

What information is mandatory and what information held is shown or hidden are variables down to the
choice of the managing organization. All the settings and what can be shown are flexible, but
considerations taken into account in respect of the latter include data protection and the purpose of
displaying that type of information. For example, all that the SMMT have chosen to show on the current
system is the company level details, a generic contact email and phone, a description, and list of the
product categories.

Although non-product details such as quality standards and turnover are non-mandatory, it is made clear
to companies that it is in their interests to include fuller information, as they might be parameters of
search set by buyers. Other fields could be readily added to the database if necessary.

No financial information is included. This is left as part of the subsequent due diligence by the potential
buyer.




                                                                                                        47
Below is a diagram giving an example of the level of product and service data that the database holds.
Over 4,000 classifications exists, and as new products are known, new classifications are added to




accommodate these.



(ii) Services - RFQs

Buyers can access the system themselves or SMMT can provide a customized service, using a back-office
tool. As well as using the database to establish a list of potential suppliers, buyers can issue a specific RFQ
- either a public or a private one which excludes their name (in case for example the RFQ might go to their
existing supplier.) In addition to including supporting CAD drawings, buyers can also put in pricing
requirements and the deadline for reply, as well as pre-defining criteria such as location and quality
standards. More details are given bellow.

Suppliers do not have to keep checking the system. They are sent an email alert to have a look at the
details of a RFQ if their profile matches a buyer’s criteria. SMMT filter and monitor the RFQs and suppliers
respond through the on-line system. Buyers receive alerts to let them know that there are quotations to
be viewed. There are no charges made for these services. The only advantage to SMMT members is that
they get listed first, if they meet all of the buyer’s criteria.




                                                                                                            48
This model is summarised in the following diagram:

(iii) Database quality/verification

In terms of verification, the SMMT carry out specific campaigns twice yearly to ask whether company
details are up-to-date, as well as updating through their ongoing contacts, such as Meet the Buyer events.
The ASF is the sole source for invitations to its Meet the Buyer events, so both an incentive and a check.
Suppliers can securely log in and edit their company’s profiles as often as they like, but the SMMT has the
opportunity to approve amendments before they go live on the website.

SMMT experience demonstrates the virtuous cycle in terms of use and quality of database. Quality of
information on suppliers encourages the buyers to actively use the system, which in turn encourages the
suppliers to input their information and keep it up-to-date, and so on.

In the Macedonian situation this emphasizes the importance of quality control from the outset of the
database, when it is seeking to establish its reputation. A key element in it being successful is that the
large investors have confidence in the quality of the data, so that they use it in looking for suppliers.

In the Czech Invest case, the initial database was built on the companies which had participated in the
pilot SDP, before widening it to include other companies with the support of trade associations.
Verification systems to ensure that the data is accurate and up-to-date then need to be put in place.
Minimum standards for inclusion could usefully be set. More positively, it might be useful to flag up in the
database those companies which have been through improvement programs as part of the Macedonian
SDP, as in the case in the UK for recognition standards achieved through the UK SC21 aerospace SDP.



(iv) Other points

In respect of the system:

   • There is an administration portal for both the database aspect and the RFI/RFQ management.



                                                                                                         49
   • The system can also be used for collecting other details including surveys and all data collected in
     one place.
   • There is also the provision for data analytics internally.

The ASF facility is presently limited to the automotive industry, but SMMT has ambitions to widen it to
other sectors/trade associations, e.g. aerospace. It would also like to widen its coverage by linking up
with other European databases, particularly lower cost countries in Eastern Europe. At the moment
over 1500 non-UK based companies have independently registered a profile on the database, but there
has been no formal linkage of databases. If fYR Macedonia wanted to consider that option, they would
be the first country to do so.

RFQ details

These include scope for specifying:

• Product category (if put in general description, e.g. brake systems, will provide prompts on in detailed
  options to select, e.g. air brake system check valve.)
• Location
• Quality standards (checklist - EFQM, ISO, TS, etc)
• Industry areas (manufacturer, distribution, reconditioned, importer, exporter, R& D, etc)
• Company exclusion (specific named companies)
• Public/private RFQ choice
• RFQ Form contains:
      - Number of units for quotation
      - Capabilities (early stage investigation of process, fundamental research, high volume
          production supply, initial concept design, low to medium production supply, small batch
          supply)
      -   Maximum price per unit (not shown to suppliers)
      -   Currency to be quoted
      -   CAD attachment - drawings
      -   NDA attachment - if require respondents to sign a non-disclosure agreement
      -   Transport - Incoterms
      -   Delivery date required
      -   Tooling details - any tooling requirements
      -   Packaging requirements
      -   RFQ response date
      -   Comments: any other comments




                                                                                                        50
         Annex 4: Database of potential suppliers, Improvement of Macedonian database of potential
         suppliers 27




Project summary

One of the key roles of investment organisation is to attract foreign companies across various industry
segments to come to develop business in the country. A major factor driving investors’ decision to invest
in country is to what extent there exists a capable and competitive supply base in the region, hence enabling
potential investors to develop a successful supply chain strategy.

In Macedonia there is a growing demand from international automotive manufacturers (both OEM and sub-
system manufacturers), who are considering/already establishing business activities in South East European
countries, to have a preliminary overview of the potential of fYR Macedonia’s supply base in the segments
relevant to their production.

To develop a positive impression and support an investor’s decision making, Macedonia should develop a
simple tool to provide potential investors with preliminary overview of the supply base potential in fYR
Macedonia and its regions. In particular, grouping them by “tier” within the supply chain and by type of
product that could be priorities.

The objective is that the tool should be developed in a user friendly form, simply electronically presentable
to a potential investor, available both on the Invest Macedonia web site and distributed by CD.

FYR Macedonia has already developed a database of automotive suppliers including over 220 contacts with
some essential and product/customer specific information.

2.         Objective and Scope

The proposed solution and scope of work reflect the overall project objectives and other Macedonia
expectations.

The primary objective of the project is to create, based on data input from Invest Macedonia, a database of
suppliers in the automotive sector and or other manufacturing sectors in Macedonia. This database should
include up-to-date essential data about the listed companies, should enable sorting by defined specific
criteria (tier level, region, product group, industry) and has to include full-text searching function.

Additional Expectations:

2.1        Information in the database are to be up-to-date. Companies in bankruptcy proceedings must be
           excluded from the final database list.

 2.2     The database must contain the following obligatory information: company name and other contact
data, product description, web page link.

2.3        The final database should be worked out in 2 language versions: (Macedonian, English).


27
     This annex was drafted by Vit Svajcr, Senior Consultant

                                                                                                          51
2.4     The primary database should be created in MS Excel of design from which excel file could be
        extracted. As for operation system is LINUX recommended, final application platform to be used
        is let up to a contractor professional consideration.

 2.5    The criteria for classification in automotive suppliers’ database into “tier” level   is to be defined
by the contractor in cooperation with Invest Macedonia.

        The future contractor is expected and encouraged to propose other solutions (functionality, database
        content), which could further enhance the user value of the database along with the overall
        objectives.

Basic project scope:

2.6     The scope of this project, should be determined by the objectives and Invest Macedonia
        expectations specified above, includes the following main stages:

        (a)      Stage 1: Review of current Invest Macedonia database, confirm target numbers of supplier,
                 review of outputs

        (b)      Stage 2 & 3: Main tools development – database + questionnaire

        (c)      Stage 4: Data collection and verification for a target number of suppliers

        (d)      Stage 5 & 6: Database completion including translation into 1 language version

        (e)      Interim / Final reports and final presentation



2.7     Some partial involvement/assistance of Invest Macedonia staff is expected and will be required
particularly within the following activities:

        (a)      Verification of proposed data in the database from suppliers

        (b)      Expanding current Invest Macedonia automotive supplier database

        (c)      Data collection/validation for selected number of suppliers

3.      Suggested approach and deliverables

Outline of the technology used and user functions solution



3.1     Based on CzechInvest experience the base data source should be Microsoft Excel. From Excel the
data will be exported to XML format, which will use Macromedia Flash as the main publishing technology.
The data will be viewed from a standard Internet browser. The data can be presented on a CD as well as
on the Internet.

3.2      The main part of the presentation on internet web page should be an intelligent search form in an
attractive layout allowing the user smooth and straight forward access to the required data. The major links
between “searching layers” as well as data content and layouts are outlined in Appendix 1.


                                                                                                           52
3.3     In the first screen (layer 1) two options to view data could be offered - either “MAP” or “DATA”
view.

3.4      In the lower layer screen, for both “view types” there should be possibility to select the desired
regions (multiple selection), tiers (multiple selection) and product module (specific selection). There must
also be the full text search bar which could supplement the main selection criteria.

3.5     After clicking on the “MAP VIEW” link the selection results appear for the particular chosen
regions as well as the total for all of them. The number will indicate how many options of Tier 1, Tier 2
and Tier 3 suppliers and the total of how many companies were identified (e.g. 15 Tier 1 suppliers, 35 Tier
2 suppliers, 35 Tier 3 suppliers, total companies identified 65)

3.6      An approximate location of the selected supplier could be displayed on a map by clicking on the
specific link.

3.7     The “DATA VIEW” option displays a list of the selected suppliers in the form of a database
structure. Information like company name, tier level and product module are shown in this detail level.
More detailed company profile could be displayed by ticking on the “DETAIL” buttons. Example of
company profile is in Appendix 2.

 4.     Potential for future enhancement of the database tool

4.1     The above described database should be developed in a form which could enable future
enhancement and adjustments according to the up-to-date status, specific industries and the final user (i.e.:
an investor) decision making purpose. In particular, the following 4 main aspects could be taken in
consideration during creation of the database solution:

        (a)      Updating of data by companies themselves

        (b)      Interfaces with other InvestMacedonia databases

        (c)     Application for other target industries (Plastics, Electronics, Services, Agro business, etc.)

        (d)     Adjustment to the requirements of the final users (MNC’s) of the info - decision making
                level (vice-president for strategic sourcing, procurement director, senior commodity buyers,
                purchaser, etc.)

It is anticipated that the project duration will be 4-6 months, depending on the responsiveness of companies
          on the database.



This initial stage could result in simple re-application of the project to other target industries such as plastics,
electronics, services and agricultural business.

Constant improvement so sustainability of the database will be achieved. In this context sustainability
means that database is broadly recognised among Macedonian companies. They should constantly update
their records or alternatively InvestMacedonia should do that since the overall goal is to promote Macedonia
as place for investment. Constant IT support is essential.



                                                                                                                 53
At this initial stage, minimum two people from InvestMacedonia should be involved on dally basis
maintenance of the database. Later on one employee will be enough.

Promotion is crucial factor. Promotion materials should be developed and shared with MNCs. Some project
might be linked with the database in a sense only companies from the database can apply.




                                                                                                    54
Example




          55
Profile from database of suppliers




Company Name [Retracted]
Address - Street, Nr.:               [Retracted]      Switchboard:                 [Retracted]

Area code (Zip), City:               [Retracted]      Fax:                         [Retracted]

Region:                              [Retracted]      E-mail:                      [Retracted]

Identification Number:               [Retracted]      WWW-pages:                   www.fimes.mesit.cz



Contact persons:                     E-mail:          Phone:                       Linguistic
                                                                                   knowledge:

[Retracted]                          [Retracted]      [Retracted]                  English



Number of Employees:                 [Retracted]

Turnover-last year (EURO):           [Retracted]

Turnover Export (%):                 [Retracted]

Quality certificates                 [Retracted]



Areas of activity                                     Prevailing nature

Automotive                                            Tier 3

Aerospace                                             Production/Assembly

Subcontracting Metal                                  Casting

Subcontracting Plastics                               Tools and Moulds

Engineering                                           General engineering



Product/Service                      Tier/Character   Modul                        Major customers

Injection moulds for plastic         Tier 3           Moulds/Jigs/Tools
materials

Castings                             Tier 3           Services/R&D/Projecting/SW   Porsche




                                                                                                 56
Precision Al, Cu, Fe alloy        Production/Assembly   Cockpit                        EADS
castings                                                                               ARTHUS
                                                                                       THALES
                                                                                       PAGE AIRSPACE

Moulds for injecting plastic      Production/Assembly   Moulds/Jigs/Tools              RAYMOND
materials and metals                                                                   KASKO
                                                                                       DICOM

Moulds                            Tools                 Tools for machining, Tools
                                                        for pressing plastics, Tools
                                                        for casting metals

Production of precision           Casting               Casting - Low-pressure
castings made of aluminium,                             aluminum, Casting -
copper, and steel alloys by the                         Smeltable model
method of lost wax and Rapid
prototyping technology up to
the dimension of 700 mm

Precision Castings                Casting               Casting - High-pressure
                                                        aluminum, Casting -
                                                        Smeltable model, Casting -
                                                        Other

moulds                            Tools and Moulds      Injection moulding - Other
                                                        inserts, Pressure moulding

Moulds                            General engineering   Tools



Technological equipment                                 Amount

3D measuring machine                                    1

Wax presses                                             3

Machining centers                                       5

Robotic shellroom system                                1

REIS die-spotting press                                 1

RTG                                                     1

Heat treatment                                          2




                                                                                                 57
Annex 5: Request for Expressions of Interest




     INVESTMENT OPPORTUNITIES


     Supplier Development Project
     The Project Will Enable Czech Companies to Become Suppliers
     of Multinational Companies




                                                                            The Project
                                                                            The goal of the Supplier Development Project is to improve the ability of Czech
                                                                            suppliers to compete, to secure good local sources for current investors working on
                                                                            the domestic market and to increase the attractiveness of the Czech Republic for new
     Inflow of Foreign Investment Per Capita (in EUR)                       investors. The success of the recent Supplier Development Program for suppliers in
                                                                            the car part, aviation part, pharmaceutical, biochemical and medical equipment
      900                                                                   industries led to the initiation of the third round of this project. All the above-mentioned
      800                                                                   industries will be incorporated into this new round as well.
      700
      600
      500                                                                   In recent years significant investment has flowed to the Czech Republic. While global
      400                                                                   foreign investment from traditional sources (for example from the US) has been
      300
      200
                                                                            decreasing significantly, the Czech Republic has been able to keep a high level of
      100                                                                   incoming foreign investment and is going counter to the global trend of decrease in
        0
                      2002                 2003                 *2004
                                                                            foreign investment.
                 Czech Republic       Maďarsko         Polsko   Slovensko


     *2004 Estimate
                                                                            The use of local sources gives investors a competitive advantage in the form of lower
     Zdroj: Wiiw, Research Reports No. 314, March 2005                      costs and shorter supply time. The goal of the Supplier Development Program is to
            Wiiw, Countries in Transition 2004, 2004
            Own calculations                                                make Czech companies the first choice for multinational companies in the Czech
                                                                            Republic.


                                                                            Project Costs
                                                                            The cost of the project is covered from the state budget; the participants cover only a
                                                                            motivational fee in the amount of CZK 50,000 for the duration of the entire program.

                                                                            The Project Offers:
                                                                            -- Evaluation of suppliers' business enterprise based on the model of the European
                                                                              Foundation for Quality Excellence and other methods with the goal of determining
                                                                              areas for improvement and suggesting concrete steps leading to further
                                                                              development of supply abilities.
                                                                            -- Methods that will enable suppliers a comparison with global supply standards and
                                                                              show the way for continuing improvement.
                                                                            -- Practical guidelines and support of suppliers during the improvement of their own
                                                                              performance standards with the goal of meeting the demands of multinational
                                                                              companies and other investors.
                                                                            -- The project was designed in close cooperation with multinational companies and
                                                                              the methods of evaluation are based on all criteria used by these companies for the
                                                                              evaluation of their suppliers. The project also makes use of the experience gained
                                                                              during other successful supplier development programs conducted in other
                                                                              countries of the European Union and especially in Great Britain and Ireland. These
                                                                              programs led to a significant increase in multinational company supply from local
                                                                              sources.




                                                                                                                                                                           58
Supplier Support Project                                                      Process of Supplier Development
                                                                              The process includes an initial overview of business activities and determination of
                                      Database
                                      of Czech                                priorities for further improvement. Within the process the selected suppliers will
                                      Suppliers
                                                                              determine their priorities for further improvement and will compile detailed long-term
                                                                              plans for improvement, which will enable the suppliers to meet the requirements of
                                       Selection of
                                     companies
                                                                              multinational companies. This will be done in cooperation with experienced Czech
                                                                              consultants. CzechInvest regularly organises workshops and courses dealing with
                                                      Supplier Development
                                                      Support                 problems which proved to be the common priorities of participating companies.
                                     Assessment       -- training
                                     of companies     -- business meetings
           Multinational Companies




                                                      -- providing contacts   Contacts with multinational companies will be maintained throughout the whole
                                                          to MNCs
                                                      -- consulting           programme duration to ensure that the programme effectively reflects their priorities and
                                     Identification   -- sample trade fairs
                                      of areas for
                                                                              requirements on suppliers and also to maximise their efforts to meet the objectives of the
                                     improvement                              programme. The programme implementation will be ensured by specially trained Czech
                                                                              consultants with the support of EU experts from Great Britain and Ireland, which will
                                     Compilation                              facilitate the sharing of best practices.
                                     of an action
                                         plan

                                                                              Apart from establishing contacts with multinational companies, CzechInvest also started
                                                                              to cooperate with Czech banks and other government agencies, such as CzechTrade,
                                     Consultations
                                                                              and today we are able to offer a wide range of services to the participating companies.


                                       Business                               Process of Supplier Development – Selection Criteria
                                     opportunities                            -- It must have its registered seat in the territory of the Czech Republic.
                                                                              -- It must be registered for income tax at a tax office pursuant to section 33 (1) of Act no.
                                                                                 337/1992 Coll., the Administration of Taxes and Fees Act, as amended, and prove that
                                                                                 it satisfied its tax liability, as regards income tax, during the two preceding closed tax
                                                                                 periods prior to the date of filing the application for support.
                                                                              -- It has to make a declaration of honour stating that, as at the day of filing the
                                                                                 application, it fulfilled all obligations towards the tax office, the Czech Social Security
                                                                                 Administration, insurance companies, the Land Fund, the National Property Fund, the
                                                                                 State Environment Fund etc.
                                                                              -- The beneficiary of the support is engaged in activities in the manufacturing industry
                                                                                 defined according to the General Classification of Economic Activities, except for the
                                                                                 manufacture of tobacco products (section 16) and the manufacture of erotic products.
                                                                                 Support will be especially provided to industries no. 17; 21; 24; 25; 27; 28; 29; 31; 32;
                                                                                 33; 34; 35; 72; 73 according to the general classification.
                                                                              -- Support cannot be provided to an entity if on the day of filing the application:
                                                                                -- the entity and its property is adjudicated bankrupt;
                                                                                -- it has been authorised to reach a settlement with creditors;
                                                                                -- its bankruptcy petition has been rejected due to insufficient property;
                                                                                -- it is facing an execution of judgment or is winding up.
                                                                              -- Financial stability
                                                                              -- A company commitment at the management level to earmark necessary resources and
                                                                                 an interest in attaining the objective
  Supplier Development Support                                                -- Results in business activity improvement, ISO 9000 etc.
  For further information on the project please contact:
  Supplier Development Department, CzechInvest
  Stepanská 15, 120 00 Prague 2                                               Expected Time Framework
                                                                              June to August 2005 – recruitment of companies; September 2005 – selection of
  PHONE: +420   296 342 500
  FAX: +420  296 342 572
                                                                              companies; October to December 2005 – initial audits, compilation of action plans;
  E-MAIL: suppliers@czechinvest.org                                           January 2006 to December 2006 – consultations, professional training and other forms
  WEB: www.czechinvest.org
                                                                              of support.

  CzechInvest Investment and Business Development Agency is a
  government organization under the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade.
  All services are provided free of charge.




                                                                                                                                                                               59
      Annex 6: Letter for Expression of Interest


LOGO InvestMacedonia


Supplier Development Pilot Program
Assignment title: Upgrading of local companies/suppliers and technology extension


The Government of the Republic of Macedonia with the support of the World Bank Group, under the
umbrella of the Macedonia Competitive Industries and Innovation Support Program, is working to design
and implement a pilot Supplier Development Program (SDP). The aim of the SDP is to stimulate linkages
between local SMEs and large foreign companies operating in Macedonia in selected light manufacturing
and services sectors.
The SDP will provide technical assistance and international expertise to up to 5 local SMEs that want to
increase their sophistication and compete more effectively in order to integrate their products and
services into the global and regional supply chains of the large foreign companies located in and outside
the special economic zones (TIDZs).
The goal of the SDP is to equip participating suppliers with the information, skills and technical capacity
to meet investors’ requirements, enabling them to win more and higher value-added contracts. The
project will also benefit foreign and other domestic companies by helping to improve the quality and
reliability of supply of products and services that they can source on the local, Macedonian market.
In order to select the companies that will participate in the SDP, the Agency for Foreign Investments and
Export Promotion of the Republic of Macedonia is launching a call for expression of interest for
Upgrading of suppliers and technology extension to confirm the interest of the companies in
participating in the program and obtain relevant company data that will be used to design the technical
assistance. The selected companies will receive free international and local expertise in management and
industry or technology specific issues over a 3-6 month period.
The technical assistance interventions will focus on operations, production and quality management,
supply and standards gap analysis, financial management, marketing, supply chain management,
organizational change as well as on communication and negotiations with the foreign partners. The
program comprises of a business review to be jointly carried out by each company with experts which will
lead to an assessment and upgrading plan. This will be organized in consultation with the potential
buyer/partner (foreign company) who will also have a consultative role in the implementation of the
upgrading plan (standards adoption, product test run, etc.). At the end of the program, the suppliers will
be evaluated on the level of technological upgrading and business improvement.
Companies who are interested in participating in the program and seeking technical assistance are kindly
asked to fill in and submit the Expression of Interest form provided as Annex 1.
Interested companies may obtain further information at the address below from 10.00 to 15.00 hours.

                                                                                                        60
Expressions of interest must be delivered in written form to the address below (by email, in person, by
address or by mail) by June 5, 2015.


Agency for Foreign Investments and Export Promotion of the Republic of Macedonia
Nikola Vapcarov, 7, 1000 Skopje
Tel: +389 2 3100 111
Fax: +389 2 3122 098


___________________________________________
The World Bank Group
World Bank Office Skopje
Aminta Treti 34, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia
Tel: +389 2 5515 230
Fax: +389 2 5515240




                                                                                                    61
         Annex 7: Expression of Interest Format


EXPRESSION OF INTEREST

1. Company details

Company name:
Date of registration:
Address:
Tel:
Fax:
Email:
Contact information:
Website:
2. Contact person



Name and Surname:
Position:
Tel:
Mob:
Email:



3. Please indicate with how many foreign companies operating in Macedonia you have established
cooperation:

                                                                           Contract duration

                          Products/services you        Short term (one time             Long term (continuous
                            have supplied and      cooperation and/or less than a   cooperation and/or more than a
                          which are integrated                 year)                             year)
                           into final production

 Foreign company #1

 Foreign company #2

 Foreign company #3



                                                                                                          62
 Foreign company #4

 Foreign company #5

 Foreign company #6

Note: There is no need to specify the names of the companies with whom you have had contract, the purpose of this question
is just to understand how many companies you have worked with and the type of cooperation.



4. Which challenges are most crucial for your company (5-most important, 1-not a challenge)?

                                                   On a 1-5 scale evaluate the importance for your business of the challenges
                                                                                     listed

                                                         1                2                 3                4               5

 Approaching new buyers/finding new
 markets

 Investments in new
 machinery/equipment/facilities

 Introduction of quality management
 standards

 Optimization of production process

 Hiring skilled workers

 Other:________________

          (please specify)



5. Which of the following areas are most likely to assist your business in establishing cooperation with
foreign company operating in Macedonia (5-most likely, 1-least likely)?

                                                     On a 1-5 scale prioritize the areas that can bring your company contract
                                                                  with foreign company operating in Macedonia

                                                         1                2                3                 4               5

 Improved communication and marketing
 skills

 Improved quality management

 Access to finance



                                                                                                                        63
 Increased capacities of the employees

 Technological and engineering expertise

 Other:________________

         (please specify)



6. Which type of support would you find most useful and needed for your company (5-hihgly needed, 1-
not needed)?

                                           On a 1-5 scale prioritize the type of support needed for your company

                                              1              2              3               4               5

 Support to improve communication and
 marketing strategy (reaching out to new
 buyers)

 Support to increase quality

 Access to finance

 Training for the employees

 Technological and engineering support

 Other:________________

         (please specify)



7. More generally, what are your future ambitions for your company, and how do you see the
program helping you to realize them? Please elaborate further details for the type of technical
assistance you would require what difference is going to make for your company and how will your
company benefit from it?




                                                                                                      64
No more than 1 page



I, the undersigned, herewith express our interest to be included in the activity upgrading of suppliers
and technology extension, as part of the Pilot Supplier Development Program executed by the World
Bank.


Position:
Name of signatory:
Signature:
Date:




                                                                                                          65
