Stories of Impact
A series highlighting achievements
in disaster risk management




Gender Inclusion in
Post-Disaster Housing
Reconstruction in India

REGION: SOUTH ASIA                                  PROJECT DESCRIPTION:
FOCUS: INCLUSIVE COMMUNITY
RESILIENCE                                          In June 2013, the northern state of Uttarakhand in India
COUNTRY: INDIA                                      experienced an unprecedented rainfall that resulted in ﬂash
                                                    ﬂoods and landslides. The continuous rain affected over
                                                    900,000 people, resulting in 580 human lives being lost, more
                                                    than 4,000 persons reported missing and over 100,000 festival
                                                    pilgrims being stranded. To assist with the recovery process,
                                                    the Joint Rapid Damage and Needs Assessment (JRDNA) was
                                                    conducted by the World Bank, with support from the Global
                                                    Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) and
                                                    in partnership with the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The
RESULTS:                                            JRDNA estimated that maximum damage was to transport and
•   About 2,200 resilient houses have been          housing sector – about 9,000 kilometers of roads and 3,320
    reconstructed (out of 2500 planned).            houses were damaged.
    Among the total beneﬁciaries, over 10%
    are widows, and another 10% are female-         In response, the World Bank and GFDRR have been supporting
    headed households.                              the Uttarakhand Disaster Recovery Project (UDRP), which
                                                    aims to build resilience, restore connectivity, and support
•   A new Housing Reconstruction Policy
                                                    capacity augmentation to be able to respond to future risk
    was created, outlining beneﬁciary
    eligibility, selection criteria (with special   effectively. Housing reconstruction is aimed at reducing
    attention to widows and women headed            vulnerability of the affected population by providing safe house
    houses), design, construction parameters,       for living and ensuring gender inclusion.
    stipulations for implementation, insurance
    and more.
•   Over 50% of the beneﬁciaries received
    their installments in joint bank accounts
    that enabled women to have an equitable
    say in ﬁnancing home reconstruction.
CONTEXT:
The State of Uttarakhand is endowed with vast natural
resources, and is one of the most frequented pilgrimage/
tourist destinations in India. However, the State also has a
very fragile terrain that is also highly prone to earthquakes.
Every year, the State faces signiﬁcant losses, particularly
during the monsoon, due to rains, cloudbursts, landslides,
ﬂoods, hailstorms and water logging events.
Evidence shows that women disproportionately suffer
the impacts of disasters, because of prevailing cultural
values and the unequal distribution of roles, resources, and
power. A large percentage of women in Uttarakhand single
handedly manage their homes, agriculture ﬁelds, and care
for their cattle. The male members of the family usually
migrate to towns to earn a living for their families. Even
though women in villages become the heads of the family,
they have little legal rights over the land.

APPROACH:
The Housing reconstruction program was designed to
be an Owner Driven Construction of Houses (ODCH),
supporting ﬂood affected population to build houses with
disaster resilient techniques. This beneﬁted communities in
a number of ways:
•   The Housing reconstruction policy encouraged joint
    titling of land and joint bank accounts.
•   Engaging a technical and social support agency
    signiﬁcantly increased awareness of women
    beneﬁciaries to their entitlements and supported single
    women headed houses to reconstruct damaged homes.
•   To inﬂuence behavior and skill for masons in the state
    through hands-on training program for on earthquake
    resistant construction and retroﬁtting techniques.
•   To curb open defecation as well as provide women and
    girls with privacy and safety, construction of toilets       LESSONS LEARNED:
    were ensured in every reconstructed house under the          Giving women a voice in climate and disaster risk
    project.                                                     management boosts resilience. Consultation with
                                                                 both men and women at all stages ensured that all
NEXT STEPS:                                                      beneﬁciaries’ needs were addressed. ODCH generated
                                                                 a sense of accomplishment and ownership — especially
The ODCH experience is found successful and its learnings
                                                                 among women never before encouraged to own land
were reviewed while designing post 2015 earthquake
                                                                 or other ﬁxed assets. A novel aspect was women’s
housing reconstruction program in Nepal. As the program          adaptation to construction technicalities.
in Uttarakhand is approaching towards completion, the
government is working for provision of public utilities like     Improved data on gender is an important step towards
drinking water and electricity for the all newly constructed     building inclusive resilience. Gender-disaggregated data
houses.                                                          analysis at the outset would strengthen the design and
                                                                 implementation of post-disaster interventions targeting
                                                                 the most vulnerable. Complementary to the Damage and
                                                                 Needs Assessment, sector- and theme-based gender
Contact                                                          analysis can inform early recovery and reconstruction,
Deepak Singh
dsingh2@worldbank.org                                            improve coordination between interventions, and support
Learn more at                   *ALL MONETARY VALUES IN USD      the transition from recovery to development.
www.gfdrr.org
