Roadmap for
Safer Schools
guidance note




Global Program For Safer Schools
A Road Map to promote a long-term systematic
approach to improving the safety of school
infrastructure at risk from natural hazards.
2
                                                                                                 Contents




Acknowledgments
The preparation of this “Roadmap for Safer Schools” was led by Fernando Ramirez Cortes under the
Global Program for Safe Schools of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR). The
team consisted of Niels B. Holm-Nielsen, Vica Rosario Bogaerts, Oscar Anil Ishizawa, Carina
Fonseca Ferreira, Juan Carlos Atoche, Jesus Gomez Sanchez, and Laisa Daza Obando . The
document was developed by Arup International Development, Hayley Gryc, and Joseph Stables in
collaboration with the Global Program for Safer Schools team.

Our particular thanks go to everyone who contributed to the development and review of the Roadmap,
especially Alanna Simpson (Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist, GFDRR-World Bank), Artessa
Saldivar-Sali (Municipal Engineer, World Bank), David Mason (Urban Specialist Consultant, World
Bank), Elif Ayhan (Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist, World Bank), Ko Takeuchi (Disaster Risk
Management Specialist, World Bank), Marc Forni (Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist, World Bank),
Zaruhi Tokhmakhyan (Senior Infrastructure Specialist, World Bank,), Jo da Silva (Director, Arup Interna-
tional Development), Matthew Free (Director, Natural Hazards and Risk, Arup), Damian Grant (Associate,
Seismology and Risk, Arup), Tigran Shmis (Senior Education Specialist, World Bank) and Ines Kudo (Senior
Education Specialist, World Bank).




                                                                                                            i
     Contents




ii
                                                          Contents




Contents
Introduction                            vi



Background                              vii

Comprehensive School Safety Framework   viii



Understanding Safer Schools             x

Deﬁning a Safe School                   x

Understanding Risk                      x

Hazard                                  x

Site Location                           xi

Physical Planning                       xi

Building Planning                       xi

Characteristics of a Safe School        xii



Safe School Roadmap                     xiv

Purpose of the Roadmap                  xiv

Objectives                              xiv

Who is it for?                          xiv
Structure of the Roadmap                xiv

How to use it?                          xvi



Steps 1– 5                              (See next page)

Steps, Modules, and Activities


Glossary                                66




                                                                     iii
     Contents


     Step 1                      Step 1 Introduction                                               1
     School           Module 1   1.1.1 Identify the natural hazards that pose                      2
                                        a risk to school infrastructure
     Infrastructure
     Baseline         Module 2   1.2.1 Create an inventory of existing school infrastructure       4
                                 1.2.2 Examine the physical characteristics of                     6
                                        existing school infrastructure
                                 1.2.3 Identify existing interventions                             8
                                 1.2.4 Identify the schools exposed to the natural hazards         9


                      Module 3   1.3.1 Identify the demand new school infrastructure               10
                                 1.3.2 Understand government’s school infrastructure plans         12


     Step 2                      Step 2 Introduction                                               15

     Construction     Module 1   2.1.1 Identify the planning regulation documents and              16
                                        understand what they cover and exclude
     Environment                 2.1.2 Identify the building regulation documents and              18
                                        understand what they cover and exclude
                                 2.1.3 Map the history of the regulatory documents                 20
                                 2.1.4 Identifying the regulatory process                          21


                      Module 2   2.2.1 Map key stakeholders                                        22
                                 2.2.2 Identify capacity and capability of key stakeholders        23
                                 2.2.3 Identify procurement and                                    24
                                        construction management processes


                      Module 3   2.3.1 Identify typical construction materials                     26
                                 2.3.2 Identify school infrastructure designs                      28


     Step 3                      Step 3 Introduction                                               31

     Financial        Module 1   3.1.1 Identify previous investment programs in con-
                                        struction of new school infrastructure
                                                                                                   32

     Environment                 3.1.2 Identify previous investment programs for                   33
                                        existing school infrastructure, including those
                                        for repair/retroﬁtting and maintenance


                      Module 2   3.2.1 Identify current and future investment                      35
                                        programs for new school infrastructure
                                 3.2.2 Identify current and future investment programs             36
                                        (repair/ retroﬁtting) for existing school infrastructure


                      Module 3   3.3.1 Identify the funding mechanisms, investment                 38
                                        requirements, and key decision makers



iv
                                                                                       Contents


Step 4                     Step 4 Introduction                                         41
Disaster Risk   Module 1   4.1.1 Deﬁne risk assessment objective                       42

Assessment                 4.1.2 Undertake a hazard analysis                           43
                           4.1.3 Build the exposure model for school infrastructure    45
                           4.1.4 Build the structural vulnerability                    46
                                 component of school infrastructure


                Module 2   4.2.1 Carry out disaster risk assessment                    48
                                 for school infrastructure


                Module 3   4.3.1 Inform the prioritization processes for risk          50
                                 reduction in school infrastructure


Step 5                     Step 5 Introduction                                         53

Safer School    Module 1   5.1.1 Enable structural rehabilitation/retroﬁtting          54
                           5.1.2 Enable functional rehabilitation                      56
Investment
                           5.1.3 Design intervention strategy and                      57
Opportunities                    investment scenarios
                           5.1.4 Undertake cost-beneﬁt analysis                        58


                Module 2   5.2.1 Consider planning and design gaps and opportunities   60
                           5.2.2 Consider regulatory framework improvements            62
                           5.2.3 Consider implementation process adjustments           64




                                                                                                  v
     Introduction




     Introduction
     In 2014, the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery (GFDRR) launched the Global Program
     for Safer Schools (GPSS). Through the GPSS, GFDRR support programs designed to establish safer school
     facilities in countries where the government has ﬁrmly committed to a reform or investment program in
     the education sector. GFDRR provides technical assistance to ensure that such education sector programs
     ﬁnance safer school facilities.

     The aim of the GPSS is to make school facilities, and the communities they serve, more resilient to natural
     hazards. The program’s objective is therefore to save lives, reduce the physical impact of natural disasters
     on school infrastructure, and minimize the negative educational outcomes resulting from natural
     disasters. Activities supported by the program focus on supporting Ministries of Education to avoid the
     creation of new risks and reduce existing risks through risk-informed construction and retroﬁtting of
     school infrastructure.

     As part of a partnership with GFDRR, Arup International Development is providing technical support
     to GPSS. This includes the development of this guidance note for the preparation of safer school projects
     and programs.




vi
                                                                                                          Background




Background
Each year countries suﬀer great tragedy when natural disasters destroy schools and disrupt children’s
education. In addition to causing immediate harm to children, there is mounting evidence that the direct
impact of natural disasters can translate into a series of indirect long-term eﬀects. For some time, multilat-
eral and bilateral development ﬁnance institutions, United Nations (UN) agencies, and nongovernmental
organizations (NGOs) have been engaged in eﬀorts to make schools resilient to natural hazards. Despite
these eﬀorts, however, the safety of school facilities in many disaster-prone countries is unknown, and
governments and donors continue to ﬁnance new school construction without taking suﬃcient account
of safety.

Comprehensive School Safety Framework
The Comprehensive School Safety (CSS) Framework is a global framework in support of two
initiatives: the Worldwide Initiative for Safe Schools and the Global Alliance for Disaster Risk Reduction
and Resilience in the Education Sector1. It was developed in preparation for the third UN World
Conference on Disaster Risk Reduction in 2015. The CSS Framework rests on three pillars (ﬁgure 1):

         Safe learning facilities (school infrastructure)
         School disaster management
         Risk reduction and resilience education




1   For the framework, see UNISDR and Global Alliance for Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience in the
     Education Sector, “Comprehensive School Safety,”
     http://gadrrres.net/uploads/ﬁles/resources/Comprehensive-School-Safety-Framework-Dec-2014.pdf.
                                                                                                                       vii
       Background




                                                              pillar 1
                                                       Safe Learning Facilities
                                                               Safe site selection
                                                                 Building codes
                                                             Performance standards

                          Building                          Disaster resilient design                       Structural safety
                      maintenance                               Builder training                            education
                     Non-structural                         Construction supervision                        Construction as
                        mitigation                              Quality control                             educational
                         Fire safety                                                                        opportunity
                                                                  Remodeling
                                                                    Retroﬁt



                                     pillar 2
                                  School Disaster                                              pillar 3
                                   Management                                            Risk Reduction and
                                Assessment & Planning                                    Resilience Education
                         Physical & Environmental Protection                                 Formal curriculum
                             Response Skills & Provisions                                  Integrations & infusion
                             Representative/participatory                            Teacher training & staﬀ development
                                       SDM committee                                   Consensus-based key messages
                              Educational continuity plan                            Extracurricular & community-based
                                                                                             informal education
                            Standard operating procedures
                                Contingency planning




                       Household disaster plan                             Multi-hazard risk assessment
                       Family reuniﬁcation plan                            Education sector analysis
                                   School drills                           Child-centered assessment & planning




                    figure 1
                    CSS Framework
                    Source: UNISDR and Global Alliance for Disaster Risk Reduction and Resilience in the
                    Education Sector, “Comprehensive School Safety,”
                    http://gadrrres.net/uploads/ﬁles/resources/
                    Comprehensive-School-Safety-Framework-Dec-2014.pdf.
                    © UNISDR. Reproduced with permission; further permission required for reuse.




viii
                                                                                                               Background




This Roadmap directly relates to Pillar 1 of the CSS Framework, safe learning facilities. To integrate safety
into school infrastructure, there needs to be an understanding of disaster risk as well as the school infra-
structure project cycle, which includes planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance.




This Roadmap is focused speciﬁcally on school infrastructure (which includes the school site and buildings).
For investment opportunities to be eﬀective and to have maximum impact at community and national
scales, it is important that this support is coordinated with investments in school disaster management, risk
reduction and resilience in education, and disaster preparedness in other sectors.
These other investments may seek to

         Mobilize political commitment for school safety.
         A commitment to act and provide resources should be sought from key political inﬂuencers
         and decision makers.
         Build social demand for school safety.
         Communities need to be aware of the importance of safe schools in order to create a commu-
         nity-driven desire for safe school infrastructure. Using crowdsourcing apps (such as “How
         safe is your school?”2 ) is a powerful way to raise awareness as well as to capture baseline data
         for measuring the eﬀectiveness of interventions in the future.
         Offer training and development.
         There is an opportunity to use safe school construction programs as education tools by
         providing associated training programs for both practical skills and awareness.




2   The app is available at https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/unisdr-school-safety-assessment/id786074863?mt=8
                                                                                                                            ix
    Understanding Safer Schools




    Understanding Safer Schools

    Deﬁning a “Safe” School
    School safety can mean diﬀerent things to diﬀerent people depending on their perception of risk. Typically,
    it is assumed that a safe school is able to withstand extreme events without collapsing and that the risk of
    loss of life is low: while the building may sustain extensive damage, occupants are able to exit safely and/
    or failure of the building is localized. In many instances, however, it is also desirable to minimize damage,
    since school buildings play an important role in creating resilient communities. Continuity of schooling is
    critical to rapid recovery, and the schools themselves may serve as a community refuge, distribution center,
    or resource center in the immediate aftermath of a disaster. Consequently, focusing on “safe and resilient”
    schools (rather than on “safe” schools) is more appropriate and better reﬂects a desire to minimize disruption
    as well as prevent loss of life or assets.

    Understanding Risk
    The extent to which a school is safe will depend on its location, construction, and operation. Four factors
    contribute to reducing (or increasing) risk: hazards, site location, physical planning, and quality of buildings.
    These are shown in ﬁgure 3 and discussed in more detail below.


                                        location                      construction & operation


                Risk = Hazard                 Exposure                   Vulnerability



                               Hazard           Site Location                   Building




                                                  Physical
                                                  Planning



                                     figure 3
                                     Factors contributing to safe schools mapped against the deﬁnition of risk.


    Hazard
    The risk posed by natural hazards is determined in the ﬁrst instance by the likelihood of a particular
    type and magnitude of event occurring. The risk of a major earthquake with the potential to devastate a
    community might be comparable to that of annual hurricanes, which cause relatively minor damage more
    frequently. The assessment of all relevant hazards is a prerequisite for achieving safe schools.


x
                                                                                    Understanding Safer Schools



Site Location
How hazards are experienced at the local level relates to exposure, which depends on the site location and
physical characteristics, including soil conditions, topography, vegetation, and proximity to water bodies or
fault lines. For instance, areas characterized by sandy soils and a high water table may be prone to liquefac-
tion following an earthquake, while proximity to water bodies or deforested slopes may increase ﬂood risk
following periods of heavy rainfall.

Physical Planning
Exposure can be mitigated (or compounded) by the physical planning of the site. For instance, wind loads
on buildings can be signiﬁcantly reduced by the correct orientation, and civil engineering works, such as
retaining walls, slope stabilization, and drainage, can substantially mitigate exposure to landslides and
ﬂooding.

Building Quality
The vulnerability of a school is inﬂuenced by the quality of buildings, including both structural and
non-structural elements as well as building services. Inappropriate design and poor-quality materials or
workmanship—the result of limited resources, corruption, or a move away from vernacular construction
methodologies—have all contributed to high levels of vulnerability and the resulting collapse of numerous
schools in recent years.

Some structural typologies are more suitable than others to withstand particular hazards; for instance, a
lightweight timber frame is well-suited to areas subject to earthquakes but not high winds. The conﬁgu-
ration of the building, the size and manner of connecting structural elements, and the quality of materials
and workmanship will all aﬀect the structural capacity, which determines the building’s ability to withstand
extreme loads.

Signiﬁcant modiﬁcations, including extensions, large openings, and additional stories, may compromise
the original design and also increase vulnerability; the same is true if there is deterioration in the building’s
condition, for instance due to corrosion, settlement, or cracking.

Additional vulnerability results from non-structural elements. Furniture, signage, pipes and ducts, and
rooftop water tanks can contribute to increased vulnerability if they are inadequately ﬁxed to the structure.
Inadequately protected hazardous materials and combustible materials can also make buildings more
vulnerable.

The construction methodology aﬀects how a building is maintained and repaired; if the methodology leads
to deterioration, there is an impact on safety.

Damage that may be costly or time-consuming to repair is unacceptable in a safe and resilient school. To
promote safety, greater emphasis should be placed not only on the quality of design and construction, but
on the ability to maintain, repair, and adapt facilities without compromising their structural integrity.
Inadequate maintenance budgets, uncertainty over who is responsible for maintenance, and imported
construction technologies may make schools less safe over time. Maintaining access and continuity of
basic services after a disaster, particularly water and power, is also important and may be achieved through
protective measures or standby (or backup) systems.



                                                                                                                    xi
      Understanding Safer Schools



      Characteristics of a Safe School
      Ten characteristics of a safe school have been developed based on a review of best-practice literature and
      good engineering practices for designing, delivering, and evaluating schools. These are summarized in table 1.

      Characteristic 1 relates to the measurements needed in order to establish the design criteria; Characteristics
      2 and 3 relate to the site location; and Characteristics 4 to 10 apply to the building itself (including building
      services and non-structural elements).

      In countries where there is a mature regulatory framework that is enforced, these characteristics will
      already be incorporated in building codes and practices, so that compliance becomes the predominant issue
      in achieving safe schools. Elsewhere, the characteristics provide a basis for developing assessment methods
      that identify the action needed at the various stages of the project delivery cycle or to support diﬀerent
      methods of implementation.




xii
                                                                                     Understanding Safer Schools



table 1
Characteristics of a Safe School



   focus                           characteristic

                                   1.   A hazard assessment has been undertaken to identify the types of
          Assessment                    hazard that the school may experience (e.g., tsunamis, volcanoes,
                                        earthquakes).

                                   2.   A site assessment has been undertaken to identify key features that
                                        may impact exposure to speciﬁc hazards, including topography, soil
                                        conditions, proximity to water bodies/fault lines, vegetation.
          Site Location            3.   Appropriate mitigation measures have been taken in the physical
                                        planning of the site to adequately mitigate the risks identiﬁed as a
                                        result of the hazard and site assessments.



                                   4.   The building makes use of an appropriate structural typology—one
                                        that takes account of the most prevalent hazards.
                                   5.   The building conﬁguration is reasonably symmetric, allows safe
                                        egress, and avoids irregular features.
                                   6.   Signiﬁcant building modiﬁcations (e.g., openings, canopies, additional
                                        stories) have not been constructed unless allowed for speciﬁcally in
                                        the building design.
                                   7.   The structural capacity of key elements of the building (e.g.,
                                        foundations, beams, columns, walls, roof, connections) have been
                                        assessed for their ability to transfer vertical and lateral loads.

          Building                 8.   The selection of the building’s non-structural elements (e.g., facades,
                                        internal walls, storage of hazardous materials, equipment, signage) has
                                        taken account of the prevalent hazards, and elements are adequately
                                        ﬁxed to the main structure.
                                   9.   There are systems in place to assure the quality of materials and
                                        workmanship during construction, and there are no signs of
                                        structural deterioration (e.g., settlement, cracking, corrosion) in key
                                        elements of the building (e.g., foundations, beams, columns, walls, roof,
                                        connections) that might impair the structural performance.
                                   10. There is adequate funding and local skill available to carry out regular

                                        maintenance and repair of the building and site infrastructure (e.g.,
                                        drainage channels, access and evacuation routes).


                                                                                                                    xiii
      Safe School Roadmap




      Safe School Roadmap

      Purpose and Objectives of the Roadmap
      The purpose of this Roadmap is to enable World Bank task team leaders (TTLs) to engage with the ministries
      of education, ﬁnance, and public works within a country so as to promote informed investment in the safety
      of new or existing school infrastructure at risk from natural hazards.

      The intention is to promote a long-term, systematic approach to improving the safety of school infrastruc-
      ture globally that uses a quantitative risk assessment to deﬁne needs and priorities. The focus is primarily on
      public school infrastructure.

      The speciﬁc objectives of the Roadmap are as follows:

              To help the World Bank TTL identify entry points for Bank support (ﬁnancing, policy reform,
              advisory services) to the education sector that facilitate the design and implementation of
              safer schools programs
              To inﬂuence policy reforms and wider investments in risk reduction that create safer school
              environments
              To inform long- term national strategies that prioritize safety at scale and that relate to
              previous and ongoing activities in the education sector

      Audience
      The Safer Schools Roadmap is an operational tool that will guide the interactions of World Bank TTLs with
      relevant ministries on the topic of school infrastructure safety. It can be used by TTLs from a variety of
      diﬀerent backgrounds, including education, disaster risk management/reduction, and engineering (construc-
      tion). It is important that TTLs lacking background or experience in both disaster risk reduction and (school)
      construction seek help from others with the appropriate experience.
      The Roadmap itself, however, uses concepts and language that are accessible for those without experience in
      disaster risk reduction and construction, and it provides guidance on the technical expertise that is required
      by the activities.

      Structure of the Roadmap
      The Roadmap consists of six steps that follow a logical sequence from diagnosis to analysis, opportunity, and
      investment (ﬁgure 4). This guidance note focuses on Steps 1 – 5 ; Step 6 is the discussion with the government
      about Bank support.

      Each step of the Roadmap corresponds to a section of the guidance note. The beginning of each section
      presents an overview of that step, which outlines the purpose, key objectives, and number of modules for
      that step along with related activities. Each step will result in a key deliverable or deliverables that will
      enable TTLs to build an evidence-based argument (ﬁgure 5).




xiv
                                                         Safe School Roadmap




        Step 1
        School
        Infrastructure
        Baseline



        Step 2           Step 4          Step 5                Step 6
        Construction     Disaster Risk   Safer School          Bank
        Environment      Analysis        Investment            Engagement
                                         Opportunities



        Step 3
        Financial
        Environment




figure 4
Safer Schools Roadmap




                                                                               xv
      Safe School Roadmap




                         Step 1
                            Purpose

                            Key Objectives what the TTL should know at the end of the step

                            module 1.1
                            activity 1.1.1                      activity 1.1.2


                                  Description/Guidance                Description/Guidance



                                  Output                              Output



                                  Local Partners                      Local Partners



                                  Technical Expertise                 Technical Expertise




                            module 1.2
                            activity 1.2.1                      activity 1.2.2


                                  Description/Guidance                Description/Guidance



                                  Output                              Output



                                  Local Partners                      Local Partners



                                  Technical Expertise                 Technical Expertise




                            Deliverables(s)




       figure 5
       Structure of Each Step




xvi
                                            Step #
                                              Module #
                                               Activity #




                   Activity Title

             This highlights the
        objective(s) of the step
       that this activity aims to
                         achieve


            Description of the
         activity contents and
              guidance on the
        methodology to carry it
                out effectively




     Suggested local partners to
       engage with to help carry
    out this activity and achieve
                    this objective




                                     Technical expertise         Output of this activity that may
                                     required to contribute to   feed into the final deliverable of
                                     or lead this activity       the step




figure 6
Activity Page




                                                                                                      xvii
xviii
                                                                                                 School Infrastructure Baseline
                                                                                                                                  1

Step 1
School Infrastructure Baseline
Purpose                                              Objectives
To establish a baseline of existing school                 Identify the quantity and quality of existing school infrastruc-
infrastructure facilities and the demand                   ture
for new school infrastructure.
                                                           Determine the exposure of school infrastructure to natural
                                                           hazards
                                                           Evaluate the potential shortfall of new school infrastructure


                                                           Estimate the scale of potential repair, retroﬁt, (re)construction,
                                                           and relocation needs

module                                    activity                                                                objective
                                              1 . 1 . 1 Identify the natural hazards that pose
1.1 Natural Hazards
                                                         a risk to school infrastructure


                                              1 . 2 . 1 Create an inventory of existing school infrastructure


                                              1 . 2 . 2 Examine the physical characteristics
                                                        of existing school infrastructure
1.2 Existing School
    Infrastructure
                                              1 . 2 . 3 Identify existing interventions



                                              1 . 2 . 4 Identify the schools exposed to the natural hazards


                                              1 . 3 . 1 Identify the demand for new school in-
                                                        frastructure and estimate shortfall
1.3 New School
    Infrastructure
                                              1 . 3 . 2 Understand government’s school infrastructure plans




Deliverables
The key deliverables will be the following:

› GIS database that contains information gathered in the activities above, including locations of existing schools,
  available hazard data, and structural and non-structural characteristics of the existing schools. This database will be
  an important tool for monitoring and reporting on the progress of school infrastructure programs over time. It may be
  especially useful in securing additional funds and gaining political support. It will also be needed in further stages for
  the design, implementation, and monitoring of speciﬁc rehabilitation programs.
› Report summarizing the scale of potential school infrastructure construction needs.


                                                                                                                                  1
                                                  |
            Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 1: Natural Hazards
1.1.1




               1.1.1
               Identify the natural hazards that pose
               a risk to school infrastructure
               objective


               Guidance
               As part of the initial diagnosis of school infrastructure, it is necessary to understand the range of
               hazards that may compromise the planning, design, construction, repair, retroﬁtting, and operation
               of school infrastructure projects. This activity is an initial screening of the exposure of school
               infrastructure to natural hazards; it aims to collect existing information about and knowledge of
               natural hazards that pose a risk to school infrastructure. At this stage no hazard or risk assessment is
               envisioned (this will be carried out in Step 4 ).

               In many countries the risk to school infrastructure posed by natural hazards is not understood, or it
               has not been assessed in enough detail to inform the development of an investment plan for school
               infrastructure. However, countries (school communities, institutions, government) often have a basic
               knowledge of the natural hazards that aﬀect school infrastructure based on previous events. There is
               more likely to be information on natural hazards that occur frequently, such as hurricanes or ﬂoods,
               and less likely to be information on infrequent hazards, such as earthquakes or tsunamis, especially
               if these hazards have not occurred in recent history.

               Possible sources of information on hazards include existing hazard maps or historical event maps
               produced by relevant government departments (not necessarily the Ministry of Education [MoE];
               historical damage assessments; existing hazard/risk studies and assessments conducted for the
               education sector; and data on disasters caused by natural hazards.

               Existing information can be identiﬁed through a combination of stakeholder consultations (in both
               the education and disaster risk reduction sectors, and at both government and community levels)
               and desktop (multi)hazard studies, which review published research studies along with available
               hazard maps and publicly available data (e.g., SRTM topographic data available on the U.S. Geological
               Survey website). Where possible, evidence should be corroborated by more than one source; this
               corroboration may involve asking the same questions to diﬀerent stakeholders and referencing the
               answers to existing sources of information. Data will need to be collated, reviewed, and commented
               on to identify the range, frequency, and intensity of the hazards that exist in the speciﬁed location.

               Where hazard maps exist, they can be used to help establish a preliminary overview of the spatial
               exposure of school infrastructure by integrating them into the geographic information system (GIS)
               database to be developed as part of this step (under Activity 1 . 2 . 4 ).




        2
                                                                                |
                                        Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 1: Natural Hazards



Local Partners
The MoE and its related departments need to be educated consumers of regional and local hazard
information, and must be able to link this information speciﬁcally to school sites and facilities as well
as the routes to access them.

Government departments—including the Ministry of Public Works (MoPW), National Disaster
Management Agency, Ministry of the Interior, national and local ﬁre departments, Planning
Department, agriculture sector authorities, and health sector authorities—may have government
records on natural hazards. Other key partners could include meteorological and geotechnical
agencies, the construction industry (engineering ﬁrms), local universities, NGOs and international
NGOs (INGOs), insurance companies, and consultancy ﬁrms.

The insurance industry typically has a comprehensive data set on natural hazards; and a number of
initiatives, including the partnership of Risk Management Solutions (RMS) with the United Nations
Oﬃce for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) and World Bank, have been developed to provide
governments with open access to insurance companies’ data and catastrophe models.

Technical Expertise
This activity should be carried out by technical consultants or academics with speciﬁc expertise in
natural hazards.

Output
A technical note summarizing the natural hazards aﬀecting the speciﬁed location should be
developed; the note should also identify whether the information is up to date and where there are
gaps. The note should indicate whether further, more detailed (multi)hazard assessments should be
undertaken; these will inform Activity 4 . 1 . 1 .




                                                                                                            3
                                                      |
              Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 2: Existing School Infrastructure
1. 2 .1




                 1.2.1
                 Create an inventory of
                 existing school infrastructure
                 objective


                 Guidance
                 This activity generates the basic information needed to develop an inventory of existing school
                 infrastructure; this inventory will serve as the baseline from which the extent of risk from natural
                 hazards can be determined, along with potential opportunities for reducing these risks. The
                 inventory should be developed as a geospatial database, such as a GIS, in order to facilitate data
                 analysis and to enable overlaying school locations with hazards to determine exposure. Such a
                 database also provides for comprehensive school mapping and is typically the most signiﬁcant
                 information required for assessing infrastructure improvements at scale.

                 The inventory database will become an important tool for reporting to government on the progress
                 of school infrastructure programs (reconstruction or retroﬁtting), and it will be especially useful for
                 raising additional funds and getting political support for future school infrastructure programs. It is
                 therefore important that the database be formatted so it can be updated easily, and there should be
                 clarity about who owns the database and will manage it going forward.

                 This collection of school-related data will also be very useful for all educational planning, as well
                 planning for purposes of disaster risk reduction and emergency response. Without it, school
                 authorities will not be able to process the data needed for rational planning, resource allocation, and
                 monitoring of school infrastructure.

                 The school infrastructure’s exposure to natural hazards and its vulnerabilities will be incorporated
                 into the inventory during Activities 1 . 2 . 2 and 1 . 2 . 3 , although in practice these activities might be
                 coordinated and carried out simultaneously. Developed nations with fully functioning Education
                 Management Information Systems usually have this information in place. In other countries, the
                 information may be fragmented, and it may be necessary to coordinate data from diﬀerent ministries
                 and government departments or agencies. Any existing inventory or database should be reviewed
                 and used as a basis for this activity. The database should include enough information to clarify
                 the problem but need not necessarily indicate how to prioritize an investment. Where information
                 doesn’t exist or there are gaps, the information should be gathered through a data collection
                 method—e.g., rapid visual assessment (RVA), remote data collection methods, etc.)—that is tailored to
                 the nature of the data, the purpose of the assessment, and the resources available.

                 Local Partners
                 Sectoral agencies typically have detailed information on their assets (e.g., location, age, and number of
                 buildings). It will be important to identify which ministry/government department is responsible for
                 school infrastructure, and it will be essential to involve the relevant government staﬀ in this process
                 to share ownership and responsibility. Information may need to be collected from diﬀerent agencies.

          4
                                                                    |
                          Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 2: Existing School Infrastructure



If information on schools doesn’t exist, a methodology for data collection will need to be developed.
Data can also be obtained through INGOs, NGOs, and others implementing school infrastructure
programs.

Technical Expertise
Technical consultants will need to design and set up the inventory database if one does not already
exist. The Istanbul Seismic Risk Mitigation and Emergency Preparedness Project (ISMEP), for
example, relied on technical assistance input from international experts. A project coordination
committee was also established for ISMEP to coordinate and manage the diﬀerent government
agencies and ﬂow of information. This approach helped build the capacity of the local government to
manage the inventory. Local experts should if possible be engaged in this activity, since they typically
have a good understanding of the characteristics and vulnerability of the local infrastructure.
Where further information needs to be developed, technical consultants should be hired to
undertake the assessment and collect data on school infrastructure. A bottom-up approach to
collecting nontechnical data is relatively inexpensive and can be done through crowdsourcing of
information from school principals, teachers, parents, etc. Alternately, a simple approach can be
developed that can be implemented on site by nontechnical staﬀ, or with easy-to-ﬁnd local technical support.

Output
The scope of the database (nature and detail of the data) should be tailored to its purpose and should
be deﬁned by technical consultants and the ministry/government department responsible for school
infrastructure. A database of existing school infrastructure should include at least the following:

        Date of survey
        Number of school buildings and classrooms, including building/block reference iden-
        tiﬁcation
        Number of occupants (students, staﬀ )
        Location (GPS coordinates) to enable GIS mapping and overlay with hazard maps (in
        Activity 1 . 2 . 4 ), so that the extent of exposure can be identiﬁed
        Education service stream (primary, secondary, etc.)
        Urban/rural
        Public/private school (asset owner)
        Age of school buildings
        Photographic reference
        Number of stories
        Basic information about the type of structure of the school buildings (e.g., load-bear-
        ing masonry, reinforced concrete frame, steel frame, etc.)
        Basic information about the functional conditions of the school buildings (e.g., water
        and sanitation)
If one of the purposes of the inventory is to support the disaster risk analysis of Step 4 , more
information related to structural and non-structural characteristics and to the condition (level of
deterioration) of the school buildings could be required, as explained in Activity 1 . 2 . 2 .
                                                                                                               5
                                                    |
            Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 2: Existing School Infrastructure
1.2.2




               1.2.2
               Examine the physical characteristics
               of existing school infrastructure
               objective


               Guidance
               The physical characteristics of the school buildings inﬂuence their vulnerability.

               The physical characteristics of school infrastructure may be classiﬁed as follows:
                       Structural characteristics. In engineering terminology, these are the system of
                       structural elements that provide building stability and resistance to external actions
                       (e.g., earthquakes, wind, gravity) and that are often known as the structural typology.
                       This classiﬁcation needs to consider the building’s condition, including historical
                       or recent damage, since damage typically inﬂuences the response of the structural
                       typology.
                       Nonstructural characteristics. These are mostly related to the building envelope (if
                       not part of the structural system) and include ﬁnishes such as windows, ceilings, and
                       building equipment.
               During this activity data should be collected, either through existing data sets or through primary
               sourcing, to build into the inventory of existing school infrastructure initiated in Activity 1 . 2 . 1 . The
               information gathered will be used to categorize school buildings by structural typology. It will also
               be used to get a high-level understanding of buildings’ vulnerabilities and typical condition/historical
               damages for the risk assessment as part of Step 4 ; this assessment will inform the development of
               a prioritized investment plan in school infrastructure as part of Step 5 . The data collection in this
               activity should be coordinated with activities in Step 4 to ensure that the data’s level of detail and
               format are appropriate for use in the risk assessment.

               Preliminary categorization and vulnerability appraisal can be made by comparing how the physical
               characteristics collected above compare to appropriate hazard-resistant details—that is, whether the
               structural typology and building conﬁguration are appropriate for the hazards present (reduced roof
               weight for seismic resistance, roof tie-down details for wind resistance, etc.).

               Depending on the existing information available, it may be necessary to gather new information
               through a comprehensive ﬁeld survey and to incorporate it into the assessment undertaken in
               Activity 1 . 2 . 1 . A methodology can be created to collect detailed structural data about each school
               building and to cover many (preferably all) schools by a high-level walk-through. The data should
               include both structural and non-structural elements that contribute to the building’s performance
               during an event, as well as site conditions. If comprehensive ﬁeld surveys of every school are not
               feasible because of limited resources, some strategy for prioritizing schools—for example, schools
               in the most exposed locations—should be developed; or only a sample of school buildings could be
               surveyed (using the stratiﬁed method of the Raosoft sample size calculator [http://www.raosoft.
               com/samplesize.html]). The sample of schools could be categorized into subgroup, such as structural
        6
                                                                      |
                            Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 2: Existing School Infrastructure



typology (if known), type of school (public/private, etc.), school level (kindergarten/primary,
secondary, university, etc.), number of students, and location (to ensure that a statistically representa-
tive sample of all schools is assessed).

Other sources of information to supplement primary survey data include; existing model school
designs and existing damage assessments. Depending on the appropriateness of the existing
information, it may be used directly or to prioritize existing schools for inspection.

Local Partners
Partners are the same as those described for Activity 1 . 2 . 1 .

Technical Expertise
Structural engineers, speciﬁcally those with expertise in the hazards identiﬁed in Activity 1 . 1 . 1 ,
should be contracted to design and develop the assessment methodology and provide training and
guidance for those undertaking the surveys. See also the expertise described for Activity 1 . 2 . 1 .

To develop a robust and replicable process for the building assessment, there needs to be an under-
standing of who will be undertaking the assessment and establishing the tools for quality reporting
and communication. A rigorous assessment process requires the following:
     a.   Clarity about the purpose of the assessment and the action to be taken based on the
          outcome
     b.   Competent assessors with appropriate training
     c.   A robust and replicable assessment process
     d.   A standard reporting format that records the basis of the assessment and the key
          ﬁndings
     e.   An eﬀective quality assurance procedure
     f.   A database or platform that can readily collate and analyze assessments

Output
The following data should be input into the existing school infrastructure inventory database
developed in Activity 1 . 2 . 1 :

          Structural typology
          Vulnerability factors, including
             Building conﬁguration (e.g., shape on plan, shape on elevation, con-
             ﬁguration of openings, number of bays, roof shape)
             Modiﬁcations
             Existing interventions (repair, retroﬁt)
             Dimensions of key building components, such as foundations,
             lateral and vertical load system, ﬂoors, roof
             Non-structural elements
             Physical condition (e.g., historical/recent damages, material deterioration, settlements)



                                                                                                              7
                                                    |
            Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 2: Existing School Infrastructure
1.2.3




               1.2.3
               Identify existing interventions

               O bjective


               Guidance
               This activity identiﬁes any repair or retroﬁtting programs that have been or are being implemented
               and identiﬁes their impact, associated investments, and the speciﬁc intervention options (repair,
               retroﬁt).

               In areas where a school structural safety program (repair, retroﬁt or reconstruction) is already under
               way, this activity provides critical information for determining where other safe school programs
               should be prioritized. It also helps in deﬁning and selecting a repair/retroﬁt strategy (part of Step 5 )
               that builds on existing capacities and lessons learned. Technical experts (engineers) should review
               all existing interventions to ensure that they are increasing the safety of school infrastructure.
               Information about existing interventions could be collated through the assessment conducted in
               Activity 1 . 2 . 2 .

               As part of this activity, eﬀorts should be made to understand the country’s approach to improving
               school infrastructure safety: Is it nationally coordinated? Is it taking place at the district/local level
               (and not coordinated)? Or does it not exist at all?

               Local Partners
               The MoE and/or MoPW (the latter responsible for education facilities) should have an understanding
               of existing or historical repair or retroﬁtting programs. Depending on how established the regulatory
               framework is and whether it is enforced, any modiﬁcations to buildings should have been approved
               by the appropriate government department.

               Other entities that may also have information on interventions include donors, INGOs, and NGOs
               implementing school infrastructure programs, as well as engineering and architectural associations
               or universities.

               Technical Expertise
               This activity requires technical experts in structural engineering, speciﬁcally those with expertise in
               the hazards identiﬁed in Activity 1 . 1 . 1 and in the retroﬁt and repair of existing buildings.

               Output
               A summary report should be developed that identiﬁes the existing intervention options for the
               common school infrastructure structural typologies identiﬁed in the previous activities. The report
               should review existing interventions for appropriateness, beneﬁt in terms of structural safety,
               quality of implementation, and cost, and it should recommend potential intervention options to be
               included in a possible safe school program.


        8
                                                                     |
                           Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 2: Existing School Infrastructure




                                                                                                                    1 . 2 .4
1 . 2 .4
Identify the schools exposed
to the natural hazards
objective


Guidance
Where hazard maps exist (see Activity 1 . 1 . 1 ), they should be integrated into the inventory developed
in Activities 1 . 2 . 1 and 1 . 2 . 2 . Doing so will enable the TTLs to map the school locations against the
hazard zones to determine both the exposure of school infrastructure assets to natural hazards
and the magnitude of the problem (number of schools/classrooms/occupants in hazard zones). This
information could inform a preliminary estimation of the number of schools that might be relocated
in case the level of risk is unacceptably high.

Information about schools’ location will be most useful if it is in GIS format, which can be analyzed
and updated eﬀectively. The state of California provides a good case study of interoperable school
location information displayed as a visible layer superimposed on the hazard maps.

Local Partners
Partners are the same as those described for Activity 1 . 1 . 1 .

Technical Expertise
The consultants contracted to develop the database should integrate the maps into the GIS database
and analyze the data to identify those schools exposed to natural hazards.

Output
A map showing school locations against hazard zones should be produced.




                                                                                                                9
                                                  |
          Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 3: New School Infrastructure
1 . 3.1




             1.3.1
             Identify the demand for new
             school infrastructure
             objective


             Guidance
             This activity involves understanding the demand for new school infrastructure in order to determine
             (1) if more schools are needed; and (2) if excessive stresses are being placed on existing school in-
             frastructure. It should be noted that the demand for new school infrastructure is not always well
             deﬁned by the MoE.

             There are two key questions to address in this activity:
                  a.   What are the drivers of demand? Answering this question involves identifying the
                       factors that aﬀect the demand for schools, such as the education policy (including
                       compulsory education streams), population, and demographic trends.
                  b.   What is the current demand for new schools? Answering this question involves
                       assessing the demand in diﬀerent locations; identifying any concentrations in
                       urban or rural contexts; determining the diﬀerent levels of demand in the diﬀerent
                       education service streams (kindergarten/primary /secondary); and quantifying the
                       anticipated changes in demand over the short, medium, and long term.
             This activity should seek to determine the current and future shortfall in schools; this information
             will help to inform the prioritization of investment in new or existing facilities.

             Some existing data are likely to be available and may be supplemented through targeted stakeholder
             engagement, such as household surveys, focus group discussions, and meetings with government
             departments and administrators.

             If data are diﬃcult to obtain, demographic research (population, children in school) should be
             undertaken. A high-level assessment mapping of the school locations (see Activity 1 . 2 . 1 ) relative to
             population concentrations is a good way of illustrating areas of potential demand.

             Local Partners
             Education specialists (World Bank TTLs) should be consulted in the ﬁrst instance, along with the
             MoE. The MoE is likely to have speciﬁc information on capacity of schools and numbers of pupils in
             each school, including publications and documents relating to the demand for school infrastructure
             and to education policy.
             Relevant demographic data, satellite imagery, and maps may be available from government
             departments responsible for master planning.




     10
                                                                    |
                             Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 3: New School Infrastructure



Technical Expertise
Education or school infrastructure specialists should be contracted to identify gaps in available
information and undertake analysis to assess the demand for school infrastructure.

Output
Geospatial information should be collected that relates to demand for school infrastructure in the
short, medium, and long term (such as school capacity, walking distance to nearest school, population
density). Findings should be summarized in a report that includes an estimation of investment
required for new school infrastructure.




                                                                                                          11
                                                 |
           Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 3: New School Infrastructure
1 . 3. 2




              1.3.2
              Understand government’s school
              infrastructure plans
              objective


              Guidance
              This activity reviews and identiﬁes the ongoing education policies that inﬂuence the development of
              the school infrastructure in the country. It is concerned with the following:
                      National education policy and its long-term development strategy
                      Integration of school infrastructure policy within national education policies
                      Private education and contributions from nongovernmental organizations
                      Role of religious organizations in school infrastructure policy
                      Government’s education coverage and quality indicators (education levels, rural
                      versus urban)

              Local Partners
              Work should be coordinated with MoE and MoPW and with donors, NGOs, and INGOs supporting
              the government in implementing school infrastructure programs.

              Technical Expertise
              Education or school infrastructure specialists should be contracted to understand government’s
              school infrastructure plans.

              Output
              A report should be produced summarizing current government’s school infrastructure policies, plans,
              and/or programs.




      12
                                     |
Step 1: School Infrastructure Baseline Module 3: New School Infrastructure




                                                                             13
     School Infrastructure Baseline




14
                                                                                               Construction Environment




Step 2                                                                                                                        2
Construction Environment
Purpose                                          Objectives
To gain an understanding of the insti-                  Understand the strengths and weaknesses of the regulatory
tutional environment and regulatory                     framework
framework within which school
                                                        Understand the strengths and weaknesses of the process for
infrastructure is planned, designed,
                                                        implementing school infrastructure
constructed, operated, maintained,
repaired, and retroﬁtted in order to                    Identify vulnerabilities in the construction technology used for
determine the factors placing school                    school infrastructure
infrastructure at risk.                                 Identify opportunities to improve the safety of school infra-
                                                        structure

module                                   activity                                                            objective
                                           2 . 1 . 1 Identify the planning regulation documents
                                                     and understand what they cover and exclude

                                           2 . 1 . 2 Identify the building regulation documents and
                                                     understand what they cover and exclude
2.1 Regulatory
    Environment
                                           2 . 1 . 3 Map the history of the regulatory documents



                                           2 . 1 . 4 Identify the regulatory process



                                           2 . 2 . 1 Map key stakeholders



2.2 Implementation Process                 2 . 2 . 2 Identify capacity and capability of key stakeholders


                                           2 . 2 . 3 Identify procurement and construction
                                                     management processes


                                           2 . 3 . 1 Identify typical construction materials
2.3 Construction
    Technology
                                           2 . 3 . 2 Identify school infrastructure designs




Deliverables
The key deliverable will be a report that identiﬁes the gaps and vulnerabilities aﬀecting safe school construction/retroﬁt-
ting and that recommends improvements to guide policy actions.

                                                                                                                              15
                                                   |
         Step 2: Construction Environment Module 1: Regulatory Environment
2 .1.1




            2.1.1
            Identify the planning regulation documents
            and understand what they cover and exclude
            objective


            Guidance
            Planning regulations provide guidance on where to locate buildings/infrastructure and on how to
            physically plan the site. Proper location and site planning can signiﬁcantly reduce the exposure
            of schools to natural hazards (see box 1). Where they exist, planning regulations typically include
            planning guidelines, processes and requirements, and land use plans. This activity should identify
            what planning regulations exist and what they cover and exclude, along with any potential
            weaknesses and opportunities for improvement to reduce the exposure of school infrastructure.

            The following should be considered:

                     Is there a national development plan or policy, and do the planning regulations align with it?
                     Do up-to-date land use plans exist?
                     Do the planning regulations account for known hazards as identiﬁed in Activity 1 . 1 . 1 ,
                     in particular ﬂooding, storm surge, and volcanoes?
                     Do site selection guidelines exist for school infrastructure or other buildings?
                     How old are the guidelines/regulations, and how often are they updated? Have they
                     been updated since the last hazard event?
                     Are regulatory documents consistent with each other?


            box 1 : regulatory documents
            Regulatory documents (such as building codes and land use plans) are important mechanisms for reducing disaster risk.
            However, they are eﬀective only if they are up to date, incorporate current understanding and best practice, reﬂect local forms
            of construction and perceptions of risk, and are part of a wider culture of safety and environmental concern that includes
            education and training at all levels of society, as well as legislation and enforcement.




    16
                                                                      |
                                  Step 2: Construction Environment Module 1: Regulatory Environment




Local Partners
The relevant partners are MoE and MoPW; the Planning Department or department responsible for
providing planning permission (if one exists); and engineering or architectural consultants/ universi-
ties/institutions/associations.

Technical Expertise
This activity requires construction professionals or academics in engineering or architecture who
have a deep understanding of the regulatory environment.

Output
A report should be produced that summarizes the strengths and weaknesses in the regulatory
framework and highlights opportunities for improvement (this output can be combined with that for
Activity 2 . 1 . 2 ).




                                                                                                         17
                                                    |
          Step 2: Construction Environment Module 1: Regulatory Environment
2 .1. 2




             2.1.2
             Identify the building regulation documents
             and understand what they cover and exclude
             objective


             Guidance
             Building regulations, including building codes and guidelines, provide guidance on how buildings/
             infrastructure should be designed and constructed. Proper design and construction can signiﬁcantly
             reduce the vulnerability of schools to natural hazards. This activity should identify what building
             regulations exist as well as any gaps and potential opportunities for improvement.

             The national building regulations should be identiﬁed and the codes and guidelines reviewed in order
             to understand what they cover in terms of hazards, materials and structural typology, building types
             (schools/educational facilities), new construction, and repair and retroﬁtting of existing buildings.
             This review should determine whether the regulations and codes are in line with existing schools
             and plans for school construction/repair/retroﬁt. The following questions should be considered:

                       Are there building codes and guidelines for both new construction and repair/retroﬁt
                       of existing buildings? Is there speciﬁc guidance for school infrastructure?
                       Are building codes based on international codes and best-practice guidelines? If so,
                       which ones? Have they been adapted to suit the local context (hazard, materials,
                       technologies, communication), and is this adaptation appropriate for the local forms
                       of construction? (See structural typologies identiﬁed in Step 1.)
                       How old are codes and guidelines, and how often are they updated?
                       Do the building guidelines complement the building codes, or were they developed to
                       ﬁll a gap in the building codes?
                       Do they adequately cover the local hazards? Does the building code state that
                       schools, usually deﬁned as critical infrastructure, require a higher performance
                       objective? (See box 2.)
                       Are building regulation documents consistent with each other?


             box 2 : performance objectives
             Performance objectives (POs) are used to deﬁne the maximum level of risk that can be tolerated in terms of damage and
             disruption. Table 2 identiﬁes four levels of performance that reﬂect the extent to which a school is safe or safe and resilient
             based on the approach and terminology developed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).1 International
             codes of practice (e.g., Eurocode 8, Part 1, BS EN 1998-1, and International Building Code: 2009) use importance factors that
             typically classify a school as critical infrastructure and imply a performance objective comparable to PO3. A school that meets
             PO2/PO1 designs will normally exceed building code requirements. Generally, building codes do not address the performance
             of non-structural elements, although their failure—notably the collapse of masonry partitions and facades, parapets, etc.—can
             also cause death, injury, and disruption.

             1   FEMA, “Design Guide for Improving School Safety in Earthquakes, Floods and High Winds,”
                  Risk Management Series, FEMA P-424, December 2010.
     18
                                                                                |
                                        Step 2: Construction Environment Module 1: Regulatory Environment


performance                                                        level of
objective               description                                resilience       impact on school

                           No structural damage. The
                           building is safe to be used during                       Mild
PO1
                           and after the natural disaster.                          Continuous education in the
Continuous                                                          High
occupancy                  Damage to contents is minimal                            school or use as a community/
                           and services will continue to                            emergency shelter
                           function without alteration.


                           Minor damage to structure that is
                           repairable at a reasonable cost and
                           in a reasonable amount of time.
PO2
                           Speciﬁed assets are protected.                           Moderate
Immediate
occupancy/                 Nonstructural components and             Moderate        Delayed start to education
operational                systems needed for the building to                       in school while repairs
continuity                 operate are fully functional (with                       are carried out
                           utilities possibly available from
                           standby sources). Some cleanup
                           and repair may be required.


                           Damage to both structural and
                           nonstructural components,
                           but risk of loss of life is low.                         High
PO3
                           Building systems and utilities           Safe            Extensive delays or building
Life safety
                           are damaged and inoperable.                              to be demolished
                           Building may be beyond
                           economic repair.


                           Building is near collapse and
PO4                        signiﬁcant hazard to life may exist.
                                                                                    Severe
Collapse                   Building and emergency systems are       Unsafe
                                                                                    No use; building to be demolished
prevention                 extensively damaged and inoperable.
                           Building beyond technical repair.




  Local Partners
  Relevant partners are MoE and MoPW, the Building Control Department (or department responsible
  for certifying construction documents), and engineering or architectural consultants/universities/
  institutions/ associations.

  Technical Expertise
  The same technical expertise is required as for Activity 2 . 1 . 1 .

  Output
  A report should be produced that summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of the regulatory
  framework and that highlights opportunities for improvements (this output can be combined with
  that for Activity 2 . 1 . 1 .
                                                                                                                        19
                                                 |
          Step 2: Construction Environment Module 1: Regulatory Environment
2 .1. 3




             2.1.3
             Map the history of the regulatory documents

             objective


             Guidance
             Updated regulatory documents, along with enforcement mechanisms, are one of the main challenges
             in developing countries. Using the information on historical updates to the regulatory documents
             gathered during Activities 2 . 1 . 1 and 2 . 1 . 2 , this activity maps the updates on a timeline against
             information gathered during Step 1 relating to hazard events, hazard studies, education policy,
             infrastructure programs, damage assessments, and other relevant events. This mapping should
             illustrate if the updates were responsive to historical hazard events, and if they resulted in a change
             in structural typology that in turn reduced school buildings’ vulnerability.

             Local Partners
             Partners are the same as those described for Activities 2 . 1 . 1 and 2 . 1 . 2 .

             Technical Expertise
             The same technical expertise is required as for Activities 2 . 1 . 1 and 2 . 1 . 2 .

             Output
             A timeline should be produced, and information should be input into the summary of strengths and
             weaknesses in the regulatory framework.




     20
                                                                              |
                                      Step 2: Construction Environment Module 1: Regulatory Environment




                                                                                                             2 . 1 .4
2 . 1 .4
Identify the regulatory process

objective


Guidance
Improving the regulatory framework for the implementation of school infrastructure can contribute
to safer schools. This activity should identify the regulatory process and note any shortcomings or
potential opportunities for improvement. Speciﬁcally, it should focus on the following:

        Approval process. This typically relates to the planning and ﬁnal design stages to
        ensure buildings are designed in line with the regulatory documents. The approval
        stages and those responsible should be identiﬁed (see Activities 2 . 2 . 1 and 2 . 2 . 2 ).
        Certiﬁcation. This relates to the end of the construction stage, when occupancy
        certiﬁcates are typically awarded. The timing (at key construction stages) and nature
        of site inspections during construction should be identiﬁed, along with who is
        responsible for carrying them out (e.g., government, independent building inspectors,
        self-certiﬁcation).
        Regulatory documents. The entities using the regulatory documents (in both the
        private and public sectors) should be identiﬁed.
        Implementation process. The key tasks at each stage of the school infrastructure
        implementation process should be outlined. Tasks include the following:
            Planning (identifying the site, appraising the site, planning
            the site, obtaining planning permission)
            Design (design of the school, communicating the
            design for construction, approvals)
            Procurement
            Construction (site supervision, quality assurance including quality of materials,
            certiﬁcation, supply and quality of workmanship, procurement, approvals)
            Operation and maintenance (ownership, assessment, works, protocols)
            Repair and retroﬁtting
        Enforcement. This concerns the degree to which processes are followed and enforced
        as well as the challenges facing enforcement.

Local Partners & Technical Expertise
Partners and technical expertise are the same as those described for Activities 2 . 1 . 1 and 2 . 1 . 2 .

Output
A report should be produced that summarizes the strengths and weaknesses of the regulatory process.

                                                                                                            21
                                                |
           Step 2: Construction Environment Module 2: Implementation Process
2 . 2 .1




              2.2.1
              Map key stakeholders

              objective


              Guidance
              This activity involves identifying and mapping the stakeholders (public and private and end users/
              school communities) against the tasks outlined at each stage of the implementation process (as
              identiﬁed in Activity 2.1.4). A stakeholder analysis should be undertaken to identify stakeholders’ roles
              and responsibilities, including any overlap, gaps, or possibility for corruption or ineﬃciencies, and to
              understand stakeholders’ relationship to one another, including how eﬀectively they communicate and
              share information.

              This activity should be related speciﬁcally to the education sector and may include a review of
              education policies.

              Local Partners
              Partners are the same as those described for Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, and also include donors/INGOs/
              NGOs and the public and private sector.

              Technical Expertise
              The same technical expertise is required as for Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2.

              Output
              A map should be produced that shows the stakeholders involved in the implementation of school infra-
              structure projects and that identiﬁes their roles and responsibilities.




      22
                                                                              |
                                     Step 2: Construction Environment Module 2: Implementation Process




                                                                                                               2.2.2
2.2.2
Identify capacity and capability
of key stakeholders
objective


Guidance
With all the relevant stakeholders having been identiﬁed in Activity 2.2.1, this activity aims to establish
their skills, expertise, and capacity. The goal is to determine any gaps or weaknesses in the school infra-
structure implementation process and to target potential investment opportunities for physical inter-
ventions (such as retroﬁtting/reconstruction) and for technical assistance to improve the regulatory
framework. For example, retroﬁtting and reconstruction options should duly consider the skills and
capacity of the contractors implementing the construction.

This activity should consider the following:

        Educational and professional environment
        Construction capacity of contractors/ local labor
        Capability and capacity of government agencies/approval bodies to enforce
        regulations

Local Partners
Partners are the same as those described for Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2, and also include donors/ INGOs/
NGOs and the public and private sector.

Technical Expertise
The same technical expertise is required as for Activities 2.1.1 and 2.1.2.

Output
Summary notes should be produced that describe the capacity and capability of key stakehold-
ers (those involved in all stages of the implementation process), speciﬁcally their strengths and
weaknesses. The notes should also make recommendations about how resources can be strengthened.




                                                                                                              23
                                                     |
        Step 2: Construction Environment Module 2: Implementation Process
2.2.3




           2.2.3
           Identify procurement and construction
           management processes
           objective


           Guidance
           Procurement and construction management processes relate speciﬁcally to the approaches adopted
           to secure construction services. To understand how the construction environment functions, it is
           important to identify the typical methods of construction (contractor build or community build; see
           boxes 3 and 4) for school infrastructure, as well as the mechanisms for procurement and construction
           management, both of which have an impact on the implementation of safer school infrastructure.

           How the building is procured—i.e., who is responsible for the design and construction of the school—
           will depend on the maturity of the construction industry, the available skills and capacity, and the
           complexity of the school design. For public buildings like schools, governments often have deﬁned
           procurement procedures and standard tender processes that should be followed. However, these
           procedures may involve the risk of corruption, which will need to be investigated.

           Eﬀective construction management is critical to the delivery of buildings, and an understanding of
           construction management practices will make it easier to devise reconstruction, retroﬁtting, and repair
           strategies. Construction management requires skill in managing ﬁnances, programs, personnel, and
           supply chains, along with a sound understanding of quality and risk. When construction involves a
           combination of centralized and decentralized approaches, construction management can become
           complex. It will be important to identify whether schools are planned and implemented centrally or
           locally, and whether the approach has changed over time. It will also be important to explore the par-
           ticipation of both public and private sector agencies and organizations, and speciﬁcally to determine
           whether public-private partnerships have been established. These partnerships can be an eﬀective way
           to ﬁnance new schools (as addressed in Step 3 ).




           box 3 : contractor build
           A contractor-build process places the responsibility for the quality of construction (and sometimes the design) with the
           contractor.

           The safety of the school will depend on the design being undertaken by competent technical experts and veriﬁed—either in
           accordance with international or local building codes, or through an alternative method (e.g., prototypes, testing). Good-qual-
           ity design documentation that clearly communicates what needs to be built will facilitate construction. Such documentation
           requires engineering plans, sections (1:20), construction details, and connection details (1:10 or 1:5), as well as clear speciﬁcations.

           Provided the contractor is competent, employs suitably skilled subcontractors, site staﬀ, and laborers, and exercises
           appropriate site management and supervision, the construction will most likely comply with the design intent. Competent
           contractors are expected to have suitable quality assurance procedures in place, such as material veriﬁcation certiﬁcates and
           site supervision by a technical expert to monitor quality of materials and workmanship.


   24
                                                                                          |
                                            Step 2: Construction Environment Module 2: Implementation Process



The disadvantage of the contractor-build method is that in some countries there is a risk of corruption, especially in public
procurement, and there may be no functional control mechanisms in ministries or other levels of the government. Another
disadvantage is that the community can feel excluded from the building process, particularly if the designs, labor, and
materials are imported,a which in turn can inﬂuence how the community and other end users maintain the building or carry
out repairs if damage occurs. For this reason it is desirable to involve communities in the early planning and construction
stages.
a. Jo da Silva, “Lessons from Aceh: Key Considerations in Post-Disaster Reconstruction,” Practical Action
      Publishing, 2010.




box 4 : community build
Community build, or “self-build,” uses community labor in construction projects. The advantage of community build is that it
allows people to develop the construction skills that provide livelihood opportunities. It is also an eﬀective way to generate
ownership of the building within a community, which encourages maintenance.a

Communities typically have a good local knowledge of the hazards that aﬀect them, and this can be enhanced by public
databases and hazard maps. They also have a good local understanding of risk and so can easily deﬁne the performance
requirements of the school and choose suitable sites. Moreover, they have a vested interest in ensuring that the level of risk is
acceptable.

Site selection guidelines and site assessment tools can help facilitate the early decisions regarding location and physical
planning of the school. Locally, craftsmen may be highly skilled in speciﬁc building practices. However, it is unlikely that
the skills exist within a community to verify the designs of a safe school. For vernacular methodologies, it is unlikely that
guidelines or codes exist. Thus if the intention is to use community labor to build schools, it is essential that appropriate
measures are taken to ensure that the design of the school is sound. For example, communities could use model school designs
that are appropriate for the hazards identiﬁed in the geographical areas they are building in.

Ensuring that construction information is conveyed clearly is key. Information could be conveyed in the form of a construc-
tion manual illustrated with 3-D imagery and pictures. Drawings and models will need to be read and understood by a non-
technical, often unskilled, and possibly illiterate workforce. In addition to step-by-step guidance on how to build safe schools,
detailed information on material quantities and quality should be given, such as concrete mix ratios, the risks associated with
using sea sand in concrete, and methods for mixing concrete, making soil blocks, and undertaking simple veriﬁcation tests
(such as slump tests for concrete). Quality of construction and materials on self-build sites can be veriﬁed only if there is site
supervision.

a. Michal Lyons, Theo Schilderman, and Camillo Boano, eds., “Building Back Better: Delivering People-Centred Housing Recon-
struction at Scale,” Practical Action Publishing, 2010.




Local Partners
Relevant partners are engineering and architecture associations, consultants, and ministries
responsible for the implementation of school infrastructure.

Technical Expertise
The activity requires engineering expertise along with knowledge of procurement and contract
management.

Output
A summary of construction capacity, gaps, and procurement issues should be produced.


                                                                                                                                     25
                                             |
          Step 2: Construction Environment Module 3: Construction Technology
2 . 3.1




             2.3.1
             Identify typical construction materials

             objective


             Guidance
             The choice of construction materials can have a signiﬁcant impact on the safety of school infrastruc-
             ture. Local and cultural building practices and capacities, as well as and local markets, can support
             the construction and maintenance of safe school infrastructure. This activity focuses on understand-
             ing the availability and quality of the typical materials currently used in the construction of schools
             and more generally; the goal is to identify potential vulnerabilities in existing school infrastructure
             as well as appropriate construction materials to be used in a repair, retroﬁtting, and reconstruction
             program. The activity requires the following:

                    The identiﬁcation of materials available locally. Materials may vary between regions,
                    districts, or islands, and should include traditional materials as well as modern
                    materials.
                    The identiﬁcation of materials speciﬁcally used in school construction.
                    An assessment of the quality of materials. This may include raw materials such as
                    sand, water, and cement; site-mixed materials such as concrete; and prefabricated
                    materials such as steel beams or trusses and precast concrete. The assessment should
                    consider materials’ resistance to degradation from wood-boring insects or climatic
                    conditions. Construction materials should be consistent with the design speciﬁcation
                    and will require veriﬁcation on delivery, appropriate storage, and testing.
                    Material certiﬁcation. It is necessary to understand whether construction materials
                    (such as timber, concrete, and steel) require certiﬁcates for material quality or sus-
                    tainability.
                    Material codes of practice. It is necessary to understand whether the building code
                    includes speciﬁcations for materials, and if so whether it deals with traditional
                    materials such as earth blocks or bamboo.
             When planning a retroﬁtting/reconstruction program, there may be an opportunity to invest in
             improved construction practices, new materials, or new technologies. However, these need to be
             balanced against cultural acceptability and—to ensure good-quality construction and the ability to
             repair and undertake future modiﬁcations—the requirement of skilled labor.




     26
                                                                      |
                                 Step 2: Construction Environment Module 3: Construction Technology



Local Partners
Relevant partners are engineering and architecture associations, consultants, and ministries
responsible for the implementation of school infrastructure, as well as contractors, fabrication
specialists, and manufacturing and material suppliers.

Technical Expertise
This activity requires the expertise of engineers with experience in construction and knowledge of
construction materials.

Output
A summary should be produced that lists local/cultural construction practices and technology as well
as innovation opportunities.




                                                                                                       27
                                              |
           Step 2: Construction Environment Module 3: Construction Technology
2 . 3. 2




              2.3.2
              Identify school infrastructure designs

              objective


               Guidance
              Investment opportunities should be aligned with current programs where possible. Standard spec-
              iﬁcations for schools, which can include building layouts, accommodation, and equipment, often
              exist, and these can provide a valuable starting point for developing the design brief or serve as the
              basis of model school designs. Where model school designs exist, these should be reviewed in order
              to identify vulnerabilities and determine whether they could be integrated into a reconstruction
              program or need to be improved. The objectives of this review are

                      To understand whether the designs are appropriate, and if they diﬀer across regions/
                      districts depending on local cultural preferences
                      To understand whether the structural typology is appropriate for the local hazards,
                      uses good-quality and available materials, is buildable, and uses local construction
                      practices and capabilities
                      To understand whether the designs are engineered and meet local building
                      regulations and/or international best practice
                      To identify whether the construction documentation includes comprehen-
                      sive drawings and speciﬁcations appropriate for whoever is building the school
                      (governments sometimes provide only architectural drawings that don’t provide
                      enough information for construction)
                      To understand whether the model school designs can be adapted to suit speciﬁc site
                      requirements, for example, a variety of soil conditions or diﬀerences in site layouts

              Local Partners
              Relevant partners are engineering and architecture associations, consultants, and ministries
              responsible for the implementation of school infrastructure.

              Technical Expertise
              Structural engineers with speciﬁc expertise in the hazards identiﬁed in Activity 1.1.1 should be
              contracted to carry out the review.

              Output
              A summary should be produced listing the strengths and weaknesses of model school designs.




     28
                                |
Step 2: Construction Environment Module 3: Construction Technology




                                                                     29
                                           |
           Step 2: Construction Environment Module 3: Construction Technology
2 . 3. 2




              v




     30
                                                                                                     Financial Environment




Step 3
                                                                                                                             3
Financial Environment
Purpose                                        Objectives
To gain an understanding of the ﬁnancial              Identify historical and planned investment programs
environment within which school infra-
structure is planned, designed, constructed,
                                                      Understand the ﬁnancing framework for school infrastructure
operated, maintained, repaired, and
retroﬁtted in order to determine the factors
placing school infrastructure at risk.                Navigate the investment system and mechanisms related to
                                                      school infrastructure investment programs




module                                activity                                                               objective
                                         3 . 1 . 1 Identify previous investment programs in con-
                                                   struction of new school infrastructure

3.1 Historical Investment                3 . 1 . 2 Identify previous investment programs for
                                                   existing school infrastructure, including those
                                                   for repair/retroﬁtting and maintenance.


                                         3 . 2 . 1 Identify current and future investment
                                                   programs for new school infrastructure
3.2 Current and
    Planned Investment
                                         3 . 2 . 2 Identify current and future investment programs
                                                   (repair/retroﬁtting) for existing school infrastructure

3.3 Financing                            3 . 3 . 1 Identify the funding mechanisms, investment
    Investment System                              requirements, and key decision makers



Deliverables
The key deliverable will be a ﬁnancial summary report that includes quantitative data on investment allocation.




                                                                                                                             31
                                       |
         Step 3: Financial Environment Module 1: Historical Investment




            3.1.1
            Identify previous investment programs in
3.1 .1




            construction of new school infrastructure
            objective


            Guidance
            The historical ﬁnancial framework for new school infrastructure should be understood in order to
            align potential investment opportunities and be aware previous ﬁnancial constraints. This activity
            explores the historical sources of funding and budgets for school infrastructure construction
            programs. The following avenues of funding should be considered:

                    Government. Identify any previous national building programs and determine if
                    funding of new schools has been based on a national, regional, or even single-location
                    approach.
                    NGOs, INGOs, international donors. Identify who has been active in funding of new
                    schools in the past, how big the programs were, and whether they were undertaken in
                    collaboration with government (public) or private schools.
                    Private sector or public-private partnerships. Many developing countries have seen a
                    recent rise in private schooling due to the poor education provided in public schools.
                    Where there is a strong private school presence, investigate how private schools have
                    been funded. In addition, determine whether private funding has been used to deliver
                    government (public) schools, and if so, how this was done.
            It is important to clarify if third-party funding has historically made up a signiﬁcant proportion of
            funding for school construction programs, since such funding can suggest the extent of government
            resources allocated to building of schools.

            Local Partners
            The government departments of education and ﬁnance at national and district levels should be
            consulted as key stakeholders. Any NGOs/INGOs and other international donors that have histori-
            cally been involved in funding/implementing school infrastructure should also be consulted. Private
            donors and businesses involved in new school construction should be identiﬁed and consulted as
            well.

            Technical Expertise
            This activity should be carried out by persons with expertise in ﬁnance and speciﬁc experience and
            knowledge of the history of the construction industry in the country under consideration.

            Output
            A ﬁnancial summary should be produced listing historical investments and funding mechanisms and
            including any factors that have inﬂuenced the characteristics and quality of school infrastructure.


    32
                                                                           |
                                          Step 3: Financial Environment Module 1: Historical Investment




3.1.2
Identify previous investment programs for




                                                                                                            3.1 . 2
existing school infrastructure, including
those for repair/retroﬁtting and maintenance
objective


Guidance
The historical ﬁnancial framework for existing school infrastructure should be understood in order
to align potential investment opportunities and be aware of previous ﬁnancial constraints. This
activity explores the budgets and sources of funding for repair/retroﬁtting and maintenance of
existing school infrastructure.

The following should be considered:

        Government. Identify any previous national repair/retroﬁtting programs and
        determine if they involved making schools safer or were undertaken just for
        maintenance. Understanding the government resource allocation for maintenance is
        critical, as maintenance will be required to ensure long-term durability of the existing
        school infrastructure.
        NGOs, INGOs, international donors. Identify who was active in the past in funding
        national or local repair/retroﬁtting programs for existing schools.
        Private sector or public private-partnerships. Determine whether other private
        funding contributed to school repairs and upgrades in the past.
It is important to clarify if third-party funding has assisted in maintenance of existing schools, since
such funding can suggest the extent of government resources allocated to maintain schools.

The purpose of previous investment programs for existing school infrastructure should be clariﬁed;
possible purposes include retroﬁtting to reduce the vulnerability of school infrastructure as part of
a disaster mitigation program, repair as part of a disaster response and recovery program, and repair
for routine maintenance.




                                                                                                           33
                                        |
          Step 3: Financial Environment Module 1: Historical Investment



             Local Partners
             The government departments of education and ﬁnance at national and district levels should be
3.1 . 2




             consulted as key stakeholders. Any NGOs/INGOs and other international donors that have been
             involved in funding school repairs or retroﬁtting should also be consulted. Private donors and
             businesses involved in school repairs or retroﬁtting should be identiﬁed and consulted.

             Technical Expertise
             This activity should be carried out by persons with expertise in ﬁnance and speciﬁc experience and
             knowledge of the history of the school maintenance and upgrading strategies in the country under
             consideration.

             Output
             A summary should be produced of historical investments and funding mechanisms that contribute
             to maintaining or improving existing school infrastructure.




     34
                                                              |
                              Step 3: Financial Environment Module 2: Current and Planned Investment




3.2.1
Identify current and future investment




                                                                                                           3. 2 .1
programs for new school infrastructure
objective


Guidance
The ﬁnancial framework for new school infrastructure should be understood in order to align
potential investment opportunities and recognize potential ﬁnancial constraints. This activity
explores the current and planned sources of funding for school infrastructure (re)construction
programs. The following avenues of funding should be considered:

        Government. Identify current and planned national building programs, or regional/
        district or other government funding streams.
        NGOs, INGOs, international donors. Identify who is currently active in funding new
        schools, including the scale of the program and whether the program collaborates
        with government (public) or private schools.
        Private sector or public-private partnerships. Identify any planned private school
        funding programs and whether there are plans for collaborative private funding for
        government schools.

Local Partners
The government departments of education and ﬁnance at national and district levels should be
consulted as key stakeholders. Any NGOs and other international donors that are now, or plan to
be, involved in funding new school infrastructure should also be consulted. Private donors and
businesses involved in new school construction should be identiﬁed and consulted as well.

Technical Expertise
This activity should be carried out by persons with expertise in ﬁnance and speciﬁc experience and
knowledge of the construction industry in the country under consideration.

Output
A summary should be produced listing current and planned investments and funding mechanisms
and including any factors that have inﬂuenced the characteristics and quality of school infrastructure.




                                                                                                          35
                                          |
           Step 3: Financial Environment Module 2: Current and Planned Investment




              3.2.2
              Identify current and future investment
3. 2 . 2




              programs (repair/retroﬁtting) for
              existing school infrastructure
              objective


              Guidance
              The ﬁnancial framework for existing school infrastructure should be understood in order to align
              potential investment opportunities and recognize potential ﬁnancial constraints. This activity
              explores the current and planned sources of funding for repair and retroﬁtting of existing school
              infrastructure.

              The following should be considered:

                      Government. Identify any current or planned national repair/retroﬁtting programs
                      and determine if they involved making schools safer or were undertaken just for
                      maintenance. Understanding the government resource allocation for maintenance is
                      critical, as maintenance will be required to ensure long-term durability of the existing
                      and planned school infrastructure. The MoE’s budget is usually among the largest
                      public sector investments, and a signiﬁcant part of that budget goes to investment
                      in new infrastructure. For these reasons, the retroﬁtting, repair, and maintenance of
                      school infrastructure usually face serious budgetary constraints.
                      NGOs, INGOs, international donors. Identify who was active in the past in funding
                      national or local repair/retroﬁtting programs for existing schools.
                      Private sector or public-private partnerships. Determine whether other private
                      funding contributed to school repairs and upgrades in the past.
              It is important to clarify if third-party funding has assisted in maintenance of existing schools, since
              such funding can suggest the extent of government resources allocated to maintain schools.

              The purpose of current or planned investment programs for existing school infrastructure should be
              clariﬁed; possible purposes include retroﬁtting to reduce the vulnerability of school infrastructure as
              part of a disaster mitigation program, repair as part of a disaster response and recovery program, and
              repair for routine maintenance.




     36
                                                            |
                             Step 3: Financial Environment Module 2: Current and Planned Investment



Local Partners
The government departments of education and ﬁnance at national and district levels should be
consulted as key stakeholders. Any NGOs and other international donors who are involved in
funding school repairs or retroﬁtting should also be consulted. Private donors and businesses
involved in school repairs or retroﬁtting should be identiﬁed and consulted as well.

Technical Expertise
This activity should be carried out by persons with expertise in ﬁnance and speciﬁc experience and
knowledge of school maintenance and upgrading strategies in the country under consideration.

Output
A summary should be produced listing current and planned investments and funding mechanisms
that contribute toward maintaining or improving existing school infrastructure.




                                                                                                      37
                                        |
         Step 3: Financial Environment Module 2: Current and Planned Investment




            3.3.1
            Identify the funding mechanisms, investment
3. 3.1




            requirements, and key decision makers
            objective


            Guidance
            The ﬁnancing framework for school infrastructure largely determines what options are aﬀordable
            under a safer school program. In order to access funding or meet approvals, any proposed investment
            opportunities should be aligned with existing funding mechanisms and speciﬁc requirements.

            This activity identiﬁes investment policies, funding schemes, and ﬁnancing mechanisms as well
            as the requirements for mobilization for any proposed investments. It should also identify the key
            decision makers who facilitate the existing funding processes that enable school infrastructure im-
            plementation.

            The analysis of the investment policies, funding schemes, and ﬁnancing mechanisms should consider
            both the private and public sectors as well as donor funding, and it should also determine any
            diﬀerences between new construction (usually a signiﬁcant part of the education budget) and repair
            and rehabilitation (often constrained). The size of budgets should be determined as well as how
            they are allocated and distributed (e.g., whether they depend on education service, region or district,
            urban or rural, etc.) Centrally funded infrastructure provides a single point of entry for potential
            investments to tap into, and may be more likely to inﬂuence change at national scale. Decentralized
            funding provides an opportunity to target high-risk areas and tailor investment opportunities for
            speciﬁc locations. It is useful to obtain disaggregated district-level expenditure data to provide a
            more detailed breakdown of the costs and budgetary distribution.

            An understanding of the ﬁnancial ﬂows and key decision makers in the processes will help to deﬁne
            rehabilitation and replacement strategies more eﬀectively.

            Local Partners
            This activity should start with discussions with government departments to identify the key
            decision makers and determine which department they reside in. This should also be corroborated
            through discussion with school management committees, INGOs, NGOs, and other private donors.

            Technical Expertise
            This activity should be carried out by persons with expertise in investment policy and ﬁnance
            mechanisms who have experience and knowledge of the ﬁnance system in the country under consid-
            eration.

            Output
            A summary report should be produced that outlines the investment policies, funding mechanisms,
            and requirements for school infrastructure implementation; lists key decision makers; and analyzes
            decision makers’ strengths and weaknesses.
    38
                             |
Step 3: Financial Environment Module 2: Current and Planned Investment




                                                                         39
                                      |
         Step 3: Financial Environment Module 2: Current and Planned Investment
3. 3.1




    40
                                                                                                    Disaster Risk Analysis




Step 4
Disaster Risk Analysis
Purpose                                          Objectives
                                                                                                                                4
To provide TTLs with a step-by-step                    Assess whether is it feasible to undertake the analysis with the
guide to quantifying the potential                     available information and determine the approach to take
damage and losses to school infrastruc-
                                                       Build the components of a disaster risk assessment for school
ture due to adverse natural events of
                                                       infrastructure
various intensities and frequencies.
                                                       Quantify disaster risk of school infrastructure—from the spatial
                                                       distribution of risk to risk metrics
                                                       Inform the prioritization of risk reduction intervention measures
                                                       for school infrastructure

module                                 activity                                                               objective

                                          4.1.1 Deﬁne risk assessment objective


                                          4.1.2 Undertake a hazard analysis
4.1 Risk Components
    Analysis
                                          4.1.3 Analyze the exposure of school infrastructure



                                          4.1.4 Analyze the vulnerability of school infrastructure


                                          4.2.1 Carry out disaster risk assessment
4.2 Risk Quantiﬁcation
                                                for school infrastructure

4.3 Informing of Prioriti-                4.3.1 Inform the prioritization processes for risk
    zation of Interventions                      reduction in school infrastructure


A disaster risk assessment will allow the team to build a risk baseline, which will be used (1) to identify and prioritize
investment needs to ensure school infrastructure safety, and (2) to monitor the progress of risk reduction programs.
The disaster risk assessment methodology is outlined in Module 4.2. This assessment could be based on a probabilistic
approach for relevant hazards like earthquake and windstorm. For other hazards, the methodology should be based on
the speciﬁc hazard conditions and the scope of the safe school project. The assessment will need to include an analysis of
the hazards potentially aﬀecting the region where the school is located (Activity 4.1.2); an exposure model (Activity 4.1.3);
and an understanding of the school infrastructure’s structural vulnerability to the identiﬁed hazards (Activity 4.1.4). The
output format from Module 4.1 should be aligned with the input required for the risk assessment methodology applied
in Module 4.2.

Deliverables
A report should be produced that summarizes the key results of the disaster risk assessment. In addition, a database
should be created that includes relevant risk metrics in terms of potential losses for each school facility and a spatial
analysis of the results. These products will include key elements to inform a proposal for prioritizing interventions.

                                                                                                                                41
                                         |
         Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 1: Risk Components Analysis




            4.1.1
            Deﬁne risk assessment objective
4 .1.1




            objective


            Guidance
            Under this activity the team should determine how the results of the risk assessment are expected
            to be used. This discussion should be based on the results of Activity 1 . 1 . 1 , the overview of the school
            infrastructure condition (Step 1 ), and the MoE’s main objectives for rehabilitation and improvement
            of school infrastructure. This decision about how to use risk assessment results will have implica-
            tions for the level of input detail (resolution), format, and quality of the relevant information. Data
            resolution, format, and quality should be determined prior to developing Activities 4 . 1 . 2 , 4 . 1 . 3 , and
            4 . 1 .4 to ensure consistency in the results (see ﬁgure 8). The assessment criteria should be agreed
            upon with the stakeholders and typically might include avoiding or reducing loss of life, reducing
            physical damages in the infrastructure, and reducing ﬁnancial losses in the portfolio.

            Output
            A database should be created that includes information on existing hazards and school infrastruc-
            ture exposure and vulnerability in the studied area. This database should be analyzed to assess the
            quality of the information included in it.




    42
                                                                        |
                                       Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 1: Risk Components Analysis




4.1.2
Undertake a hazard analysis




                                                                                                                4 .1. 2
objective


Guidance
This activity aims to quantify the intensity and probability of occurrence of selected hazards as an
input for a disaster risk assessment (Module 4.2). Using the existing hazard information collected in
Activity 1 . 1 . 1 , hazards should be qualitatively prioritized in order to determine which hazards are the
most relevant in the selected area. A more detailed analysis could be then undertaken for the selected
hazards as an input for the risk assessment. This analysis will include determining the intensity and
frequency for each hazard that could potentially aﬀect the school infrastructure. The spatial distri-
bution of the intensity of each hazard for a given probability of occurrence (return period) could be
used to inform new school infrastructure construction.

Hazard data sets and maps may already exist, in which case they should be assessed for quality and
completeness. Any new information available should be assessed and integrated into the hazard
analysis to improve the model. The following sources of information may be useful:

        Existing hazard event catalogues that include physical characteristics of the events,
        which could be used to deﬁne critical events for a scenario risk assessment
        Historical events intensity maps
        Hazard maps
        Soil and geological information; topographical and hydrological information at the
        local and regional levels
        Global hazard information
The metric used to represent the hazard intensity should be consistent with the approach used to
deﬁne the vulnerability information, and the resolution should be consistent with the resolution of
the exposure (see Activity 4 . 1 . 3 ).

Local Partners
Relevant partners will have local knowledge and expertise in hazard assessment; they may be found
in technical agencies in the country, speciﬁcally in seismic monitoring networks, geological surveys,
and university engineering departments and research centers.

Technical Expertise
This activity should be carried out by highly skilled technical consultants with expertise in the
analysis of the speciﬁc natural hazards being considered, with input from local technical agencies.




                                                                                                               43
                                          |
          Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 1: Risk Components Analysis



             Output
             The following should be produced under this activity:
                  a.   A technical summary note of the existing hazard information, including the
                       approaches or methodologies used to generate this information (including quality
4 .1. 2




                       assurance and quality control procedures followed)
                  b.   Probabilistic hazard information produced for the studied area
                  c.   Hazard maps for given return periods
                  d.   Historical scenarios for hazard events in the studied area




    44
                                                                         |
                                        Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 1: Risk Components Analysis




4.1.3
Analyze the exposure of
school infrastructure




                                                                                                                 4 .1. 3
objective


Guidance
This activity aims to build an exposure model for the school infrastructure based on the information
collected in Step 1 , including the location and key characteristics of the school infrastructure (e.g.,
construction material and year, replacement or construction value).

School buildings need to be categorized by structural typology based on the material of the con-
struction. If the replacement value of the infrastructure is not known, each typology will need to be
assigned a unit value of construction so that an estimated economical value of the infrastructure can
be calculated.

An exposure data set will therefore be created, including an inventory of assets at risk, each one with
an assigned replacement value. This information should be aligned with the hazard metrics (Activity
4 . 2 . 1 ) and vulnerability metrics used throughout the risk assessment; please refer to Activity 4 . 2 . 2
for further explanation. A detailed cost analysis will be carried out for the actual retroﬁtting and
reconstruction options, as further elaborated in Activity 5 . 1 . 2 .

Local Partners
MoEs and/or MoPWs may be able to determine structural typologies used for school infrastructure
and associated construction costs.

Technical Expertise
Construction typologies should be deﬁned by professionally qualiﬁed structural engineers with
specialized knowledge of hazard-resistant construction. Construction costs should be ascertained in
consultation with appropriate construction industry experts.

Output
The following should be produced:
     a.   A database of the structural typologies identiﬁed, including their main characteristics
     b.   An exposure model for school infrastructure that includes at a minimum the school
          ID, the facility’s structural typology, the occupation, and the replacement value




                                                                                                                45
                                                |
           Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 1: Risk Components Analysis




              4 . 1 .4
              Analyze the vulnerability of
              school infrastructure
4 . 1 .4




              objective


              Guidance
              This activity aims to identify the susceptibility of school infrastructure to selected hazards, in order
              assign the vulnerability function1 to each proposed structural typology. A vulnerability analysis
              helps to quantify the severity of the damage caused by a particular hazard to a given infrastructure.
              Vulnerability analysis takes into account building conﬁguration—e.g., construction systems, building
              components, and building condition (including year of construction and level of maintenance).

              The following factors may for example contribute to the seismic vulnerability of a speciﬁc typology:
              irregular building ﬂoors, irregularity in elevation, heavy roofs, large openings, soft or weak stories,
              short columns, large wall panels, and weak foundations. Vulnerability functions are derived from
              fragility functions, which are developed for the diﬀerent structural typologies identiﬁed and agreed
              upon with local experts.

              There are two main approaches to developing vulnerability functions:
                    a.   Empirical. Where suﬃcient loss or damage data exist, empirical vulnerability
                         functions can be developed on the basis of past observations of loss or damage due
                         to a particular hazard experienced by buildings of a particular typology. Conversely,
                         if there are very limited building loss or damage data from previous hazards in
                         the selected area, expert knowledge of overseas damage data can be used to adjust
                         existing global fragility functions to local conditions.
                    b.   Analytical. Analytical vulnerability functions may be calculated using structural
                         engineering technical analysis, which stems from industry standard capacity curves
                         and subsequent fragility functions produced for assessed infrastructure.




              1   Vulnerability functions provide a direct assessment of the diﬀerent levels of damage to the infrastruc-
                   ture associated with diﬀerent hazards and hazard intensities, namely the damage ratio.
     46
                                                                      |
                                      Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 1: Risk Components Analysis



Local Partners
Local architects, civil engineering professional bodies, or local civil engineering consultants should
undertake vulnerability assessments and categorization of school buildings.

Collaboration with local, regional, and international research institutions may also provide access to




                                                                                                           4 . 1 .4
the latest available information, or provide an opportunity to work together to develop vulnerability
functions and adapt them to the local context.

Technical Expertise
This activity should be carried out by a professionally experienced structural engineering team or
individual with speciﬁc expertise in structural analysis and knowledge of local construction building
codes and methods.

Output
Vulnerability functions should be generated for each structural typology deﬁned. Vulnerability
functions proposed should be consistent with other components of the disaster risk assessment.




                                                                                                          47
                                              |
           Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 2: Informing of Prioritization of Interventions




              4.2.1
              Carry out disaster risk assessment
              for school infrastructure
4 . 2 .1




              objective


              Guidance
              The purpose of a disaster risk assessment is to quantify the potential damages and losses of school
              infrastructure (physical/structural risk). The output from the assessment can inform investment
              prioritization and options for risk reduction.

              The basic steps involved in the risk assessment process are as follows:
                   a.   Hazard analysis (see Activity 4 . 1 . 2 )
                   b.   Exposure model (see Activity 4 . 1 . 3 )
                   c.   Deﬁnition of structural vulnerability per typology (see Activity 4 . 1 . 4 )
                   d.   Risk quantiﬁcation


              The following risk assessment methodologies or approaches are recommended among others:

                        Probabilistic risk assessment. Using the input data of the hazard analysis, this
                        analysis is based on all possible hazard scenarios that the infrastructure being
                        evaluated could face. It can provide a particularly useful detailed assessment for
                        earthquake and windstorm risk. With this approach it is possible to estimate the
                        expected cost in terms of diﬀerent metrics attached to the occurrence of hazard
                        events. Probabilistic risk assessments have results in terms of annual average
                        losses (AALs), probable maximum losses (PMLs), and other ﬁnancial metrics. These
                        assessments are based on probabilistic hazard information, available exposure
                        information, and probabilistic vulnerability functions.
                        Deterministic (scenario) assessment. In certain cases, it could be useful to employ
                        a simpliﬁed methodology using a single hazard scenario to determine the potential
                        losses that could result from a particular hazard. Scenario-based risk assessment
                        results make it possible to oﬀer stakeholders comparisons to historical events. Single
                        scenario assessments should be based on given hazard scenario information, available
                        exposure information, and vulnerability information (that could be probabilistic to
                        facilitate a range for the results).




     48
                                                                   |
                          Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 2: Informing of Prioritization of Interventions




                                         risk assessment methodology
figure 8                                              Scenario (Deterministic)
                                           Multi-scenario (using probabilistic information)
Disaster risk
                                                Fully probabilistic (e.g. Montecarlo)




                                                                                                                      4 . 2 .1
assessment approach.

                                                             Hazard




                                  scale                                                   hazard metrics
               Level of detail of the hazard                                              e.g. for earthquakes:
                    information should be                                                 Peak Ground Acceleration
                appropriate for the hazard                                                Spectral Acceleration
                           and the location              consistent
                                                                                          Marco Seismic Intensity
                                                          metrics                         (MMI)




                          Exposure                                                            Vulnerability
                                                     damage metrics
                                                                Light
                                                              Moderate
                                                                Heavy
                                                               Collapse




 Local Partners
 The MoE is the key stakeholder and should agree to the assessment criteria and objectives.

 Technical Expertise
 This activity should be carried out by hazard risk modeling specialists.

 Output
 Depending on the risk assessment methodology, the expected output will vary. Loss exceedance
 curves2, PML3 curves, and AAL4 curves should be produced as part of a probabilistic assessment.
 Other outputs may include

           Potential structural damage or casualties
           GIS-compatible spatial data sets comprising hazard maps and diﬀerent loss metrics
 A summary report should be prepared containing the results and ﬁndings of the risk assessment and
 including the outputs above as appropriate.



 2   A loss exceedance curve shows the annual frequency of exceedance for a determined value of losses.

 3   PML (probable maximum loss) is the maximum loss amount for a given return period for a given hazard.

 4   AAL (average annual loss) is the sum for all scenarios of the product of the expected loss and the annual
      frequency of occurrence of every scenario.
                                                                                                                     49
                                        |
          Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 3: Informing of Prioritization of Interventions




             4.3.1
             Inform the prioritization processes for risk
             reduction in school infrastructure
4 . 3.1




             objective


             Guidance
             The results of the risk assessment provide a quantitative estimation of risk for the entire portfolio, as
             well as by structural typology and spatial distribution. Risk assessment reveals the main vulnerabili-
             ty or hazard factors. Based on this understanding, the following steps could be taken:

                     Rank the physical risk for the school facilities in order to identify those at highest
                     risk, and calculate distribution of risk across the portfolio
                     Disaggregate the portfolio by subgroups of school facilities that share similar risk
                     conditions and characteristics
                     Disaggregate the portfolio by structural typology
                     Disaggregate the portfolio by spatial criteria (urban, rural) and risk condition
                     Deﬁne potential risk reduction alternatives to maximize life safety, potential damage
                     reduction, and post-disaster operational continuity
             The design of a risk reduction strategy is based on the information generated from these steps.
             At this point the team may seek to consult with the MoE in order to discuss the results and begin
             identifying potential intervention alternatives in keeping with the political, ﬁnancial, technical, and
             cultural context of the country (this is the objective of Step 5 ).

             It is important to note that further analysis (e.g., cost-beneﬁt analysis) might be required of the risk
             assessment results in order to design the risk reduction strategy. Thus new variables (e.g., ﬁnancial)
             are introduced into the decision making process through complementary analytic work.

             Local Partners
             The prioritization criteria should be agreed upon with stakeholders such as the MoE, MoPW, and
             department of disaster management.

             Technical Expertise
             This activity requires a consultant with expertise in risk assessment and structural engineering
             (with appropriate knowledge of the relevant hazard).

             Output
             A summary of the prioritization criteria should be produced, along with comparison tables of critical
             scenarios for the intervention options (such as reconstruction, retroﬁtting, and repair).




    50
                              |
Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 3: Informing of Prioritization of Interventions




                                                                                         4 . 3.1




                                                                                        51
                                        |
          Step 4: Disaster Risk Analysis Module 3: Informing of Prioritization of Interventions
4 . 3.1




     52
                                                                              Safer School Investment Opportunities




Step 5
Safer School Investment Opportunities
Purpose                                         Objectives
To recommend investment scenarios to                 Identify, deﬁne, and prioritize lines of intervention to increase
the MoE that integrate safety into both              the safety of existing school infrastructure and improve the
existing and new school infrastructure.              planning and building regulatory framework
                                                     Identify, deﬁne, and prioritize opportunities for investment in
                                                     integrating safety in school infrastructure
                                                                                                                          5
                                                     Approach government on investment opportunities




module                               activity                                                               objective

                                          5.1.1 Enable structural rehabilitation/retrofitting



                                          5.1.2 Enable functional rehabilitation
5.1 Existing School
    Infrastructure                        5.1.3 Design intervention strategy and
                                                investment scenarios


                                          5.1.4 Undertake cost-beneﬁt analysis



                                          5.2.1 Consider planning and design gaps and opportunities



5.2 Implementation Process                5.2.2 Consider regulatory framework improvements



                                          5.2.3 Consider implementation process adjustments




Deliverables
A proposal for an intervention plan should be produced that includes a roadmap prioritizing possible investment
scenarios. These will form the foundation for the government’s speciﬁc action plan and its eﬀorts to seek technical and
ﬁnancial support from international banks, donors, NGOs, and the private sector.




                                                                                                                          53
                                                            |
           Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure




              5. 1 . 1
              Enable structural rehabilitation/retroﬁtting

              objectives


              Guidance
              This activity aims to consolidate the requirements and alternatives for the structural rehabilitation/
5. 1 . 1




              retroﬁtting of the school infrastructure portfolio based on the results of the risk assessment, in
              particular Activity 4 . 3 . 1 . It involves the following:

                      Deﬁning the need for, and priorities of, a ﬁeld campaign to undertake detailed
                      structural inspections, by diﬀerent structural typologies
                      Deﬁning the need for complementary analytic work
                      (e.g., structural engineering analysis) to inform the intervention plan
                      Reviewing previous experience in the country on school retroﬁtting
                      Proposing criteria for the selection of retroﬁtting versus replacement
                      Quantifying and recommending retroﬁtting alternatives for diﬀerent structural
                      typologies
                      Estimating a preliminary investment plan for structural rehabilitation
              Retroﬁtting is an expensive and disruptive measure whose feasibility should be carefully evaluated.
              Toward this end, diﬀerent building performance levels can be deﬁned and graduate accordingly
              the retroﬁtting strategy. The concept of setting performance objectives for school infrastructure is
              referred to in various guidance materials; see also Activity 2 . 1 . 2 . The highest standard, “continuous
              occupancy,” is expensive to achieve and is usually reserved for hospitals, emergency service centers,
              and similar critical infrastructure. It may be appropriate for schools where they are expected
              to function as postdisaster shelters or for continuous education. The more typical performance
              objective level for new schools is “immediate occupancy,” which considers some damage acceptable,
              as long as the infrastructure investment is largely protected. For a low-cost minimum retroﬁt, “life
              safety” is often considered to be the acceptable performance standard and can often achieve code
              compliance.

              The diﬃcult economic decision lies in setting acceptable cost criteria to decide whether to replace
              unsafe schools with new schools, or to minimally retroﬁt them. When undertaking the cost
              comparison of these options, it is important to note that the level of damage (and therefore the
              residual cost) of repairing or replacing new or retroﬁtted investments varies based in part on the
              performance criteria.




     54
                                                                 |
                Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure



Local Partners
The performance criteria should be agreed upon with the government, as it will form the basis of the
retroﬁtting and redesign options prioritized under the cost-beneﬁt analysis.

The identiﬁcation and analysis of retroﬁtting solutions should be made with the participation of
local senior structural engineers to ensure the solutions are appropriate, viable, and cost-eﬀective.
Local academic institutions may also have relevant expertise.

The performance criteria and retroﬁtting options should be coordinated with the MoE, MoPW, and
Ministry of Finance.




                                                                                                          5. 1 . 1
Technical Expertise
The retroﬁtting options should be developed by an engineering consultant with expertise in
structural engineering and speciﬁc experience in the hazards that pose a signiﬁcant risk to school
infrastructure (as identiﬁed in Activity 4 . 1 . 1 ).

Output
A report should be produced to serve as the basis for a school retroﬁtting program.




                                                                                                         55
                                                          |
           Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure




              5. 1 . 2
              Enable functional rehabilitation

              objectives


              Guidance
5. 1 . 2




              This activity aims to identify the needs for improving the architectural, service, and environmen-
              tal conditions of the existing school infrastructure. There are two main reasons to integrate this
              dimension into the Safe School program: ﬁrst, safety is only one of a number of attributes that
              school infrastructure should possess, and second, public investment projects usually integrate both
              structural and functional rehabilitation works.

              Functional characteristics are related to campus layout, buildings’ architectural characteristics, ac-
              cessibility, energy supply, communication connection, and water and sanitation. The following steps
              may be followed to deﬁne the functional rehabilitation needs for a speciﬁc portfolio:

                      Deﬁne functional indicators to establish the current condition of existing infrastruc-
                      ture (based on results of Module 1.2)
                      Establish the gap in functional rehabilitation by analyzing the current condition of
                      existing school infrastructure and the planning and building regulation (Activities
                      2 . 1 . 1 and 2 . 1 . 2 )
                      Discuss and deﬁne priorities with the infrastructure oﬃce regarding functional
                      needs to be covered in the short, medium, and long term
                      Identify potential intervention alternatives for urban and rural areas and deﬁne
                      criteria to integrate structural and functional rehabilitation or replacement of
                      buildings
                      Estimate a preliminary investment plan

              Local Partners
              The functional indicators should be identiﬁed, reviewed, and agreed upon with the Ministry of
              Education, in particular those within the MoE working on functional aspects of infrastructure.

              The gap in the functional rehabilitation should be analyzed by a multisectoral team. Local
              consultants and ﬁrms with expertise can contribute to the analysis to ensure it is appropriate, viable,
              and cost-eﬀective.

              Technical Expertise
              The activity should be carried out by a multidisciplinary team with expertise in areas such as
              engineering, architecture, water and sanitation, education, and data analysis.

              Output
              A report should be produced to serve as the basis for a school functional rehabilitation program.

     56
                                                                     |
                 Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure




5. 1 . 3
Design intervention strategy
and investment scenarios
objectives


Guidance




                                                                                                                 5. 1 . 3
Whether both the structural and functional rehabilitation needs (Activities 5 . 1 . 1 and 5 . 1 . 2 , respec-
tively) have been identiﬁed or only the former, the next step is to deﬁne a prioritized and aﬀordable
intervention strategy in keeping with the construction and ﬁnancial environment (Steps 2 and 3 ),
government priorities (Step 1 ), and local territorial characteristics (urban or rural). The design of an
intervention strategy might follow these steps:

        Deﬁne the scope of the intervention strategy in terms of levels of government
        (national or subnational), geographic interest, and time line.
        Discuss the objectives and prioritization criteria that will drive the design of the
        strategy. These should come from the prior activities.
        Deﬁne the budgeting approach by reviewing previous interventions (if available) and
        local condition of the targeted area.
        Deﬁne the approach for comparing the retroﬁtting and reconstruction options, such
        as cost-beneﬁt analysis (CBA), cost-eﬀective analysis, and multi-criteria analysis.
        Deﬁne a set of intervention scenarios by combining options of retroﬁtting, recon-
        struction, and functional rehabilitation to achieve the proposed objectives in the
        short, medium, and long term.
        Conduct comparative analysis for intervention scenarios and consolidate a proposal
        for the intervention strategy
        Discuss the proposed strategy with the government. This step envisions a back-and-
        forth process with the MoE to look at preliminary results, adjust the scenarios, and
        gradually devise a strategy aligned with government’s perspective.
        Consolidate the proposed intervention strategy in a formal document to be presented
        to and discussed with other stakeholders.

Local Partners
The scope of the intervention strategies should be deﬁned, discussed, and agreed upon with the MoE.
Government agencies and local universities and consultants may also be able to provide information
on past retroﬁtting, reconstruction, and functional rehabilitation programs and costs.

Technical Expertise                                         Output
This activity should be carried out by a team with          A report should be produced outlining a risk
expertise in engineering, economics, and data analysis.     reduction and rehabilitation strategy for a
                                                            targeted school infrastructure stock.

                                                                                                                57
                                                              |
           Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure




              5. 1 .4
              Undertake cost-beneﬁt analysis
              objectives


              Guidance
              The retroﬁtting and reconstruction options identiﬁed in Activity 5 . 1 . 3 can be compared through a
5 . 1 .4




              cost-beneﬁt analysis; this approach makes it possible determine which investment opportunities will
              oﬀer the maximum beneﬁt and to prioritize them accordingly.
              CBAs have two primary purposes: to make a compelling argument for investment in the strategic
              replacement of school infrastructure, and to facilitate decision making about how to diﬀerentiate
              between retroﬁtting and replacing school facilities.

              Comparing the costs and beneﬁts of hard solutions (such as retroﬁtting or new build) is more
              straightforward than evaluating costs and beneﬁts of soft solution investments (such as changing
              the regulatory framework). Therefore this CBA activity is focused on the hard solutions, with the soft
              solutions considered separately in Activities 5 . 2 . 2 and 5 . 2 . 3 .

              Cost-beneﬁt analysis can be approached as follows:
                   a.   Scope and context. Set out the objectives and qualitative criteria; deﬁne the
                        parameters, including the key indicators; and set a discount rate (particularly for
                        long-term beneﬁts).
                   b.   Feasibility and option analysis. Screen the options identiﬁed in Activity 5 . 1 . 3 against
                        the qualitative criteria to establish a short list of ranked suitable alternatives and
                        select preferred options based on their net present values in ﬁnancial and economic
                        terms. Using the revised vulnerability curves, the risk analysis can be repeated to
                        measure the potential beneﬁt of introducing the risk reduction measures.
                   c.   Financial analysis. Assess the costs of the physical intervention with the direct
                        beneﬁts such as the saving from avoided or reduced damages. In addition to
                        comparing the investment options with one another, the analysis may also compare
                        them with a “do nothing” baseline scenario.
                   d.   Sensitivity analysis. Identify the most critical variables, and highlight the uncertain-
                        ties and assumptions that should be communicated to the key decision makers.
                   e.   Conclusion. Determine how many building typologies or locations to strengthen or
                        rebuild.




     58
                                                                |
                Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure



Alternative approaches may be taken, such as the following:

       Cost-eﬀective analysis. This type of analysis is useful where costs are easy to predict
       and beneﬁts are diﬃcult to evaluate. It involves a comparison of alternative options;
       for a given output level, it seeks the minimum net present value of costs, and for a
       given cost, it seeks the maximum output level.
       Multicriteria analysis. This type of analysis balances the needs of multiple stakehold-
       ers to consider the costs and beneﬁts that do not ordinarily have an economic value,
       such as biodiversity, well-being, or community spirit.

Local Partners




                                                                                                          5 . 1 .4
The cost of the retroﬁtting/rebuilding options should be estimated based on advice from local
surveyors and available local and international data on market costs. Government agencies and local
consultants may also be able to provide information from current building/retroﬁtting programs.

Technical Expertise
This activity should be carried out by a team with expertise in ﬁnance, economics, quantity
surveying, and disaster risk reduction.

Output
A technical report should be produced that documents the sample retroﬁts developed, the analytical
models used to deﬁne upgraded vulnerability curves, and the results of the CBAs. In addition, a
summary should be produced that includes recommendations for and prioritization of retroﬁtting
options.




                                                                                                         59
                                                             |
           Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 1: Existing School Infrastructure




              5. 2 . 1
              Consider planning and design
              gaps and opportunities
              objectives


              Guidance
5. 2 . 1




              Using the information and analysis in Steps 1 , 2 , and 3 , it is possible to look for opportunities to
              improve the planning and design of school infrastructure in order to promote safer schools.
              The following should be evaluated for identifying opportunities:

                      Model school designs. If these exist already, they should be reviewed to determine
                      how they could be improved to better resist the identiﬁed hazards. Previous case
                      studies have shown that typical upgrades made to achieve a life-safety performance
                      level for earthquakes involve less than a 10 percent increase in the cost of construc-
                      tion.
                      Value engineering. Existing designs should be assessed to see if they can be value
                      engineered to be more cost eﬀective. This step will help to increase the impact of a
                      capped investment.
                      Communication. Improvements should be made in the way design information is
                      communicated to local builders; speciﬁcally, more engaging and understandable
                      drawings and speciﬁcations should be used.
                      Technical guidelines. Guidelines for building (including extension and modiﬁcation),
                      retroﬁtting, and site selection and planning typically seek to ensure that safe building
                      practices are incorporated into non-engineered buildings. There is an opportunity
                      to develop (or update existing) guidance documents to illustrate how to apply the
                      requirements of the code to small (community-built) schools. Schools in the examples
                      must be typical of the local context in terms of structural typology and hazards.




     60
                                                                     |
                      Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 2: Implementation Process



Local Partners
The model school designs and value-engineering solutions should be discussed with the MoE. Local
design consultants and construction contractors can help to ensure that designs are appropriate,
viable, and cost-eﬀective. Local academic institutions may also have relevant expertise here and in
the assessment of demographic information to identify spatial investment priorities.

The performance criteria and design options should be coordinated with the MoE and MoPW. The
spatial planning should be coordinated with the government department responsible for geohazard
information.

Technical Expertise




                                                                                                        5. 2 . 1
The model designs, value-engineering solutions, and technical guidelines should be developed by
a design consultant with expertise in structural engineering and site planning and with speciﬁc
experience in the hazards that pose a signiﬁcant risk to school infrastructure (as identiﬁed in
Activity 4 . 1 . 1 ).

The spatial analysis should be conducted by a planning specialist.

Output
A summary should be produced listing recommendations, options, and priorities for a government
action plan. It should include updating of model school designs and of technical guidelines.




                                                                                                       61
                                                             |
           Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 2: Implementation Process




              5. 2 . 2
              Consider regulatory framework
              improvements
              objectives


              Guidance
5. 2 . 2




              Using the information and analysis in Steps 1 , 2 , and 3 , it is possible to look for opportunities to
              improve the regulatory framework of school infrastructure in order to promote safer schools.
              The following provide potential lines of action:

                      Updates to regulatory documents, such as
                         Hazard and risk maps (with the resolution required by education infrastruc-
                         ture). Updates would ensure that maps include appropriate hazards at a useful
                         level of detail to inform land use plans, site selection, and site planning.
                         Land use plans. Updates would ensure that plans consider known hazards and
                         appropriate distribution of schools to suit the spatial population/demographic.
                         Planning guidelines. Updates would ensure that guidelines are consistent
                         with other regulatory documents, are current (so that schools are ap-
                         propriately situated and planned), and provide guidance on appropriate
                         mitigation measures to reduce the exposure of schools.
                         Building codes. Updates would ensure that codes are consistent with other
                         regulatory documents and include current understanding and best practice,
                         appropriate structural typologies, and hazards that aﬀect school infra-
                         structure. Stricter structural design requirements constitute a relatively
                         small portion of the overall construction cost of new buildings and are a
                         cost-eﬀective investment against future hazards. Building codes should
                         also include guidance for retroﬁtting and repair of existing buildings.
                      Institutional adjustments, such as
                         Design checking and approval process. Adjustments would ensure
                         that there is a standard, streamlined design process with checking and
                         approval stages throughout the design phase (prior to construction).
                         Enforcement of regulatory documents. An eﬀective enforcement system
                         could be established by training and licensing professional engineers to act as
                         reviewers and undertake site inspections, exert tighter control over engineering
                         and construction quality, and deﬁne consequences for noncompliance.
              Consideration should be given to whether private schools are subject to the same regulatory
              processes. How private schools are regulated may have a signiﬁcant impact on the nation’s school
              safety, particularly if private schools constitute a substantial portion of the nation’s schools.


     62
                                                                    |
                     Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 2: Implementation Process



Local Partners
Proposed adjustments to the regulatory documents and process, including design checking and
approval procedures, should be made in collaboration with the appropriate regulatory body and
the MoPW. Institutional adjustment recommendations should be informed by relevant stakeholder
consultation.

Technical Expertise
Structural engineers, planners, and hazard specialists should review existing regulatory documents
and identify opportunities for improvement. Institutional adjustments should be proposed by
persons with speciﬁc expertise in the construction regulatory and institutional environment.




                                                                                                       5. 2 . 2
Output
A summary should be produced listing recommendations and prioritizations for adjustments and
improvements to the regulatory and institutional processes.




                                                                                                      63
                                                             |
           Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 2: Implementation Process




              5. 2 . 3
              Consider implementation
              process adjustments
              objectives


              Guidance
5. 2 . 3




              Using the information and analysis in Steps 1 , 2 , and 3 , it is possible to look for opportunities to
              improve the implementation of school infrastructure in order to promote safer schools.

              The following provide potential investment opportunities:

                      Build capacity of the construction industry.
                         Provide training and/or improve education (or training for
                         trainers) on safe school construction to develop and strengthen
                         the competencies of the construction industry.
                         Incorporate education on known hazards into university education.
                         Introduce requirements for professional qualiﬁcations for engineers and
                         architects designing, reviewing, and checking school infrastructure.
                         Introduce certiﬁcation schemes to conﬁrm skills and experience of contractors.
                      Improve quality assurance.
                         Propose continuous on-site inspections by an independent third party rather
                         than periodic inspections to maintain a consistent quality performance level.
                         Introduce quality assurance methodology and tools in the delivery
                         of school infrastructure to clarify roles and responsibilities, and
                         introduce checklists and audits for checking and certifying the quality
                         of materials and workmanship on site and in the supply chain.
                      Seek clarity, accountability, and clear lines of communication in school implementa-
                      tion processes.
                         Deﬁne roles and responsibilities for national and local
                         government and other institutional stakeholders.
                      Improve construction management practices.
                         Streamline procurement and management processes.
                         Deﬁne roles and responsibilities, and clearly delineate re-
                         sponsibility at each step of the process.




     64
                                                                    |
                     Step 5: Safer School Investment Opportunities Module 2: Implementation Process



Local Partners
Proposed adjustments to the ﬁnancial implementation process should be made in collaboration with
the MoE, MoPW, and Ministry of Finance.

Recommendations for improvements to the physical implementation processes (such as construc-
tion management and quality assurance) should be made in collaboration with local contractors,
suppliers, and the MoPW.

Technical Expertise
Financial implementation adjustments should be recommended by consultants with expertise in




                                                                                                       5. 2 . 3
economics, ﬁnance, and the construction industry. Infrastructure implementation adjustments
should be made by consultants with expertise in the construction industry, contracting, quantity
surveying, and supply chains.

Output
A summary should be produced listing recommendations and prioritizations for adjustments and
improvements to the ﬁnancial and infrastructure implementation processes.




                                                                                                      65
     Glossary




     Glossary


     building regulation                                             risk
     Local and national legislation related to the design of the     The combination of the probability of an event and its
     school infrastructure (e.g., structural design of buildings).   negative consequences.
     deterministic analysis                                          risk analysis
     Approach to assessing risk that considers an individual         The process that seeks to comprehend the nature of risk
     event with a certain probability of occurrence.                 and to determine the extent of risk.
     earthquake resistant                                            risk assessment
     Quality of structures designed and built in accordance          A methodology to determine the nature and extent
     with seismic codes and guidance at a minimum.                   of risk by analyzing potential hazards and evaluating
                                                                     existing conditions of vulnerability that together could
     mitigation
                                                                     potentially harm exposed people, property, services,
     The action of reducing the risk.
                                                                     livelihoods, and the environment on which they depend.
     nonstructural elements
                                                                     RVA (rapid visual assessment)
     Elements that do not contribute to the stability of the
                                                                     A methodology to quickly inspect and evaluate buildings.
     building, such as ﬁnishes, windows, ceilings, and building
                                                                     It can be used in postdisaster contexts in damaged areas
     equipment.
                                                                     with minimum manpower to judge whether a building
     performance objective                                           can be reoccupied.
     Used to deﬁne the maximum risk level that can be
                                                                     school campus or facility
     tolerated in terms of damage and disruption. The
                                                                     The site of the school where all school buildings are
     performance objective for a hospital or school may be
                                                                     located. Typical characteristics of the campus to be
     higher than for individual houses.
                                                                     evaluated are the location, number of buildings, and
     planning regulation                                             building layouts.
     Local and national legislation related to the physical
                                                                     seismic retroﬁt
     planning of school infrastructure (e.g., site selection,
                                                                     The addition of new technology or features to an existing
     arrangement of buildings on the site, interfaces with
                                                                     building aimed at improving its earthquake resistance.
     services, size and layout of buildings)
                                                                     This approach may fall short of code standards in order
     probabilistic analysis                                          to allow pragmatic incremental enhancement.
     Approach to assessing risk that considers all possible and
                                                                     structural system
     relevant events.
                                                                     Set of building elements that contribute to both the
     reconstruction                                                  vertical and horizontal stability of the building.
     The action or process of rebuilding a building or part of a
                                                                     structural typology
     building that has been damaged or destroyed.
                                                                     Engineering categorization of a building based on the
     rehabilitation                                                  principal vertical and lateral stability system from which
     The action or process of returning a building to its            it has been built. The structural systems of a building
     former condition.                                               are those that resist gravity, earthquake, wind, and other
     relocation                                                      types of loads. These are called structural components
     The action or process of rebuilding a building in a             and include columns (posts, pillars); beams (girders,
     diﬀerent location after it was damaged or destroyed, or         joists); ﬂoor or roof sheathing, slabs; load-bearing walls
     because a high level of risk exists in the original location.   (i.e., walls designed to support the building weight and/or
                                                                     provide lateral resistance); and foundations (mat, spread
     repair
                                                                     footings, piles).
     The action or process of restoring a damaged building to
     a good condition.


66
Glossary




           67
About GFDRR:
The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
(GFDRR) is a global partnership that helps developing countries
better understand and reduce their vulnerabilities to natural
hazards and adapt to climate change. Working with over 400
local, national, regional, and international partners, GFDRR
provides grant ﬁnancing, technical assistance, training and
knowledge sharing activities to mainstream disaster and
climate risk management in policies and strategies. Managed
by the World Bank, GFDRR is supported by 34 countries and 9
international organizations
