A Guide to the Light Library model
  Lessons, results & recommendations
        from the field: Senegal




                                       1
A project funded by Lighting Africa, a World Bank/IFC joint initiative, delivered by
  SunnyMoney in partnership with Agence Senegalaise d’Electrification Rurale.




                                                                                             2
                                                               Front cover image: ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
Executive summary


The Light Library is a new model designed and
delivered by UK charity SolarAid’s social enterprise
SunnyMoney, in partnership with the Senegalese
Rural Electrification Agency (ASER), the World Bank
and the Ministry of Education. The Light Library is a
donated set of pico-solar lights given to selected
public schools in rural areas to enable students to
borrow the lights at a nominal fee to take home and
                                                                                    ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
use for study after dark. The objectives of the model
are to increase access to, awareness of and use of solar lights. The model was designed to
support strategies to increase demand and uptake of solar lights for use in off-grid areas
of rural Africa. As a second phase to the project, the Light Library model was followed by
the SunnyMoney traditional sales campaign in the same region and a control region to use
as a comparison to determine the model’s effect on demand and uptake.

There was a strong research and evaluation component to the project, including baseline
market studies, baseline customer interviews and follow up parent and headteacher
interviews.

Nearly 5,000 solar lights were procured for the project, 58 schools selected and an
estimated 55,000 people gained direct exposure to the solar lights through the Light
Library project. There were other added benefits of the Light Library project, for example,
increased community interaction with the school, including increased enrolment.

Demand for solar lights during the sales campaign were dramatically higher in the Light
Library schools at 35% of school population, than in the control schools, although there
was still high demand in the control region, with 15% uptake. The Light Library model not
only appears to have increased uptake through increased exposure, but also seems to
have reduced the perception of risk; in Light Library schools the customers included more
risk-averse, lower-income families.

Lessons learned were that partnership was key to effective delivery, and with higher
student:light ratios the model could raise awareness amongst a larger population.

It is strongly recommended that those interested in supporting or delivering the model
should complement it with a sales element to ensure that increased demand is followed
up with sustainable and ongoing supply. Consumer awareness campaigns may achieve a
less intensive version of the model and could complement the work. Engaging with
government for a healthy policy environment is key to successful delivery.

                                                                                             3
Contents


 1. Introduction                                                    6
 2. Background to the project                                       7
      o The partners                                                7
                SolarAid and SunnyMoney
                Lighting Africa and the World Bank Group
                The Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency
                The Ministry of Education
      o The policy environment in Senegal                           9
 3. The model                                                       10
      o The rationale                                               10
      o The objectives                                              10
      o Key risks                                                   10
 4. Details of implementation                                       11
      o Phase 1: The Light Library model                            11
                The model
                Implementation
                The products
                Site selection
                Sustainability and accountability
      o Phase 2: The School Campaign                                17
                The model
                Implementation
                The products
 5. Results and impact                                              20
      o The research conducted                                      20
                Phase 1: The Light Library project
                Phase 2: The School Campaign
      o The results of the baseline market studies                  21
      o The results of the Light Library project                    23
                Usage of the Light Library
                Management of the Library
                Opinions on the solar lights
                Opinions on the Light Library
                Impact of the Light Library
                Faulty lights and breakages within the Libraries
                Challenges faced and suggestions for improvement
                Potential sustainability of the Library
                Conclusion


                                                                         4
      o The results of the School Campaign                         30
                Headteacher interaction
                Customer profiles
                Uptake and sales
                Reasons for non-purchase
                Policy environment and pricing
      o Conclusions on the model                                   34
6. Lessons learned                                                 35
      o   Partnerships are key                                     35
      o   Guidance but not rules                                   36
      o   Reach more with higher student:light ratios              36
      o   Upholding warranties                                     37
7. Recommendations                                                 38
      o   Complement with supply and sales                         38
      o   Determine the objective of the model                     38
      o   Engage with government for a health policy environment   39
      o   Consumer awareness                                       39
      o   Support available from SunnyMoney                        40
8. Contacts and useful resources                                   41
9. Appendix                                                        42




                                                                                5


                                                                        ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
 1. Introduction


The Light Library is a new model designed and delivered by UK charity
SolarAid’s social enterprise SunnyMoney, in partnership with the
Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER), the World Bank and the
Ministry of Education. The Light Library is a donated set of pico-solar
lights given to selected public schools in rural areas of Senegal to
enable students to borrow the lights to study after dark. The model
was designed as a direct response to requests for a distribution model
for solar lights that offered exposure to, and built awareness of, pico-
solar lights in order to help build trust and demand without
                                                                                             ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
undermining strategies to build a sustainable market for the sale of this
technology. The model was aligned to support the achievement of ASER and LightingAfrica’s national
programme objectives for rural electrification. The objective of the model was to support market-
building through overcoming two of the main barriers to uptake: lack of trust and awareness.

This report shares information on the design and delivery of the
model and the subsequent delivery of SunnyMoney’s traditional
sales model, ‘The School Campaign,’ which tested the effect on            This report shares details of the design
demand/purchase of solar lights. It shares the results of an              and delivery of the model, as well as
evaluation as well as the lessons learned, challenges faced, and          evaluation results.
key issues addressed. The report then draws conclusions on the
usefulness of the model in building a sustainable market for              The Light Library was a new model
improved access to, and availability of, solar products, and offers       designed and delivered by social
guidance and recommendations for various stakeholders such as             enterprise SunnyMoney.
governments, private-sector, practitioners, policy-makers and
donors considering using, implementing, promoting or funding
the model.                                                                The Light Library is a donated set of
                                                                          pico-solar lights given to selected public
Key information and results are called out in the orange boxes,           schools in rural areas of Senegal to
as seen to the right, and quotations from stakeholders are called         enable students to borrow the lights to
out in pale orange boxes, as seen below.                                  study after dark.




                                                                                                     6

                                                                                                          ©SolarAid
 2. Background to the project


This section provides an introduction to the partners and an overview of the situation in Senegal.



The Light Library model was first delivered as a project in selected regions
of Senegal. The project was funded by Lighting Africa and implemented by
the UK charity SolarAid’s social enterprise, SunnyMoney. It was delivered
in partnership with the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) and
the Senegalese Ministry of Education. The objectives of the project were
to increase access to, and use of, solar lights, and increase awareness of
the benefits of using these lights through public schools in rural Senegal. A
key aspect of this project was that the solar lights were to be used as a
public good and could not be sold or exclusively owned.


                                                                                                 ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
The partners

SolarAid and SunnyMoney

SunnyMoney is a social enterprise and UK-registered company wholly
owned by the UK charity, SolarAid, with operations in Kenya, Malawi,         SunnyMoney is a social enterprise
Tanzania and Zambia. In East Africa, the organisation works closely          wholly owned by UK charity
with local education authorities to sell lights to the parents of students   SolarAid.
to enable families to access clean, safe lighting at home. This model
has been so successful that they have become the largest distributor of portable solar lights in Africa
and in March 2014, SolarAid/SunnyMoney reached their one millionth light sale. By building a market
for solar lights, the organisation seeks the eradication of the kerosene lamp from Africa by 2020.
They are product neutral, offering customers choice, quality and impartial advice. All of the products
distributed meet Lighting Africa’s Minimum Quality Standards to ensure quality.

SunnyMoney designed and delivered the Light Library model and had not implemented the model
prior to this experience in Senegal. SunnyMoney set up a Project Steering Committee made up of
representatives from Lighting Africa, ASER and the Ministry of Education, among others; see below.



Lighting Africa and the World Bank Group
                                                                                Lighting Africa aims to catalyse the
Lighting Africa, a joint International Finance Corporation (IFC) and
                                                                                development of markets for
World Bank program, seeks to accelerate the development of
                                                                                affordable, modern off-grid lighting
commercial off-grid lighting markets in sub-Saharan Africa as part of
                                                                                products.
the World Bank Group's wider efforts to improve access to energy.


                                                                                                      7
Lighting Africa is mobilising the private sector to build sustainable markets that provide affordable,
modern, off-grid lighting to communities across Africa, which are not on the electricity grid. The
program and its partners have brought cleaner, safer and better lighting to close to four million
people and are working to increase energy access in order to provide better lighting to 250 million
people by 2030.

Lighting Africa designed and managed the tender process, and funded the US$240,000 project under
a grant from the Norwegian Trust Fund for Private Sector and Infrastructure.



The Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency

The Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) is an autonomous
body attached to the Ministry of Energy in Senegal. ASER is in charge       ASER is attached to the Senegalese
of promoting electrification by providing support to local, national,       Ministry of Energy and promotes
and international initiatives. Its approach rests upon an                   rural electrification.
electrification plan established by the Ministry of Energy.

ASER was a key partner in the detailed design of the model in Senegal; supporting SunnyMoney in
selecting appropriate solar light products, identifying other key agencies/ministries to include in
decision making, and easing importation of products into Senegal.



The Ministry of Education

The objective of the Ministry of Education in Senegal is to ensure
equitable access, attendance, attainment, and achievement in                 The Ministry of Education focuses on
education by ensuring good services. The Ministry oversees the               providing    education     to    the
curriculum and management of all public schools in the country with          population of Senegal.
national, regional and local level staff including headteachers and
teachers.

The Ministry of Education was a key partner in the delivery of the model in Senegal; supporting
SunnyMoney in identifying and selecting the schools that were included in the model, interacting
with teachers, and supporting the process.




                                                                                                    8

                                                                                              ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
The policy environment in Senegal

Senegal has a national electrification rate of 42%, while rural access is considerably lower at 26%.

The government divided the country into rural electrification concessions to be allotted to private
operators through a process of competitive bidding, yet most of the regions remain unserved
through this process.

VAT and import tariffs currently cost 44% of the value of a solar light imported into Senegal. This has
suppressed the market and leads to higher prices for consumers.

There have been discussions about modifying the concessionaire model and eliminating or reducing
the solar import tax costs but no changes have been implemented as yet.




                                                                                                       9


                                                                                                           ©SolarAid
 3. The model

This section provides an introduction to the rationale for funding and designing this model and the
objectives and goals the model was designed to achieve. In addition, it shares some of the key risks
or assumptions that were in place at the start of the design and implementation.



The rationale

SunnyMoney was interested to design and deliver this model to identify if it could
be an effective way to address three of the key barriers to uptake for customers;
lack of awareness, lack of trust, and low-income. The Light Library model
addresses all three of these barriers and it was felt that a good market-building
complement to the model would be to follow it up with sales and distribution
activities. The Light Libraries would raise awareness of the solar lights through
providing direct access to them, it would build trust in the products as it would
allow families to use the lights at almost no risk, and it could work to address the
low-income challenge as families have an opportunity to save the money they
would spend on other lighting while using the lights from the Library.

                                                                                                ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison

The objectives

The Light Library project centred on the procurement and
distribution of solar lanterns to students through public schools, in         The objective of the Light Library
partnership with ASER and the Ministry of Education (MoE). The                was to increase access to, and use
Light Library model was expected to have a catalytic effect on local          of, solar lights, and to increase
market demand for these ‘pico’-solar lights. The objectives of the            awareness of the benefits of using
project were to increase access to, and use of, solar lights, and             the lights.
increase awareness of direct and indirect financial and non-financial
benefits of using these lights.



Key risks

There was some concern at the outset of designing and delivering this model that it would
undermine the market for pico-solar lights. This was a significant concern to both SunnyMoney and
Lighting Africa specifically due to the nature of their goals and objectives as organisations. This
appears not to have been the case, providing there is supply to meet demand; discussed in more
depth below. A key objective of this delivery was therefore to ensure responsible monitoring of this
situation to prevent any risk of this happening. Another concern was the sustainability of the model
and project. Again, this is addressed in specific sections throughout the report.



                                                                                                   10
4. Details of implementation


This section provides detailed information on how the project was delivered with the phased
approached explained and addressed.



Phase 1: The Light Library model

The model

SunnyMoney delivered a ‘library’ of solar lights – a Luminothèque – to
selected public schools in rural areas of Senegal to enable students to study
after dark at home. The lights were donated through ASER to the Ministry of
Education (MoE) and remain the property of the MoE and the school. They
are managed by the school and community and provide access to, awareness
of, and exposure to, pico-solar lights for all. Schools can choose to prioritise
exam-year students, but other than legitimate prioritisation, all students
should have equal access to the lights.

With a token charge per night for borrowing the lights of 5 CFA (less than
US$0.01) for the entry-level lights (lighting only) and 25 CFA (~US$0.05) for
                                                                                               ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
the mid-level lights with phone charging, the use of the library is available to
all with the added benefit that the school can raise a small
fund to replace the lights at the end of their lifespan, purchase
                                                                         Students were charged a nominal fee for
additional lights, or to use for other school expenses as
                                                                         borrowing lights from the school.
decided by the school committee. In addition, charging a token
fee may mean that the lights are valued more than if they
were available free of charge.

The decision to continue or not to operate the Light Library during school holidays is to be
determined by the school management committee (see below for explanation on this group),
though it was encouraged to allow more regular use for community members and also raise some
funds for the school. The renting fees were increased because the use of the lights would not be
strictly limited to the students during this period. To borrow solar lights during the holidays a deposit
of 25% of the purchase price of each light is required, plus 25 CFA per day for lights without phone
charging and 100 CFA per day for the lights with mobile phone charging capacity.

In addition to the Library lights, each school was given four mid-level lights for use solely by the
teachers to assist in lesson-planning and preparation, and marking. These did not require a rental
payment and were provided to ensure that the Library was available solely for students and families,
while the teachers also had a chance to use solar lights to enable them to experience and confidently
talk about the benefits of this technology to the community.



                                                                                                      11
Each school was asked to nominate a Librarian to manage the Library at the school and to either set
up a committee or use an existing parent-teacher association/school committee to make decisions
on some of the details of the Library management.



Implementation

SunnyMoney’s trained field team visited every single school
                                                                    Schools     were      provided  with
participating in the project to meet with teachers, the
                                                                    supporting materials and documents
community, and parents. Teachers and the Librarian were
                                                                    to aid the management of the Light
given training on the products, and the Library and how to
                                                                    Library.
manage it. A manual with materials to support the
management was developed by SunnyMoney and given to each school, details below. A meeting was
held with the community and parents to share information on the purpose of the Library, its use and
management. This provided an open forum to sensitise the community, answer questions and
address any issues.

The idea was that whole families would gain awareness of the lights and their benefits through their
use and due to SunnyMoney’s hands-on distribution method.

An outline of the materials provided to each school is included in the Appendix.



The products

A combination of entry-level lights - lower-cost and lower
functionality; lighting only - and mid-level lights - more             The Light Libraries consisted of entry-
expensive and with phone-charging capability - were identified         and mid-level solar lights.
for the project. SunnyMoney ran a competitive procurement
process to select the solar lights they felt would best meet the needs of the project and the users.
Apart from cost, the criteria for the selection process considered performance and quality, battery
life, warranty availability, and more, see Table 1.

Table 1: Solar light product procurement criteria

 Criteria                      Minimum requirements
 Performance, specification
                               The lights have passed Lighting Africa’s Minimum Quality Standards
 and quality
 Battery longevity and         Long-lasting Lithium Ion or Lithium Iron Phosphate battery with a
 technology                    life-span of at least 3 years
                               Deposit payable when ordering: 50%
 Payment and credit terms
                               Balance of payment on shipping
 Warranty                      2 years from date of delivery
 Serial number                 Visible on unit and packaging box
 Ability to adhere to
                               Bidders should anticipate all of the supply will be required to arrive
 manufacturing and
                               in Senegal by no later than 6th April 2013
 airfreight schedule



                                                                                                        12
In addition, organisation and manufacturing credentials such as the following were taken into
account: social and ethical credentials, product and manufacturing certifications such as ISO 9001/2,
existing manufacturing volumes, ownership structure, organisation size and history, any (African)
logistics expertise.

At the end of this process, five solar light products from three different manufacturers were selected.

 -    d.light S2 (entry-level light)
 -    Greenlight Planet Sun King Eco (entry-level light)
 -    Marathoner/Omnivoltaic MB2-200 (mid-level light)
 -    d.light S300 (mid-level light)
 -    Greenlight Planet Sun King Pro (mid-level light)


4,798 solar lights were procured for the project with all
distributed to schools minus a small stock left in Dakar for           Nearly 5,000 solar lights were procured
replacements. In terms of volume, the focus was on the entry-          for the project.
level lights with 71% being in this category, see Table 2 for
details.

Table 2: Details of products selected for the Light Library project

                                                                                         Number
                                                            Total         Total
                                                                                       allocated as
 Products                                                 number        number
                                                                                       replacement
                                                         for project   distributed
                                                                                           stock
 OVERVIEW            3 brands        5 products             4,798         4,409             389


                                     d.light S2             2,035         1,883             152
 Entry level
 (lighting only)
                                     Greenlight
                                     Planet Sun King        1,350         1,223             127
                                     Eco


                                     Marathoner
                                                             460           429              31
                                     MB2-200

 Mid-level
 (lighting plus
 phone charging                      d.light S300            518           473              45
 capability)

                                     Greenlight
                                     Planet Sun King         435           401              34
                                     Pro




                                                                                                    13
Despite normally attracting an import tariff of around 40%, thanks to the partnership with ASER, the
solar lights imported for the project benefited from tax exemption which meant that more lights
could be deployed in the project.



Site selection

In order to maximise the impact of the project and ensure its
success, alongside the partners, SunnyMoney developed a key             Regions and schools to participate
set of criteria with which to select the region(s) for this first       were selected based on specific
trial project. Criteria for region selection focused on electricity     criteria.
access, poverty rates and school enrolment numbers, for more
detail see Table 3.

Table 3: Region selection criteria for Light Library project

 Area of
                  Indicator of criteria      Criteria     Rationale (target)
 criteria
                  Electrification rate        Low rate To reach those without access to electricity.
 Electricity
                                                       To reach those without access to electricity
 access           % electrified schools       Low %
                                                       and lower-resourced schools.
                                                       To raise maximum awareness amongst
                  Population density         High rate
                                                       population.
 Poverty and
                                                       To reach those most suitable for products;
 population
                  Poverty rate               High rate those unable to access grid electricity and
                                                       experiencing energy poverty.
                                             Moderate A high number of primary schools to reach
                  Number of schools
                                             number most members of community.
 Education                                             To reach a wide audience and high
                  Gross enrolment rate       High rate enrolment rates suggest sizeable share of
                                                       families in the region.


Regions with low rural electrification rates, high poverty rates and high school enrolment rates were
initially selected. Due to the short nature of the project, regions that were particularly remote and/or
with a dispersed population were filtered out.

Ultimately, the neighbouring regions of Kaolack and Kaffrine were selected for the project test, see
highlighted regions below in Figure 1.




                                                                                                    14


                                                                                           ©SolarAid/Steve Woodward
Figure 1: Map of selected regions for the Light Library project within Senegal




To select the actual schools to be included in the project, the school list was first filtered for schools
with no electricity connection. Using information from the Ministry of Education on school
population, SunnyMoney then selected schools with 150-500 students to ensure the Libraries
reached many people. This was easier logistically than selecting many smaller schools, and still
allowed the Libraries to be small enough to be managed by the schools.

The next criteria was filtering from the school list for those with high numbers in the exam classes as
they are most likely to need lights for homework and study. Then, the accessibility of the schools
was assessed. Given the short timeframe of this project, it was decided that schools that were very
remote should not be included.

After this process was completed, districts within the regions were chosen based on accessibility to
focus the project in: Katakel and Sagna in Kaffrine, and Paoskoto and Mbadakhoune in Kaolack.

Ultimately, the list was checked with the partners, including local-level Ministry of Education staff to
provide information on community engagement and teacher competence. Each headteacher was
phoned by the SunnyMoney team to verify enrolment numbers and to assess willingness to
participate in the project.

The final list identified 24 schools in the Kaffrine region and 34
in Kaolack; 58 schools in total, see Figure 2.                           In total, 58 schools in Kaffrine and
                                                                         Kaolack regions were selected.


                                                                                                       15
Figure 2: Map of selected schools for the Light Library project within selected regions




Sustainability and accountability

SunnyMoney created a Light Library Project Management
Committee at the national level who provided input into the         A Light Library Project Management
project design and implementation and after handover, at the        Committee was formed.
end of the project, oversaw the running of the project. This
Committee is made up of members of representatives from the Ministry of Education, the
Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency, the Inter-sectorial Committee for Implementation of
Synergies between the Energy sector and other Strategic Sectors for Poverty Reduction (CIMES), the
Ministry of Energy, the Centre for Studies and Research on Renewable Energies (CERER) and Lighting
Africa. Local level Ministry of Education staff also played a critical role in the monitoring and
management of the Light Libraries at the local level.

By having a community meeting, asking the schools to create a Light Library Management
Committee and having signed agreements it was believed that the Light Libraries would remain the
property of the school and would be used to provide opportunities for students to study after dark
for many years to come.

As the project was designed to be handed over to the Management Committee to manage at the
end of the project timeframe, it was envisaged that upholding warranties on the solar lights might
be challenging. However, SunnyMoney have decided to maintain a longer term presence in Senegal


                                                                                               16
and can assist, where possible, with claiming replacements for faulty lights from manufacturers,
which can be handed over to the Committee to manage.

To ensure that the solar lights are still available in schools, in the event of any
faults or breakdowns, a replacement stock of 8% of the total solar lights shipped
to Senegal were kept in storage at ASER. During the School Campaign phase (see
below), SunnyMoney offered to manage this replacement process at the schools,
more details later.



Phase 2: The School Campaign

The model                                                                                       ©SolarAid/Gill Davies

Approximately six months after the end of Phase 1, Light
Library delivery, SunnyMoney began implementing their                 SunnyMoney delivered their traditional
traditional, award-winning School Campaign model. This                distribution model as follow up to the
model was developed in 2011 in Tanzania to catalyse markets           Light Library project.
and has been successfully scaled up and replicated across
Kenya, Zambia and Malawi, resulting in SunnyMoney rapidly             “The meeting was interesting in the
becoming the largest ‘last mile’ distributor of LightingAfrica        sense that we are really aware now of
quality-assured solar products in Africa.                             the management of the lights (functions,
                                                                      capacities and other technical aspects).”
SunnyMoney works through schools alongside the Ministry of
Education. SunnyMoney’s teams meet with the local education                         Boubacar Tall, Headteacher
authority and check if they are happy for the campaign to be
run in their region/district. They then arrange zonal/area headteacher meetings where groups of
headteachers will visit a hub location and the SunnyMoney field team will give a workshop on pico-
solar lights, their benefits, and how the campaign works. The headteachers are given fliers to hand
to students to give to their parents and a sample light for use in demonstrations and to show
students and parents, and are encouraged to arrange meetings with parents and the community to
tell them about the opportunity. The SunnyMoney customer centre calls the headteachers each
week to offer assistance and to collect a rough idea of orders. Then 2-4 weeks after the initial
meeting, the field team will revisit the hub location, the headteachers will come to collect the lights
for their school students and hand over the money.



Implementation

SunnyMoney ran a School Campaign to meet demand, test the
viability of a market-based approach to providing access to        A control region was chosen to run the
pico-solar lights and to test the efficacy of the Light Library    traditional model in to test effects of
model as a tool to raise awareness and exposure to solar           the Light Library model.
lights. SunnyMoney ran the School Campaign in the 58 Light
Library schools in the Kaffrine and Kaolack regions. SunnyMoney also selected the Louga region,
using the same criteria as above, as a control region and 58 control schools to run the School
Campaign in, see Table 4. SunnyMoney worked with a reduced field team and conducted two

                                                                                                  17
headteacher meetings in Kaolack, one in Kaffrine – the original Light Library areas, and two meetings
in Louga, the control region.



Table 4: Indicators for Light Library and control regions

 Indicator/Region                   Kaffrine            Kaolack            Louga
 Rural electrification rate           4.8%               19.4%             20.5%
 Electrified schools                 35.7%               32.4%             26.2%
 Population density              52 people/km²      155 people/km²     34 people/km²
 Poverty rate                        46.2%               23.8%             31.9%
 Number of primary schools            387                 636               824
 Gross enrolment (primary)           50.8%              108.2%             74.8%


As this was the first time SuunnyMoney was running its School Campaign model in Senegal, it based
its sales forecasts and solar light stock procurement on its experience of operating in East Africa and
made the assumption that demand for lights would be even higher in the schools which had
participated in the Light Library project. Within the first two weeks of running the School Campaign
in Senegal, it became evident that orders for solar lights had surpassed estimations, and hence more
solar lights were procured and imported to Dakar to meet this higher than anticipated demand.

It was estimated that in the Light Library schools there would be an uptake (number of solar lights
sold as a proportion of school population) of 19% of entry-level and 13% of mid-level solar lights. In
the control schools, with no prior interaction with SunnyMoney or the Light Library model, an
uptake of 5% of entry-level lights and 2% of mid-level lights was estimated. See page 33 for actual
uptake.




                                                                                                    18


                                                                                                          ©SolarAid
The products

Because the School Campaign in Senegal was a small-scale test project, SunnyMoney chose to keep
the product range simple and selected the d.light S2 as the entry-level solar light and the Greenlight
Planet Sun King Mobile as the mid-level light with phone charging capability.

The School Campaign provides an offer price for the solar lights which is a one-time opportunity and
may not be found in the market or as a retail price after the campaign, but doesn’t undermine the
market as it allows early adopters to be introduced to the technology at a reasonable price. The
d.light S2 (left below) was sold for 4,500 CFA (~US$9.50) in the School Campaign and the Greenlight
Planet Sun King Mobile (right below) was sold for 15,000 CFA (~US$31) in the School Campaign.




d.light S2                                              Greenlight Planet Sun King Mobile

- gives 4 hours of light                                - up to 36 hours of light with three settings
- Integrated solar panel                                - charges mobile phones
- 2 year warranty                                       - separate 1.5 Watt solar panel
- up to 5 year lifespan                                 - 1 year warranty
                                                        - up to 5 year lifespan




                                                                                                    19
 5. Results and impact


This section provides an overview of the research methods used and then shares the key results of
the Light Library model and its impact on The School Campaign sales.



The research conducted

There was a strong monitoring, evaluation (M&E) and research
component to all parts of the project delivery; SolarAid have a          There was a strong M&E component
strong focus on M&E and research to inform strategy design               throughout the project design and
and process, to inform programme delivery and to allow                   delivery.
accountability to donors and stakeholders. Because the Light
Library was a new model, never delivered before, it was even             Research conducted:
more imperative that the research element was integral to the
                                                                     - 15 market observations
project design and delivery. As such, a comprehensive set of
                                                                     - 1,492 public survey interviews
M&E and research activities were carried out.
                                                                     - 135 trader survey interviews
As with SolarAid’s current impact measurement and research           - 206 baseline customer interviews
activities, the evaluation used mixed methods; collecting            - 148 follow up parent interviews
qualitative and quantitative data, where possible. It engaged          (Light Library)
with a variety of stakeholders: customers, parents, the public,      - 116         baseline     headteacher
head-teachers, the Light Library Project Management                    questionnaires
Committee members, school committee members and traders              - 58 follow up headteacher interviews
in local markets.                                                      (Light Library)
                                                                     - 28     follow     up   parent-teacher
                                                                       association member interviews (Light
                                                                       Library)
Phase 1: The Light Library project
                                                                     -
The SunnyMoney field team conducted baseline market observations, trader surveys and public
surveys in the selected Light Library regions. This research enabled SunnyMoney to ascertain the
initial level of awareness, supply, and demand for pico-solar lights.

The field team conducted structured baseline interviews with teachers, parent-teacher
association/school committee members, and parents at the organised school workshops. Parent
interviews, for the most part, took place prior to SunnyMoney presentations to get a true baseline of
attitudes towards, awareness of, and opinions on pico-solar lights. Teacher and PTA member
interviews took place after the workshop to gather information on programme design; to record
reactions to the project including concerns and opportunities expressed, and to better deliver future
implementation. During the workshop itself, the SunnyMoney Research Assistant recorded
attendance, general attitude, and key questions asked and answers given.




                                                                                                 20
Structured follow up interviews were conducted with parents, teachers and PTA members a few
weeks after project implementation; they enabled SunnyMoney to capture initial successes and
challenges of the Light Library activity, changes in awareness of, and opinion on, pico-solar products.
The same respondents were interviewed as were interviewed during the baseline to offer a direct
comparison. However, due to the short timeframe of the project, this follow up exercise was done
reasonably soon after project delivery and it was felt it didn’t offer a long enough term evaluation of
the project successes.



Phase 2: The School Campaign

SolarAid committed to conducting a fuller impact evaluation of the Light
Library project; more rigorous follow up research to understand the longer-
term impact of the Light Library project and to enable the production of this
report for sharing results and guidance. The research in Phase 2 also
monitored the success of the School Campaign to offer a chance to assess
whether demand for solar lights was affected by exposure/awareness, and if
so, to what extent.

The following research tools were used: structured interviews with parents,
teachers and school committee members at Light Library schools, market
observations, public surveys and trader surveys in the control region,
structured interviews with solar light customers, baseline questionnaires with
headteachers who attended the meetings, and structured interviews with
                                                                                                  ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
members of the Light Library Project Management Committee.



The results of the baseline market studies

A baseline market study was conducted in rural areas of the
Light Library regions; Kaffrine and Kaolack in May 2013. A              A market study in both regions showed
similar study was conducted in rural areas of the comparison            similar baseline environments.
region: Louga in March 2014.

The results show a low level of electricity access in the areas surveyed, a population mostly living
below the poverty line1 and spending a considerable amount of household income on lighting
(around 10%) in both areas. The control region had slightly higher average family sizes and higher
spending on lighting with a slightly lower per person income and lower levels of access to electricity.

For both regions, there was a high level of expressed interest in purchasing a solar light with similar
opinions on the benefits of the lights: usefulness, providing opportunity for saving money, as well as
similar concerns around the reliability, quality and size of the light.

Overall there was a low level of awareness of pico-solar lights in the Light Library regions prior to the
implementation of the model, but a reasonable level in the control region (45%); this could be due to
the slightly more recent timeframe of this study i.e. while both were baseline studies before

1
    Using the US$1.25 per person per day threshold.

                                                                                                     21
SunnyMoney operations, the Kaffrine/Kaolack market study was done 10 months earlier.
Interestingly, respondents in the control region estimated the price of an entry-level light at over
double the estimates from the Light Library regions; this could be because they were more aware of
solar lights, as evidenced above, but perhaps weren’t actually aware of the very small lights.

The key learnings, and comparisons, are below in Table 5.

Table 5: Key results from baseline market research


                                                     Light Library regions           Control region

 Number of market observations                                 8                           7
 Number of trader interviews                                  66                          69
 Number of public interviews                                  960                         532
 Average household size                                        9                           13
 Average monthly household income                            $145                         $148
 % respondents living below the $1.25 per
                                                             84%                          94%
 person per day poverty line
 % of respondents with access to electricity                 27%                           9%
 Main source of lighting (for those with no
                                                     battery lights (85%)         battery lights (78%)
 access to electricity)
 Average household monthly expenditure on
 lighting (for those with no access to                       $5.72                       $9.55
 electricity)
 Lighting expenditure as % of household
                                                              7%                          11%
 income
 Average hours of lighting used per evening                   4.6                          4.5
 % of public respondents who were aware of
                                                             20%                          45%
 pico-solar lights
 % of public respondents who expressed
                                                             92%                          85%
 interest to purchase a pico-solar light
 % of public respondents who felt the price of
 the sample solar light was cheap or                         38%                          66%
 reasonable (other option: expensive)
                                                    save money (54%)          useful (50%)
 Perceived benefits of solar lights                 useful (49%)              save money (45%)
                                                    reliable (23%)            useful for child study (20%)

                                                    no negatives (61%)        no negatives (55%)
 Perceived negatives of solar lights                unreliable (18%)          unsure of quality (13%)
                                                    too small (10%)           too small (13%)

 Estimated cost of entry-level solar light           2,654 CFA (US$5430)         5,712 CFA (US$11.65)

Full reports on these market studies are available at SolarAid (see contact details at end of report).




                                                                                                      22
The results of the Light Library project

Although the initial criteria for selecting schools for the Light
Library project identified those with student populations of        An estimated 55,000 people gained
between 150 and 500, due to inaccuracy of data provided, the        direct exposure to the solar lights
student numbers were, on average, 30% of those given. This          through the Light Library project.
meant that in the 58 schools that participated, 6,115 students
had access to the solar lights for study. An estimated 55,000 people had direct exposure to the
technology with many more community members gaining exposure through friends and neighbours.

148 parents were interviewed as a follow up to the Light Library project; of these, 102 had chosen to
buy a solar light of the sample size. All headteachers at Light Library schools were also interviewed.



Usage of the Light Library

95% of the headteachers reported that they had a Light Library
                                                                      All students had access to the Light
Management Committee; on average made up of three men
                                                                      Library with some schools prioritising
and one woman. 95% of the headteachers also reported that
                                                                      exam year students.
their nominated Librarian was still active in managing the
Library at their school.
                                                                        “[The parents] are very satisfied
At each school, all students had access to the Light Library
                                                                        because some of them could not
with 21% of schools prioritising students taking exams. One
                                                                        afford to give their flashlight to their
school prioritised students from poor families and another
                                                                        children every time they needed it to
prioritised those that had no access to electricity; otherwise
                                                                        do their homework.”
there was equal access for all students. 93% of the
headteachers said that all students at the school had                             Landing Djiba, Headteacher
registered to borrow the lights in the Library.
                                                                        “The programme is great and can
78% of the headteachers felt that girls borrowed the lights
                                                                        lead to the development of the rural
more often than the boys at school. The main reason given for
                                                                        areas.”
this was that there were more girls at the school, though some
teachers noted that girls were more motivated and/or parents                           Ndoumbé Diop, Parent
were more inclined to respond to girls’ needs.
                                                                        “The solar light is something which
Of all the parents interviewed, 76% had used a light from the           helps people living in rural areas to
Light Library. Interestingly though, all of those who chose not         have access to energy for light.”
to buy a solar light had used one from the Library so this was
                                                                                             Aliou Sarr, Parent
not the reason for not purchasing, as discussed later.




                                                                                                    23
Management of the Library

The majority (68%) of the headteachers at the Light Library schools reported that the Library was
being run as per the manual and guidance provided. This was asked as an open question so this does
not mean the other 32% were not managing the project in line with instructions. 47% of the
headteachers specifically talked about having involved the teachers, community and parents in the
running of the project.

According to the headteachers, every school was charging for use of the lights in the Library.
According to the parents, 98% of those that borrowed a light from the Library paid a fee.

17% of the headteachers said the school was charging more
than the recommended fee of 5 CFA per night (~US$0.01) for           The majority of schools were
the entry-level lights, while 22% of the parents said they were      charging for the use of the solar
charged more; up to a maximum of 50 CFA per night.                   lights in the Library.

For the mid-level lights, 9% of headteachers said they were
charging more than the recommended fee of 25 CFA                    “At the beginning I didn’t believe it,
(~US$0.05) per night, while 4% of parents had experienced           but now, I am so content because
this; up to a maximum of 100 CFA.                                   [the Library] can be used to light the
                                                                    house and charge our phone too.”
These figures are broadly in-line with each other so it’s
reasonably fair to assume that the majority of schools were                       Oiseynou Ndaw, Parent
following the charging guidelines set out in the Light Library
project manuals.

While a large number of the parents did not know how the funds from the Light Library were going
to be used, 24% said that they were being used to buy new solar lights to add to the school’s Light
Library and 24% said the funds were being used on school expenses.




                                                                                                24


                                                                                         ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
Opinions on the solar lights

All parents said that their opinion of solar had changed since
                                                                  All parents said that their opinion of
the Light Library project at their school. 41% of the parents
                                                                  solar had changed since the Light
specifically mentioned that the lights were brighter than they
                                                                  Library project at their school.
had thought they would be, 13% that they were money-saving
and 9% that they lasted a long time in terms of lighting hours.
                                                                  All parents said that they would
When asked if parents would recommend using a solar light to      recommend solar lights to others,
others after using one from the Light Library, all said yes.      after using one in the Light Library.

                                                                  “I understand now [solar’s] usefulness.
                                                                  It is economical.”
                                                                                    Sada Ndiaye, Parent

                                                                  “After using the solar light, I found
                                                                  that it was brighter than I thought.”
                                                                                    Adama Cissé, Parent

                                                                  “The solar light has changed our
                                                                  opinion, at the beginning we didn’t
                                                                  believe in it, but after using it we see
                                                                  that this is something very interesting
                                                                  to experience.”
                                                                                     Sada Ndiaye, Parent




                                                                                               25


                                                                                     ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
Opinions on the Light Library

The reaction from the teachers to the Light Library was very
positive. 59% of all the headteachers talked about how the            Some schools experienced increased
project helped their pupils, 16% mentioned the support it gave        enrolment as a result of the Light
to the teachers, 14% said the Library led to improved school          Library.
results, and 14% said it was good for the school.
                                                                      “[The parents] are now more
86% of the headteachers felt that the community had been
                                                                      involved in school affairs. There is a
supportive of the project and 71% felt that there were changes
                                                                      better communication between the
in the way the parents and community now interacted with
                                                                      community and the school and the
the school, as a result. 56% felt that the parents were now
                                                                      number of new students for the first
more involved in the school, 22% said that the project was
                                                                      year has increased.”
helping to increase school enrolment and 7% said the project
had bought interest in the school.                                                Thierno Sow, Headteacher
                                                                                         ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
Headteachers felt that the parents and students had
                                                                      “[The Library] has played a very
responded positively to the project, in particular through
                                                                      important role in the school because
improved study and participation in school life. They reported
                                                                      it urges parents to bring their
that parents were interested to use the lights because they
                                                                      children to school.”
save money/are economical, they support child study and
better school results, there are other uses for the solar lights in            Babcar Ndome, Headteacher
the home, they have no access to other lighting and the
parents are able to charge their phones.                              “The project has participated in the
                                                                      development of the school. Thanks to
The reaction from the parents to the Light Library was also
                                                                      it, the children study longer at night,
very positive, as highlighted by the headteachers. 56% of those
                                                                      the enrolment rate has increased and
interviewed remarked on the usefulness of the project for
                                                                      the results are better too.”
villagers/those living in rural areas, 32% talked about how the
project helps students and 11% said that the project was                         Thierno Sow, Headteacher
economical for the parents.




                                                                                                  26


                                                                                          ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
Impact of the Light Library

98% of the parents who borrowed a solar light said that the
lights were used for child study and all parents said that there    Nearly all parents said that their
was equal access for their children at home i.e. the light use      children studied longer using a solar
was not prioritised based on age, gender or other reasons. On       light, compared to before.
average, children were studying for three hours each evening
when they had access to the solar light. 96% of the parents         Headteachers noticed improvements
said this was more than on a normal evening without the solar       in     attendance,     motivation,
light.                                                              concentration and performance of
                                                                    students.
Nearly all parents who had a chance to use a light from the
Library (98%) found that their expenditure on other lighting
                                                                    “Our children at school are now very
products was reduced; on average by 560 CFA a week
                                                                    motivated to learn at night, more than
(~US$1.16). They reported noticing other changes from using
                                                                    before the Light Library’s arrival.”
the solar lights; 50% talked of the lights helping their children
to study, 11% said that they gained time in the evening to do                          Aliou Diassé, Parent
work, activities or chores.
                                                                     “[The students] are studying better
The headteachers felt that there had been noticeable impact
                                                                     and the success rate has increased
on students having used the Light Library at school. 48% of
                                                                     noticeably.”
headteachers said they had noticed improved school results
since the project began nine months earlier. 29% talked about                   Abdoulaye Ly, Headteacher
having noticed the children studying more and in better
                                                                     Nearly all parents experienced
conditions, 12% talked about the students being more
                                                                     savings from using a solar light from
motivated and interested to learn. On the whole, the
                                                                     the Light Library.
headteachers remarked that there had been improvements in
attendance, motivation, concentration and performance; and
                                                                    “The solar light helps us to save money
particularly that the changes were noticed in boys and girls
                                                                    and to live in a good condition.”
equally.
                                                                                 Abdoulaye Ndiaye, Parent

                                                                    “My expenses are strongly reduced
                                                                    while using the solar light.”
                                                                                       Aliou Diassé, Parent




                                                                                                27


                                                                                       ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
Faulty lights and breakages within the Libraries

SunnyMoney expected a higher breakage rate of the solar lights
than just from manufacturer error (which is normally estimated at
around 2%); as there is an element of moral hazard. This is because
with no personal ownership of the solar lights there is less
incentive for those renting them to take as good care of them.

As a result, the Light Library, within the first nine months, saw 5%
of solar lights reported broken, faulty or damaged by the schools.
The fault rate was higher for certain products, which also suggests
that the durability differs between manufacturers and models.
                                                                                          ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
While delivering Phase 2 of the project; the School Campaign,
SunnyMoney replaced all faulty lights in the Libraries from the replacement stock being held at
ASER. When asked in the follow up interviews, 91% of the headteachers said they knew who to
contact if they had challenges with or questions about the Light Library at their school, meaning
ongoing management was clear.



Challenges faced and suggestions for improvement

36% of the headteachers interviewed had not experienced any
challenges with the Light Library at their school. 16% said            “It is a bit difficult sometimes
there were not enough lights; however, the Library was                 because we are in rural areas and
purposefully designed not to provide the same number of                most people don’t have enough
lights as student population so these comments more reflect            resources to borrow lights on a
mismatched expectations rather than poor delivery of the               regular basis.”
project. There were four headteachers out of 58 who felt that                 Thierno Ndiaye, Headteacher
some people in their school community did not have enough
resources to rent a light.

95% of schools experienced non-return, damage and/or breakage to the solar lights in the Library.
This occurred on a reasonably low scale though; on average, schools experienced four broken lights,
of which one was not returned, two were faulty, and one was damaged. While this represents a
higher fault rate than expected, it still represents around 5% of the Light Library lights.

Each headteacher was asked if there was anything that had worked particularly well at their school
that they would like to share. Some headteachers talked about how the funds were being used and
that the project had led to improved teaching and learning opportunities more generally. However,
one or two mentioned the success of having a school committee set up to manage the project, as
recommended in the SunnyMoney delivery model. This seems to have eased management and
enhanced effectiveness of the model.




                                                                                                 28
Potential sustainability of the Library

In an average Light Library school, if all of the solar lights were
being used 85% of the time (i.e. six days a week) this would
generate around 621,000 CFA (~US$1,300) of ‘revenue’,
assuming the school was charging the recommended fee, over
three years (the expected lifespan of the solar lights; though
many are expected to last up to seven years). This roughly
equates to the cost for replacement of the entire Library of
lights; suggesting the Library can be self-sustainable at the
schools if the collected funds are set aside for this purpose.
What’s more, as some families purchase solar lights, see below
                                                                                                        ©SolarAid
on the results of the School Campaign, there may be more
opportunity for those who didn’t purchase to use the Library lights more regularly. Those that chose
not to buy may be lower-income families; and so having more regular access to the solar lights may
enable them to save money over a longer period of time and, therefore, have funds to purchase a
light at a later date.



Conclusion

Ultimately, the results of the Light Library project evaluation
                                                                       “We find that the solar light is more
suggest that the solar Light Libraries were in regular use at the
                                                                       effective than the torch light or
schools, were well received by the school community, and
                                                                       candles.”
were bringing positive changes to student learning and
teacher conditions.                                                                     Seydou Dia, Customer

The response from the parents and headteachers suggests
that there was a change in awareness and opinion of solar as a           “The Light Library is something very
result of the exposure to the products that the project                  positive. We never knew that we could
brought. Families experienced money savings and had an                   have lights with energy from the sun.”
opportunity to try the lights in a risk-free environment;
                                                                                            Adama Cissé, Parent
enabling them to test the product in their own time, in their
own setting and see how the lights could fit into their lifestyle. The sales figures in the School
Campaign certainly suggest this to be the case, see below for the results of Phase 2.




                                                                                                  29

                                                                                               ©SolarAid/Ben Gurr
The results of the School Campaign

The School Campaign included 116 schools; 58 as a follow up to the Light
Library project and 58 new ones. Just four schools (3% in each region) did not
have any solar light purchases; this could either be due to no interest and/or
low awareness from the parents and community or little sharing of
communication by the headteacher.

The SolarAid research team collected completed questionnaires from all 116
headteachers who attended the School Campaign meeting. This was to allow
us to assess initial thoughts on the School Campaign for future learning and
improvement for SunnyMoney, but also to assess expected demand as well as
existing awareness among headteachers of this technology.


                                                                                                                ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
Headteacher interaction

All but one of the headteachers who attended our meetings were male. All of them found the
meeting interesting and felt that there would be interest from students and parents at their school.

All 58 headteachers in Light Library schools had seen the pico-solar lights before; as expected since
they manage them at their school. None of the 58 headteachers in the control region had ever seen
or heard of a pico-solar light before.2


Customer profiles

104 baseline interviews were conducted with customers who
bought a solar light in the comparison region and 102 in the                        Over 70% of customers at Light
Light Library regions. This was to understand the motivating                        Library schools said the Light Library
factors for purchasing a solar light and to ascertain whether                       affected their decision to purchase a
the Light Library project contributed to that decision. Table 6                     solar light.
shows the customer profiles for each region.

The Light Library school customers have slightly larger families                     The Light Library model encourages
with lower per person income, less access to electricity and                         lower income, more risk-averse
they spend less on lighting per week. This suggests that the                         families to purchase solar lights as
Light Library region customers were of a slightly lower income                       addresses the trust and exposure
level than the control region.                                                       barrier.
71% of customers at Light Library schools said that the Light
Library affected their decision to purchase a solar light; 53% of
customers said they would not have bought a solar light                              “It is not safe to buy something you
without having tried it first. This may suggest that the Light                       don’t know.”
Library model encourages lower income, more risk-averse
                                                                                                            Aliou Ba, Customer
customers to purchase solar lights as the trust and exposure
element is key to purchasing decisions.
2
    This was not just a test of the term ‘pico-solar light’ but also a description of the type of technology.

                                                                                                                      30
Table 6: Profile of customers

                                             Light Library regions                Control region

 Average household size                               14                                 11
 Average number of children at
                                                       6                                  4
 school per household
 Average monthly household
                                                   $196.36                            $189.30
 income
 % of customers with variable
                                                     79%                                67%
 income
 % respondents living below the
 $1.25 per person per day poverty                    90%                                86%
 line
 % of respondents with access to
                                                      2%                                13%
 electricity
 Main source of lighting (for those
                                              battery light (90%)               battery light (92%)
 with no access to electricity)
 Average household monthly
 expenditure on lighting (for
                                                     $4.65                             $8.15
 those with no access to
 electricity)
 Lighting expenditure as % of
                                                      3%                                 6%
 household income
 Average hours of lighting used
                                                      3.0                                3.7
 per evening
 % of respondents who were
                                                     100%                                0%
 aware of pico-solar lights
 Average monthly expenditure on
                                                     $1.17                             $1.82
 mobile phone charging
                                        For child study (85%)             For child study (73%)
 Reason(s) for purchasing solar         For family activities (20%)       To light the house (general
 light                                  To light the house (general       lighting) (31%)
                                        lighting) (12%)                   To save money (26%)



97% of the comparison region customers said that the source
of lighting used by their children before the solar light                   “We have bought this type of solar
purchase for study after dark negatively affected their study               light for our children at school to have
time and/or motivation. It is clear to see why the main reason              good conditions to read and learn their
for purchasing the solar light was to support child study and               lessons at night.”
why 52% of these customers said that the light would be                                Mohamed Diame, Customer
prioritised for use by the children in the household. It is also
key to note that due to the distribution model that SunnyMoney uses and their marketing strategy,
the solar lights are presented as an opportunity for supporting education with the solar lights as a
tool to aid this; so this is likely to shape the results and reasons for purchase.




                                                                                                        31
In both areas, nearly all customers said they were
                                                                     A recommendation from a trusted
recommended to buy the solar light by someone they trusted;
                                                                     source influenced all customers’
in general the headteacher, though in some cases the children
                                                                     decision to purchase a solar light.
at school or family members. For nearly all customers, this
influenced their decision to buy the solar light.

In both areas, there were very similar opinions on the price of
the products with 94% of control region customers and 100%         “I decided to buy a solar light because
of Light Library school customers feeling the price of the entry-  where we live there is no electricity.
level solar light offered was cheap or reasonable (the other       We need energy to light rooms in
option was expensive). All control region customers and 93%        order for our children at school to have
of Light Library customers felt the price of the mid-level solar   good condition to read and learn their
light offered was cheap or reasonable also. We might have          lessons at night.”
expected to see opinions in the Light Library region as                          Mathar Khoya, Customer
different because the customers may value the solar lights
more having had the opportunity to use them. However, with such high rates of opinion on the
reasonableness of the price, this possibly suggests more that the marketed price was felt to be a
good value compared to what households were currently spending on lighting, and of course this
question was asked of those who chose to make the purchase, so it is potentially unrepresentative
of the general public.

It is interesting to look at the average customer profile in comparison to the average public profile
from the market studies; this also reflects the subset of the population that chose to purchase a
solar light and points to a different uptake characteristic in the Light Library areas.

In the Light Library regions, the average household size of the customer was higher than the general
public, whereas it was lower in the control region. Average monthly houshold income was higher in
both regions; perhaps unsurprisingly, showing that those that chose to buy had slightly higher than
average incomes.




                                                                                                   32

                                                                                        ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
Uptake and sales

In the control schools, there was an uptake of 15% of the
student population purchasing a solar light overall; of which        Demand for solar lights in the Light
12% were entry-level lights and 3% were mid-level lights. This       Library areas was more than double
demonstrates a successful campaign when looking at                   the demand in the control region.
SunnyMoney operations in East Africa. This suggests there is
an unmet demand in rural areas of Senegal, some of which
may be due to limited distribution networks, which may in part be because of high import tariffs and
an uncertain policy environment.

In the Light Library schools, there was an uptake of 35%; with 21% entry-level solar light sales and
14% mid-level light sales.

This shows a more than double uptake of solar lights in Light Library schools and a particularly high
uptake for the more costly and higher capacity mid-level solar lights. The mid-level lights represent a
bigger commitment due to the higher price, which is not insignificant for families living in rural
Senegal.

While this is a small-scale project, it does still represent a sale of 3,104 solar lights within an eight
week period. What’s more, the SunnyMoney team were receiving calls from headteachers with
additional orders after the first delivery meetings. An overview of the sales and uptake figures are in
Table 7 below.



Table 7: Purchase rates of solar lights

                                            Light Library      Non-Light Library
                                            school sales         school sales
  entry-level solar lights                      1,279                 781
  % entry-level uptake                           21%                  12%
  mid-level solar lights                         859                  185
  % mid-level uptake                             14%                   3%
  total sales                                   2,138                 966
  uptake as % of school population               35%                  15%




Reasons for non-purchase

Over half of the parents that did not buy a solar light said the reason was that they didn’t have the
money to afford the lights. A third of the parents said that they were ready and waiting for a second
delivery of lights so that they may buy one; SunnyMoney had to cap orders because the demand was
higher than the number of lights that had been imported into the country.




                                                                                                      33
Policy environment and pricing

While these purchase rates suggest real interest for solar in
the market as a whole, the lack of awareness of the pico-solar            “[The children] didn’t really want to
lights highlight very low levels of availability and distribution of      study with the firewood but they had
these products. A key reason for this is likely to be the high            no choice.”
import tariffs and taxes which may have led to little                                     Dame Ndiaye, Customer
development and investment in Senegal for off-grid lighting
products. SunnyMoney, working alongside ASER, benefited
from tax exemption for both phases of this project, but where             “[The solar light] would help students
this is not available, or where the tax policy does not change,           and teachers, households as well as
the extra cost is likely to be passed onto the customer, which            the entire population in rural areas to
is likely to negatively affect uptake.                                    do more at night (study, prepare
                                                                          lessons, prepare food, chores).”
Positive engagement with members of the government
through the Project Management Committee as well as                        Ousmane Konate, Headteacher
positive results and response to the Light Library project were
important in persuading the government to revisit the concessionaire model and review how best to
support the market; discussions around the policy environment. Because pico-solar lights, as
evidenced by the Light Library project in Senegal, touches on so many elements of poverty: fuel,
energy, income, education, health, and communication, there is a strong case for supporting a tariff
reduction or elimination for these types of products, which provide a first step towards modern
energy access.




Conclusions on the model

The Light Library model provided awareness, access and exposure to pico-solar lights as an
alternative to traditional or inefficient lighting methods such as candles, kerosene lamps and battery
torches/flashlights. It allowed low-income families to try the products and have an opportunity to
see how they would fit with their lifestyle at very little risk. This allowed families to build trust in the
quality and usefulness of the technology as well as save money in the short-term.

The Light Library model, through raising awareness and exposure to the pico-solar lights, increased
interest and willingness to purchase. When the SunnyMoney School Campaign reached schools
there was a very high uptake as a result of prior access to the lights through the initial project.

While the Light Library raises awareness and exposure to the solar lights, it does not help to catalyse
a market for the solar lights in isolation. The only way to do that is to complement the model with an
element of sales and distribution. Through this route, it supported an increased uptake of solar
lights, thereby making the distribution more cost-effective and reaching many more people in a
shorter length of time. Before we move to Recommendations, the report first highlights some of the
challenges and lessons learned.




                                                                                                         34
6. Lessons learned


This section provides an overview of some of the key challenges faced and the lessons learned that,
taken into account, will enable more effective future delivery of such a model.



Partnerships are key

The Light Library model, and indeed the School Campaign, would not have
been so successful without the key partnerships that enabled
collaboration, learning, delivery and planning.

The presence of the Inter-sectorial Committee for Implementation of
Synergies between the Energy sector and other Strategic Sectors for
Poverty Reduction (CIMES), set up under the initiative of the Senegalese
Rural Electrification Agency (ASER), greatly facilitated the creation of the
Light Library Project Management Committee and getting key partners,
especially the Ministry of Education, on board to share, discuss and input.

ASER played a crucial role in supporting the design and implementation of
the project and ensured the project was as successful as possible through
facilitating the tax exemption on imported products and helping to shape
the direction of the project.                                                                   ©SolarAid/Ben Gurr


Without the Ministry of Education, SunnyMoney would have struggled to gain insight to education
management within Senegal, access to information that was key for the selection criteria, and
linkages with local level Ministry of Education staff including headteachers who ultimately managed
the project. When working through public schools, this relationship is key.

It is unlikely that SunnyMoney would have trialled this model without specific funding to support it.
SunnyMoney seeks to be a commercially viable model and while there is some analysis to be done
on the cost effectiveness of such an approach for increasing uptake, it is unlikely that SunnyMoney
would have had the funds to test on this scale, certainly in a new country. It should, therefore, be
recognised that this is not an inexpensive model even though it brings great benefits and impact.

SunnyMoney spent considerable time and funds on reaching              Without key partnerships the project
each school individually to build relationships with the              would not have led to increased
teachers, school committees and local community. While this           interested and support for policies
project may have been delivered without this level of last mile       that support market growth.
access, it is unlikely the project would have been so well
managed, integrated and successful. Having that direct access enabled the public communication of
the purpose and guidance for the project at each school. Village leaders attended the meetings and
their buy-in was key to the smooth running of the project in the school community. SunnyMoney


                                                                                                  35
feel that this close connection facilitated efficient and effective running of the programme in
schools.

Without these partnerships, the project would not have led to increased interest and support for
policies that support market growth.



Guidance but not rules

While the Light Library project had specific and detailed
objectives, the detailed design of the project was
discussed and determined within the Project
Management Committee. Decisions around payment for
borrowing lights, key criteria to consider and the process
for local management were all made together. This
allowed specific insight by relevant experts on how
processes worked in their area of knowledge i.e. school
management processes.

Alongside this, though the Light Library as a model was                                  ©SolarAid/Ben Gurr

clearly defined, there was some element of flexibility at
the school level. There were certain ‘rules’ that were non-
negotiable: the solar lights remained a public good i.e. the       The project encouraged schools to
property of the school and that the lights were available for all  interact with the community for
equally. But, there were certain elements that were up to the      effective management.
school as it was felt that ownership and empowerment within
the boundaries would make for a more effective and sustainable management of the project.

For example, it was up to the school committee to decide how the funds from the Light Library were
to be used; it was suggested that schools may wish to keep money aside for replacing lights at the
end of their lifespan.

It was suggested that schools rented out the lights for three days at a time, at maximum, to ensure
that as many students and families as possible got a chance to use the lights, but again, this was up
to the school as long as there was equal access for all.

This ownership and flexibility also allowed schools to interact with their committees and members
and that meant that the parents and community felt they had some say in the running of the Library.
At some schools, as noted above, this led to more interest and interaction from the parents, and
increased enrolment of children at the school.



Reach more people with higher student:light ratios

A key lesson learned, was the challenge with accuracy of data.
With a longer timeframe it may be more effective to use this          With higher student:light ratios the
time to confirm enrolment data with schools individually. As a        model could raise awareness amongst
result of the short timeframe for this project, SunnyMoney            a larger population.

                                                                                                  36
had to rely on Ministry of Education figures which were significantly inflated. This led to a much
higher student:light ratio than first planned. With a higher student:light ratio, many more families
would have an opportunity to test and try the solar lights, as it stands, the project will provide much
more hands-on and regular opportunities for a smaller population to use the lights because there
are around seven lights to every 10 students; it was first envisaged that the student:light ratio would
be around half of that at one light for every three or four students.



Upholding warranties

Another key challenge that had to be overcome was the
honouring of warranties for the solar light products. This was
key to the process as it allowed parents using the lights from
the school to see that if the light was faulty it would be
replaced and this would help to build trust.

Honouring warranties is not an easy or cheap process though,
and is particularly challenging if the organisation delivering the
Light Library does not have longer-term plans for operating in
the same area.                                                                             ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley

Schools that are most appropriate for a Light Library are likely
to be in rural areas where electrification rates are low and          Honouring product warranties for this
poverty high. This means that there are often long distances to       project alone is a challenge.
cover to reach schools where Light Libraries are.
Transportation is expensive, but so also is the importation and shipping of replacement lights from
the manufacturers. For this test project, SunnyMoney bought replacement lights so that faulty lights
could be replaced. The process needs to be fully considered.



The vast majority of these lessons feature in the Recommendations section below, along with other
things to consider.




                                                                                                     37


                                                                                               ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
7. Recommendations


This section provides a conclusion of the effectiveness of the Light Library model as well as
recommendations for those considering replicating or delivering such a project.



Complement with supply and sales

Light Libraries are effective at building the off-grid lighting     For the Light Library model to achieve
market as part of a broader strategy involving supply and           the objective of supporting market-
sales. This evaluation strongly suggests that the model can         building      there      must         be
build demand but without a sales component, it builds               complementary sales   ©SolarAid/Kat
                                                                                              and supplyHarrison
awareness, trust and demand but results in unmet demand             activities.
and dissatisfaction.



Consider the objective of the model

The Light Library project delivered by SunnyMoney in Senegal had a clear set
of objectives, however, it had many different impacts and benefits. There is
opportunity to use the model to achieve different objectives than the
SunnyMoney project set out to. For example, the evaluation of the Light
Library suggests that it could be used as a tool to facilitate improved
educational outcomes through supporting child study, teacher preparation
and improving learning and teaching conditions. It also seems to support
community cohesion and interaction with the school.

What is most relevant for this report, however, is that it appears to have a
significant impact on helping create demand for solar lights, which resulted in
more people buying solar lights in areas with Light Libraries than those
without. That is not to say that it cannot have all of these impacts, but it is              ©SolarAid/Patrick Bentley
important for the planning phase to determine which outcome it is trying to
achieve and therefore determine the relevant partners and communication strategy.




                                                                                                  38
Engage with government for a healthy policy environment

It is imperative to engage with government when delivering this model in countries with an
unfavourable, unclear, or uncertain policy environment around VAT, import tariffs and taxes. Uptake
and demand for these products are so sensitive to price that tax is key. High taxes and tariffs are
likely to be passed onto the consumer in the form of higher prices which may price out lower-
income families and become too much of a commitment and risk to those with little awareness or
exposure to this new technology. An uncertain or unclear policy environment will not attract
investment and interest to work in this area and as a result there is likely to be little availability or
choice available for consumers.



Consumer awareness

Light Libraries, which expose rural communities to physical samples of solar lights which they can
use, appear to be an excellent way of educating the public about solar lights and helping them make
informed decisions.

There may be other, less-intensive ways to raise awareness of solar lights.
Consumer awareness campaigns using local media; posters, radio, and
newspapers may assist in letting people know about the technology and any
corresponding availability. The effectiveness of such a campaign has yet to
be tested and one challenge is that it does not address the exposure barrier
in the short-term. Of course, to the extent that consumer awareness
strategies might reach the slightly higher-income group and those more
willing to take risks on a new and unknown technology, in the long-term,
lower-income households may gain exposure through friends and
neighbours having a solar light. In Senegal, where there is such low
penetration, it may take a long time before this kind of approach leads to
lower-income families making the commitment to buy a solar light.

And just like the Light Library model, raising awareness has little effect on
the market if there is not a corresponding supply chain where generated                        ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison

demand can be met. Where a consumer awareness campaign
may have most impact is in conjunction with a Light Library
                                                                   Consumer awareness campaigns
model and a sales/distribution model. This may then achieve
                                                                   could have real impact in conjunction
the task of addressing multiple barriers to uptake of the solar
                                                                   with the Light Library model and a
lights in rural areas most in need: it may address exposure
                                                                   sales element to meet demand.
through the Light Library, tackle awareness through the
awareness campaign and respond to availability through a sales network. Where the consumer
awareness strategy specifically focuses on raising awareness of quality products this may build
greater trust both in the short-term and in the long-term where populations purchasing lights see
that they are durable, sustainable and life-changing.




                                                                                                      39
Support available from SunnyMoney

SunnyMoney is keen to support those interested in                   SunnyMoney are well-placed to
implementing, promoting, delivering or funding the Light            support, deliver or advise on most
Library model. SunnyMoney would be open to delivering               elements of a successful market-
additional Light Libraries if funded, however, SunnyMoney           building strategy.
would not do this in isolation. They believe, as expressed
above, that without supply, sales and last mile distribution
there will be less impact and ultimately the objective of
improving access to safe, clean, affordable energy would not
be achieved. SunnyMoney is well-placed to deliver the Light
Library model again in conjunction with their own sales
model or to support those wishing to implement or fund the
Light Library model by following up with the sales element.
SunnyMoney believes that the most effective action would
come in four parts:                                                                        ©SolarAid/Elly White

   1. Consumer awareness which can be delivered in a number of ways;
   2. Consumer exposure through the Light Library model which SunnyMoney could advise,
      support, deliver or follow up on;
   3. Distribution through a sales model which SunnyMoney could do using their innovative
      School Campaign model or other distributors working in this sector, and;
   4. Sustainable market building through supporting the establishment of more lasting access
      and distribution. SunnyMoney would do this through their agent networks model which is
      fast being developed and trialled in East Africa, alongside other operators.

SunnyMoney has kindly offered to make the materials, tools and manuals used in the Light Library
model available publicly and act as an advisor, support or consultant to those wishing to implement
a Light Library model.




                                                                                                 40


                                                                                          ©SolarAid/Kat Harrison
8. Contacts and useful resources


SunnyMoney contact details

If you wish to access the market studies, Light Library materials or contact SunnyMoney for advice
and support please contact:

Kat Harrison

Director of Research & Impact (at time of project: Senegal Programme Manager)

kat.harrison@solar-aid.org




Useful resources

SolarAid website www.solar-aid.org

SunnyMoney website www.sunnymoney.org

Lighting Africa website www.lightingafrica.org

ASER website (French) www.aser.sn

Ministry of Education website (French) www.education.gouv.sn



This report was published in August 2014.




                                                                                               41

                                                                                      ©SolarAid/Kwame Lestrade
9. Appendix


Materials for schools

Below is an outline of the materials given to each school in the Light Library project to enable
effective management and delivery of the model.

 -    A letter to the parents that the teachers could distribute via students to inform them of the
      project
 -    A poster to be put up at school to ensure the purpose of the Library and the charging fees
      were shared
 -    A poster to share the benefits of the solar lights
 -    A Library product register – each solar light was numbered to allow easy tracking
 -    A manual for the teachers, Librarian and school committee:
      -    an introduction to the project
      -    how the Library works
      -    roles and responsibilities of the Librarian and school committee
      -    how to open and operate the Library
      -    how to use, recharge and maintain the lights
      -    support available
      -    questions and answers
      -    resources available
      -    examples of completed registers
 -    Library registers to support the Librarian in tracking where the lights were, when they were
      due to be returned and the payment process
 -    Product manuals for each pico-solar light in the Library
 -    A Library agreement to be signed by the
      headteacher, Librarian and witnessed by one of
      the SunnyMoney field team.
 -    A signed goods received note to outline the
      number and types of products handed to the
      school.




                The benefits poster given to each
                                                                                                42
                school to display publicly to raise
                awareness of the solar lights
