                                                                                                                        Catalyzing Markets for
                                                                                                                        Modern Off-Grid Energy




Maryama and Ndeye Fatou Diouck reading a school book with a solar lamp, Dakar, Senegal ©Bruno Déméocq/Lighting Africa
Lighting Africa, a joint IFC - World Bank program, catalyzes the private
sector to build sustainable markets for affordable, high-quality, modern, off-
grid solar lighting and energy products for people in sub-Saharan Africa not
connected to grid electricity.

The Situation

Close to 600 million people in sub-Saharan Africa – about two-thirds of the population
– live without grid electricity. This lack of modern energy services severely limits
educational and economic opportunities, as well as negatively impacting day-to-day
quality of life and health. Those without electricity often use polluting and expensive
lighting sources such as kerosene lamps or candles, the fumes of which can cause
serious health problems. Modern, high-quality off-grid lighting and energy products
offer a real and sustainable alternative to the off-grid population.

Since running its first pilot projects in Ghana and Kenya in 2007, Lighting Africa has
already enabled more than 35 million people across Africa to access clean, affordable,
safer lighting and energy, and aims to reach 250 million more people by 2030. Lighting
Africa is currently operational in 11 countries - Burkina Faso, the Democratic Republic
of Congo, Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, Mali, Nigeria, Senegal, South Sudan, Tanzania and
Uganda, with plans to continue to extend our activities across the continent.




                Lighting Africa consumer education campaign (Better lighting for better lives) in Ghana ©Lighting Africa
                                                                                         Consumer education in Ghana ©Lighting Africa
What We Do
Lighting Africa works across the supply chain to catalyze the market for modern
off-grid lighting and energy products. Our work is primarily focused on three critical
areas: working with companies to develop markets that deliver commercial energy
access solutions for the base of the pyramid (BOP) population, attracting investment
by improving the sector’s enabling environment, and working with governments to
address policy barriers. To achieve these objectives, Lighting Africa conducts the
following activities:

Market Intelligence
Lighting Africa conducts in-depth market research and publishes the findings,
demonstrating the extensive opportunities presented by the off-grid market in sub-
Saharan Africa and providing critical data to help manufacturers, distributors and
retailers to make informed business decisions.

Quality Assurance
A cornerstone of the IFC-World Bank Lighting Africa program is our dedication to
quality. The purchase of an off-grid lighting product or solar home system (SHS) can
represent a significant investment for a family in sub-Saharan Africa, and consumers
simply can’t afford to purchase something that doesn’t work well or won’t last. In
order to protect consumers and prevent the eroding of consumer confidence in off-
grid products in the process, Lighting Africa developed a quality assurance framework
that included test methods, quality standards, and a product testing and verification
program. The program’s quality assurance activities have expanded to cover markets
in Asia and the Pacific Islands, and they are now managed through our affiliated
program, Lighting Global. Since the quality assurance program was launched in 2009
over 150 off-grid solar products have been evaluated, and approximately 55 currently
meet the Lighting Global Quality Standards.

Access to Finance
Access to finance all along the supply chain has been identified as a critical need
for the functioning and growth of the off-grid lighting and solar home system (SHS)
market. From distributors who need working capital to hold adequate product stocks,
to consumers needing credit to make a purchase, Lighting Africa facilitates and
leverages financial products to help provide the capital that is needed.

Consumer Education
For the off-grid lighting products and solar home system market to grow and thrive,
consumers need to be aware of the benefits that these products provide over fuel-
based and other sources of lighting. To educate potential end users on the many
benefits of quality off-grid lighting and energy products, Lighting Africa produces
consumer education materials and conducts consumer education campaigns in
partnership with manufacturers and distributors.

Business Development Support
The off-grid lighting market has been typified by remarkable innovation and novelty,
and largely driven by social entrepreneurs. Lighting Africa provides advisory services
to support innovative business models that expand energy access at the base of the
pyramid (BOP).

Lighting Africa works with governments to integrate modern off-grid energy
solutions into their energy access programs. In addition, the program works with
governments towards removing policy and regulatory market entry barriers in order to
increase access to clean energy, and to foster a vibrant competitive market for off-grid
energy products.
Note:	 Number of people reaching Tier 1 or greater energy access” (SE4All Energy
       Access Framework) is about 17.3 million

                                                                      © Lighting Africa, October 2015




  The Products
  Lighting Africa works exclusively with products that have been quality-verified
  according to the standards maintained by our affiliated program, Lighting Global.
  These products have all undergone rigorous quality testing utilizing test methods in
  IEC Technical Specification 62257-9-5, thereby ensuring that they are safe, durable,
  and warranted. Lighting Africa and Lighting Global have recently expanded their
  activities to support solar home system kits (SHS) up to 100W. These products are all
  plug-and-play and can power appliances such as fans, radios, and televisions sets, in
  addition to providing light and mobile phone charging.
Who Benefits?
Industry: Manufacturers and distributors benefit from the wealth of knowledge and
information made available by Lighting Africa on markets, consumer needs, and
industry quality standards, which has been used in developing consumer demand
driven solar lighting and energy products. The program also provides business
development support to companies committed to bringing to market high quality yet
affordable products for low-income households.

Consumers: Consumers benefit from the increased availability of affordable, high
quality lighting and energy products on the market from companies that work with
Lighting Africa. Consumer education campaigns work to ensure that consumers
become knowledgeable about the benefits of the available technology and how to
identify quality products. Consumers can get more information on available quality-
verified solar lights and solar home systems (SHS) on our website: www.lightingafrica.
org/products.

Development Organizations: Organizations implementing off-grid lighting programs
in Africa and other parts of the world can access the lessons and experiences from
Lighting Africa to guide them in designing and implementing their activities.

Governments: Governments can benefit from the program’s advice on how to
integrate modern off-grid lighting in their rural energy access expansion programs,
and how to use the market approach to increase energy access as well as learn from
the experiences of other countries where we are working. Governments can easily
adopt the global off-grid lighting standards, initially developed by Lighting Africa, to
safeguard their markets from products of unverified quality.
A customer gets a feel of a solar lighting product ©NIWA
        Contacts:

        Raihan Elahi
        Senior Energy Specialist, Energy & Extractives
        Tel: +1 (202) 473-4401 | Email: relahi@worldbank.org

        Jenny Hasselsten
        Energy Specialist, Energy & Extractives
        Tel: +1 (202) 473-44905 | Email: jhasselsten@worldbank.org

        In Nigeria
        Allwell Nwankwo
        Atlantic House (formerly Maersk House), 1st Floor | Plot 121 Louis Soloman Close
        Off Ahmadu Bello Way | Victoria Island, Lagos
        Tel: +234 1 279-9400 | Email: anwankwo1@ifc.org

        In Ethiopia
        Alasdair Miller
        Africa Avenue (Bole Road) | Wollo Sefer by River Side near Caramara Bridge
        Kirkos Sub-City | P.O Box 5515, Addis Ababa
        Tel: +251 11 517-6000 / 662-7700 | Email: amiller5@ifc.org

        In Kenya
        Nana Nuamoah Asamoah-Manu
        Delta Center, Menengai Road | Upper Hill
        P.O Box 30577-00100 | Nairobi, Kenya
        Tel: +254 20 293-7000/7200 | Email: nasamoahmanu@ifc.org




Lighting Africa is part of the World Bank Group’s contribution to Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All). It is implemented
in partnership with the Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), the Global Environment Facility
(GEF) and the governments of Australia, Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Lithuania, the
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States of America.

For more information, visit www.lightingafrica.org, or follow us on Twitter @lightingafrica.
