Disaster Recovery
in Conflict Contexts

Thematic Case Study for the
Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




Thematic Case Study for
the Disaster Recovery
Framework Guide
B / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                 Disclaimer: This document is the product of work performed by GFDRR, the European Union (EU), and United Nations Development
                 Program (UNDP) based on information provided by GFDRR’s partners. The findings, analysis and conclusions expressed in this
                 document do not necessarily reflect the views of any individual partner organization of GFDRR, including, for example, the World
                 Bank, the Executive Directors of the World Bank, UNDP, the EU, or the governments they represent. Although GFDRR makes reasonable
                 efforts to ensure all the information presented in this document is correct, its accuracy and integrity cannot be guaranteed. Use of
                 any data or information from this document is at the user’s own risk and under no circumstances shall GFDRR or any of its partners
                 be liable for any loss, damage, liability or expense incurred or suffered which is claimed to result from reliance on the data contained
                 in this document.

                 The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denomination, and other
                 information shown in any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of
                 any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

                 Design: Miki Fernández/ULTRAdesigns, Inc.

                 Cover photo: Satellite image of the devestation around Kalutara, Sri Lanka (center), on December 26, 2004, at 10:20 a.m. local time—
                 about an hour after the first in the series of waves hit. Photo credit: © DigitalGlobe. Top left: Water supply and sanitation community
                 discussion, Kaski, Nepal. Photo credit: Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank. Bottom right: Repairing and refilling breached sections of
                 embankments as part of the North-East Irrigated Agriculture Project. Sri Lanka. Photo credit: Dominic Sansoni/World Bank
Table of Contents


Abbreviations	ii
Executive Summary	                                                                v

1	Introduction	                                                                   1
2	 Disaster and Conflict Interface: Basic Concepts and Principles	                3
   2.1	 Risk Reduction Principles for Equity in the Recovery Process	             3
        Impartiality	4
        Empowerment	5
        Gender Equality	                                                          6
        Do No Harm	                                                               8
   2.2	 Integrating Equity Principles into Existing Frameworks	                   9
3	 Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts	                                       11
   3.1	 Policy Framework and Vision for Disaster Recovery	                       11
   3.2	 Institutional Framework for Disaster Recovery	                           12
   3.3	 Disaster Recovery Financing	                                             17
   3.4	 Disaster Recovery Implementation and Monitoring	                         18
4	 Conclusions and Recommendations for Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts	   22
    Policy Framework and Vision	                                                 22
    Institutional Framework	                                                     22
    Recovery Financing	                                                          23
    Implementation Management and Monitoring	                                    23
5	 Practical Considerations to Determine the Interface of Disasters
   and Conflict in a Specific Context	                                           24
6	Appendix	                                                                      30
7	Bibliography	                                                                  33
8	Endnotes	                                                                      35
ii




Abbreviations


CBO	      Community-Based Organization
CSO	      Civil Society Organization
DRF	      Disaster Recovery Framework
DRR	      Disaster Risk Reduction
EC	       European Commission
EEAS	     European External Action Service
EU	       European Union
FCV	      Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
GAM	      Gerakan Aceh Merdeka (separatist movement)
GFDRR	    Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
GoSL	     Government of Sri Lanka
IDP	      Internally Displaced Person
INGO	     International Nongovernmental Organization
JVP	      Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (political party)
LTTE	     Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (Tamil Tigers)
M&E	      Monitoring and Evaluation
MSME	     Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NGO	      Nongovernmental Organization
NRRC	     Nepal Risk Reduction Consortium
OCHA	     United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
ODI	      Overseas Development Institute
OSE	      United Nations Special Envoy for Tsunami Recovery
PCNA	     Post-Conflict Needs Assessment
PDNA	     Post-Disaster Needs Assessment
P-TOMS	   Post-Tsunami Operational Management Structures
RADA	     Reconstruction and Development Agency
SIHRN	    Subcommittee on Immediate Humanitarian and Rehabilitation Needs
TAFLOL	   Task Force for Logistics and Law and Order
TAFOR	    Task Force for Rescue and Relief
                                                                         iii




TAFREN	   Task Force to Rebuild the Nation
UAS	      Unified Assistance Scheme
UN	       United Nations
UNDP	     United Nations Development Programme
UNISDR	   United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction
USIP	     United States Institute of Peace
WASH	     Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WRC2	     Second World Reconstruction Conference
iv / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




Refugee camp at Dadaab, located close to the Kenyan border with Somalia. The ongoing civil war in Somalia and the worst drought
to affect the Horn of Africa in six decades has resulted in an estimated 12 million people whose lives are threatened.
Photo credit: Oli Scarff/Getty Images
                                                                     Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide / v




Executive Summary

T
      he already difficult task of undertaking a disaster recovery is made more problematic when a
      disaster occurs within a conflict affected context. The allocation of resources towards recovery
      can become highly politicized and exacerbate pre-existing social tensions between groups,
leading to criticism of legitimacy and undermine the recovery effort. The conflict context creates
a causal loop between the recovery effort and the conflict where one influences the other, or both
simultaneously exert influence on each other. The design and implementation of a recovery effort are
likely to be heavily influenced by the conflict. However, it is equally likely that the inverse will occur,
with the recovery effort affecting the dynamics of the conflict itself. Negotiating these concerns calls
for utilizing a recovery framework as outlined in the Disaster Recovery Framework (DRF) Guide with
special attention paid towards social inclusion principles to reduce potential risks.

In a conflict context, the guidelines for a recovery framework at its core remain centered on the
holistic approach examining the four components advocated in the DRF Guide. These components are:
(a) policy framework and vision for recovery; (b) institutional frameworks; (c) recovery financing; and
(d) recovery implementation and monitoring. Where the conflict context differs is the emphasis on
the utilization of the principles of impartiality, empowerment, gender, and ‘do no harm’ throughout
the DRF to mitigate the risk of negative social impacts in the recovery effort. These principles are
important in any natural disaster context as well, but become critical in implementing recovery for
disasters within a conflict context where they must be followed to ensure equity across conflict and
disaster victims.

This document does not go into the detail of the DRF guide but rather focuses on how recovery
frameworks must be informed within a disaster-conflict nexus. At a structural level, a recovery
framework for disasters in a conflict context resembles other disaster recovery frameworks. However,
that should not overshadow the critical need for conflict sensitivity through a nuanced consideration
of the local political context, the two-way relationship between intervention/action and conflict, and
how both will inform the recovery effort. How well conflict sensitivity is incorporated in a recovery
framework depends on how it achieves this two part criteria:

1.	 Avoid, to as great an extent as possible, having a negative impact.

2.	 Maximize the positive impact on conflict dynamics through strengthening conflict prevention,
    structural stability, and peace-building.1

Disaster risk reduction and conflict prevention measures should occur together, and a “one-size-fits-
all” model does not exist for recovery frameworks in general, especially in a conflict context. The
process of constructing a disaster recovery framework needs to be highly context specific, and it may
use the window of opportunity created by the disaster to contribute to peace-building.

In this annex a selection of risk reduction principles are defined, followed by case studies as they pertain
to the four pillars of a DRF. Final recommendations and practical considerations for implementation
of a disaster recovery framework in a conflict context are also included. The practical considerations
section includes key questions that will assist readers in scoping the interface of disasters and conflict.
vi / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




June 29, 2005, Galle, Sri Lanka—A german volunteer helps put up a transitional house for a tsunami affected family.
Photo credit: Paula Bronstein/Thinkstock.com
                                                                                               Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 1




1. Introduction

D
      isaster Recovery Framework (DRF) Guide has been jointly prepared by the the European
      Union (EU), United Nations Development Program (UNDP), and the Word Bank (WB) to assist
      governments and partner agencies to deliver effective and efficient post-disaster recovery
programs.2 The DRF guide provides key planning and decision making processes for the development
of recovery policies and programs in a general post disaster context. However, an increasing number
of disasters are taking place in countries that already are experiencing fragility due to conflict or
protracted violence.

Between 2005 and 2009, fifty percent of disasters took place in fragile countries. In such disaster
recovery contexts characterized by high levels of political fragility, the viability of the disaster response
is dependent on the management of fragility and conflict sensitivities. In order not to aggravate fragility,
peace building and social cohesion need to be part and parcel of a country’s recovery approach to help
close pre-existing development gaps and avoid increasing fragility.3 Therefore, post-disaster recovery
faces additional challenges in conflict settings. Accordingly, the process of developing a recovery
framework needs to give specific attention to such situations to ensure that it is appropriate and
operational. The objective of this thematic case study is to examine some challenges that post-disaster
recovery can face in these settings, and to draw up a series of recommendations for the planning and
programming of post-disaster recovery in these contexts.

Most importantly, this case study aims to learn from, and not evaluate in detail, the recovery initiatives
in conflict-affected or fragile environments. It looks at specific features of post-disaster recovery in
such contexts, highlighting some best practices and lessons learned from past experiences that can be
used to inform the recovery process.

After providing a general overview of the disaster and conflict interface, the organization of the
information in this thematic case study will follow the structure of the DRF Guide along the following
four pillars:

                                Policy                         Institutional
                          1     Framework                2     Framework



                                Recovery                       Implementation
                          3     Financing                4     and Monitoring




This thematic case study is based primarily on desk research and secondary data analysis. It looks at
different examples of disaster recovery in conflict contexts, with a detailed focus on the case of Sri
Lanka.
2 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




January 2, 2005, Colombo, Sri Lanka—Volunteers unload relief supplies from Sri Lanka and overseas.
Photo credit: Scott Barbour/Thinkstock.com
                                                                                            Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 3




2.	 Disaster and Conflict Interface:
    Basic Concepts and Principles

U
      nderlying social, economic, and political conditions influence a disaster’s impact. These
      conditions also influence the potential responses ranging from the immediate emergency/
      humanitarian assistance to longer-term recovery processes.

The interface of disasters and conflict must be seen as mutually inter-related. In one direction,
conflict can push populations into disaster and escalate its impacts i.e. conflict displaces people to
higher disaster risk areas, causes damage to infrastructure and basic services, or prevents disaster
risk reduction strategies from being implemented. In the opposite direction, disaster can lead to or
aggravate existing conflicts by exacerbating existing tensions or creating new ones. Grievances can
arise as a result of resource shortages following a disaster. Governments may be weakened and rebel
groups strengthened by the effects of a disaster.

In a disaster and conflict interface, post-disaster recovery outcomes are significantly affected if
the response design is not conflict sensitive, potentially exacerbating a conflict situation. Possible
adverse results from an insensitive response could be the distribution of aid being inequitable,
discriminatory, or irreflexive of the affected population’s diversity and specific needs. It also can lead
to the development of a top-down process that has little buy in from the affected community.

At the same time the impacts and responses to disasters and/or conflicts also create opportunities
for social change. A conflict sensitive post disaster response provides opportunity to redress social,
economic, and political exclusions and inequalities; and promote a more participatory development
process expanding the benefits of peacebuilding to all social strata. It may reduce conflict by creating
opportunities for cooperation among the stake holders including the marginalized and vulnerable
groups - provided there is prior willingness to engage in peace processes.

The review of a number of post disaster recovery processes suggest that the extent to which risk-
reduction measures benefit marginalized and vulnerable groups relates to the ability of stakeholders
in the recovery process to do two things (a) to remain legitimate and credible in the eyes of relevant
constituent and societal groups, and (b) to look beyond the existing institutions and organizations
around which people organize themselves. In order to accomplish these two mandates for providing
equity a recovery process needs to embed a certain set of principles in its decision making process,
that prioritizes avoiding marginalization of groups.


2.1 Risk Reduction Principles for Equity in the Recovery Process
As recovery process seeks to implement risk reduction measures there is the risk of deepening the
divide or even creating social tension for disenfranchised groups. Being mindful of this risk to social
cohesion in the planning process offers the opportunity to incorporate various principles to provide
best practice safeguards. To this end framework designers and implementers should consider including
the following principles. This is not an exclusive list, and other principles can also be considered for
incorporation into a holistic recovery process design.
4 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         Impartiality
                         A key principle to be applied is that of impartiality. A simple definition would be: “Impartiality means
                         not distinguishing one person from the next, and being aware that many people have an interest in the
                         vulnerability of others.”4 In humanitarian and development aid, impartiality means that the response
                         should be guided by human needs alone, rather than by political or other criteria. In peace-building,
                         impartiality (or neutrality, as it is also called) defines the approach necessary for a mediator or peace-
                         builder to build trust among all involved parties.5

                         Remaining credible necessitates that practitioners interact effectively with a diverse range of actors in
                         relationships that can vary from harmonious and cooperative to antagonistic and confrontational. For
                         example, in seeking rapid action and ease of interventions, the field staff of donors, NGOs and other
                         partners sometimes have engaged with village elite groups, instead of identifying and working with
                         the most vulnerable people. For the process to be inclusive, it is essential that practitioners engage
                         with groups at all levels.

                         How do these views of impartiality/neutrality actually function? The basic thesis proposed here is
                         that, to be conflict sensitive, a recovery framework must be acutely aware of the needs of the various
                         societal and interest groups, and aware of the differences and power relationships between and across
                         them. The framework must seek synergies to minimize and mitigate divergent actions. Otherwise,
                         such actions would neither achieve the objective of a neutral or impartial recovery that provides for
                         the needs of the most affected, nor would they become a conflict-reducing instrument.
                                                                                             Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 5




                                  The mirror image of impartiality in intervention by governments and
                                  external actors is “empowerment,” that is, the full inclusion of all
                                  people affected by disasters and conflicts.




Empowerment
The mirror image of impartiality in intervention by governments and external actors is “empowerment,”
that is, the full inclusion of all people affected by disasters and conflicts. Multiple and often
complementary approaches have been adopted by donors and international organizations to achieve
impartiality in assistance while generating local or national empowerment in regions or countries
affected by disasters and/or conflicts.

One approach has been to bolster governance as a means of achieving greater local, regional, and
national empowerment. In the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Somalia, Afghanistan, Haiti and
Nepal, donor governments and the UN worked to support and facilitate the establishment of stabilizing
governance structures; either through elections, strengthening civil society, and/or institutionalizing
local actors and community organizations.6 Similarly in the cases of Afghanistan and Timor-Leste, the
use of special funds by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) to support community-related provincial
recovery efforts generated both benefits to livelihoods and empowerment through project ownership.7
 In the case of the DRC, development assistance providers were less successful at supporting measures
meant to generate more accountability, inclusiveness, improved state-society relations, or a more
stable political structure.8 Meanwhile, in the cases of conflicts in deeply divided societies such as Iraq,
Lebanon and Syria, supporting empowerment while attempting to do no harm require a high degree
of situational awareness of vertical and horizontal cleavages in any given conflict or disaster scenario
—be it man-made or caused by a natural hazard.

Another approach has been to support local empowerment through the bolstering of national
development strategies and the provision of targeted technical assistance. In 2005, the ADB and
the Australian Agency for International Development (AusAID) assisted the Government of Nauru to
develop the National Sustainable Development Strategy – the country’s first national development
plan. By supporting participatory leadership and processes across of the Nauru’s districts, ADB and
AusAID contributed to the development of local capacity.9 Similarly in the aforementioned cases of the
DRC, Somalia, Afghanistan, Haiti and Nepal, donors opted to provide technical assistance to relevant
ministries and government institutions.10
6 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         T
Box 2.1                         he Bougainville Conflict of 1988-1998 on the   Grassroots women’s advocacy NGO’s such as
Women at                        island of Bougainville, where the borders      Leitana Nehan Women’s Development Organisation
the Frontline                   of Papua New Guinea and the Solomon            (LNWDA) obtained huge prominence during the
for Peace in                    Islands meet, was the largest Oceania          conflict and peace making process by providing
                         conflict since World War II. A peace agreement was    humanitarian relief, providing a forum for women
Bougainville
                         signed in 2001 for the creation of an Autonomous      and youth mobilization, and eventually large scale
                         Bougainville Government (ABG), and allowed for the    awareness and counseling programs. LNWDA’s
                         disposal of weapons.                                  work has been a remarkable case study for gender
                                                                               inclusive peace making with its ability to promote
                         During the conflict and in the immediate period
                                                                               and gain wide scale acceptance for its vision for
                         following the agreement women ignored personal
                                                                               the role of women in Bougainville society, its
                         risk by crossing conflict lines to successfully
                                                                               vision of peace, and its ideas about development.
                         convince their sons and husbands to surrender
                         their weapons. Today weapons disposal is
                         complete in almost all areas of the island.




                         Gender Equality
                         A third approach has been to support women’s empowerment and gender equality. UN Security Council
                         (UNSC) Resolution 1325 was the first UNSC effort to explicitly link the role of women in conflict to
                         the international peace and security by acknowledging that gender equality was critical to achieving
                         peace processes and post-conflict recovery.11

                         In the cases of conflicts in Papua New Guinea and Solomon Islands, women placed themselves at odds
                         with conflicting parties and assumed risks by engaging principally male combatants on either side of
                         each conflict to sue for an end to hostilities.12, 13

                         Meanwhile, in Nepal, 11 large associations under the aegis of the Women’s Peace Building Network
                         worked to cement links between conflicting rival groups, with different interactive processes problem
                         solving techniques, titled tracks (tracks 1, 1.5, and 2) to support the drafting of the Comprehensive
                         Peace Agreement to end the decade-long conflict in 2006.14 Track 1 included political parties and the
                         state bureaucracy, while women’s NGOs and other groups participated in a parallel Track 2 effort.
                         Meanwhile a Track 1.5 effort centered on the Nepal Transition to Peace Initiative (NTTP), which sought
                         to create an opening for informal dialogue between some of the more prominent political parties and
                         civil society groups to discuss key differences.15, 16
                                                                                                  Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 7




Water supply and sanitation community discussion, Kaski, Nepal. Photo credit: Simone D. McCourtie/World Bank




                         T
Box 2.2                           en years of armed conflict in Nepal left           women in peace initiated with the Government
Nepal’s National                  widespread impacts affecting ethnic                of Norway in 2007, turned into Sankalpa, a
Action Plan                       groups in most of the districts, the               local nongovernment organization (NGO) that
Ensuring the                      country’s socioeconomic performance, and           has incorporated 11 large networks related to
                          disproportionately negatively impacted women’s             women in peace and dealing with women’s issues.
Role of Women in
                          lives. During the conflict and post conflict periods       The major theme of Sankalpa’s engagement is
Recovery
                          women continued to raise their voice through               strengthening women at all levels in politics and
                          various means and strategies. Their efforts led to         as change agents and active participants in the
                          the United Nations Security Council Resolution             peace process. It also works in advancing support
                          (UNSCR) 1325—an international legal framework              to implement the National Action Plan on UNSCR
                          that addresses the impact of war on women, but             1325 in coordination with the Ministry of Peace
                          also the pivotal role women should play in conflict        and Reconstruction.
                          management, conflict resolution, and sustainable
                                                                                     Similarly, Women Acting Together for
                          peace— being translated into the National Action
                                                                                     Transformative Change (WomenAct) is a coalition
                          Plan endorsed by the government.
                                                                                     of 36 women’s NGOs and networks to ensure
                          Nepal’s transitional situation provided                    women can raise their voices, work in teams,
                          opportunities, both at the national and at the             and support each other. It drafted a charter for
                          community level, for women to participate                  inclusion in the political party manifesto and
                          in governance (where 33% of the constituent                in the new Constitution. It encourages women
                          assembly are women), infrastructure                        to participate in the political process through
                          development, informal mediation, and new found             advocacy, radio programs, and interactions.
                          livelihoods reducing poverty. The commitment               It also mobilizes a large number of women’s
                          to women empowerment has led to a robust                   organizations to educate women at the grassroots
                          community of female driven advocacy.                       level on transitional and contemporary
                                                                                     democratic issues across the country.
                          Women’s Alliance for Peace, Power, Democracy,
                          and Constituent Assembly, a loose network of
8 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




Box 2.3                  The Do No Harm Project, which began in
Do No Harm               1993, identified six key lessons on how
Project                  interventions and conflict interact:

                         1.	 Interventions become               3.	 Interventions interact       5.	The details of
                             part of the context.                   with dividers and               interventions matter.
                                                                    connectors.
                         2.	 Contexts are                                                        6.	There are always options.
                             characterized by dividers          4.	Actions and behaviors
                             and connectors.                       have consequences.




                         Do No Harm
                         Another key concept that should be applied is the “Do No Harm” principle.17 This principle means that
                         the well-being of the people must be the focus of the efforts to help them, and not only at the moment
                         that the assistance is offered but also beyond a specific intervention.18

                         “Do No Harm” project was an outgrowth of Local Capacities for Peace Project (LCPP) in 1993. It explored
                         the relationship between humanitarian and development aid, and discover how to best support the
                         positive efforts while avoiding the negative impacts of development aid in a conflict context. Prior
                         to this humanitarian and development practitioners saw aid ideally being used to support local
                         populations in their efforts to escape conflict and build their own peace, but at the same time saw aid
                         being co-opted, misappropriated, and misused. The learning project sought to answer two questions.
                         How does aid exacerbate conflict? And how does aid mitigate conflict?

                         LCPP was renamed the Do No Harm Project in 2001 formalizing what had become the lexicon term for
                         the LCPP. That same year a training manual for Do No Harm that was released based on the lessons
                         from the implementation phase and Options.19




“Do No Harm” principle means that the well-being of the people must
be the focus of the efforts to help them, and not only at the moment
that the assistance is offered but also beyond a specific intervention.
                                                                                           Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 9




2.2 Integrating Equity Principles into Existing Frameworks
The challenge in applying these principles is to not create new frameworks, but to supplement the
continuous use of the existing ones that work well. Rather than waste energy on reinventing variations
of the wheel it is more efficient to find solutions that make valuable use of existing, well-functioning
frameworks supplemented with the Risk Reduction principles. Doing so requires good leadership and
well-trained flexible staff who can adapt to situations and learn rapidly to find the balancing point
between general practice and the situation specific context.

There are already many frameworks that have been constructed to analyze aspects such as context
and conflict, gender, livelihoods, governance analysis, etc. In vogue now is for systems analysis—in
an attempt to “pull it all together”—arriving at the belief that “best practices” can be codified so that
anyone can just “follow the book” to accomplish the goal. The reality in practice, however, shows that
far from these beliefs there is not a one size fits all template that can be designed.

A review of the cases presented herein shows that no framework can be applied universally.20
Moreover, the case reviews show that danger exists in attempting to create standard procedures for
every eventuality rather than tailoring procedures to specific situations.

Specific local characteristics condition the four pillars that the DRF Guide frames:

1.	 In each country, unique policy frameworks are created in response to a specific political context.
    Understanding the numerous levels of nuance is even more critical when that context is one of
    underlying, unresolved, or ongoing conflict.

2.	 Institutional frameworks are cross-sectorally and thematically specific, reflecting power structures
    as much as technical distribution of activities.

3.	 Financing and financial management, as well as monitoring and evaluation, are often prescribed
    by donors rather than by internal legislation. This procedure leads to difficulties in achieving
    transparency and/or in being able to measure results.

4.	 The underlying causes of the difficulties in implementation arrangements in conflicts and disasters
    share certain commonalities. These include poor governance, poverty and inequality, environmental
    mismanagement, displacement, and inappropriate crisis response. Despite all these commonalities
    the framework must be tailored to specific needs of a situation.

In attempting to understand the Disaster and Conflict interface two lessons become very clear. First,
disaster risk reduction and conflict prevention measures should occur together. Second, disaster
response needs to be conflict sensitive to prevent hard-won peace dividends from being undermined
and to ensure that aid programming is effective.

The Sri Lanka case study referenced in the following sections highlights the components of the
recovery plan as they pertain to four pillars in the DRF Guide. The detailed examination will provide
valuable lessons on the importance of adhering to the principles set out above.
10 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




A Sri Lankan construction worker builds a new school, to replace one destroyed by the Tsunami, December 27, 2005 in Galle, Sri Lanka.
Photo credit: Paula Bronstein




                      O
Box 3.4                         n December 26th 2004 an undersea               Eelam (LTTE) calming decades of insurgency yet
Sri Lanka                       earthquake resulted in a massive tsunami       no peace accord had been reached. Many actors
Post-2004                       that struck the several countries in the       within Sri Lankan society saw the handling of
Indian Ocean                    region including the eastern and southern      the recovery as an opportunity to improve trust
                       coasts of Sri Lanka. The tsunami was responsible        in the public institution with transparency and
Earthquake
                       for the deaths of 35,322 individuals, displaced         accountability. The recovery effort constructed
and Tsunami
                       over 1,000,000 more, and affected two thirds of         60,000 transitional shelters; provided a
Recover and
                       the outlying 13 coastal districts. The government       combination of cash grants, food assistance,
Reconstruction         projected it would take 3-5 years and US$ 2.2           cash for work, and microfinance programs to
                       billion to complete the recovery effort to fully        restore livelihoods; restored services to health,
                       restore services and livelihoods. Just two years        sanitation, and education; and established social
                       prior the Sri Lankan government had signed a            services expressly for the protection of vulnerable
                       ceasefire with the Liberation Tigers of the Tamil       groups.
                                                                                                  Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 11




3.	 Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts
3.1 Policy Framework and Vision for Disaster Recovery


I
   n the aftermath of the Indian Ocean tsunami in December 2004, several guiding principles were established to underpin
   the recovery strategy in Sri Lanka.21 These principles specified that the strategy should be conflict sensitive and that all
   recovery interventions should be analyzed for their potential impacts on the country’s civil conflict.22 The strategy, at the
very least, aimed to do no harm to the ongoing peace process; rather it attempted to foster the peace process.

The pre-disaster situation in the North East region of the country arising from the civil war was that more than 40,000 families
were still living in relief camps, and more than 350,000 houses still needed to be reconstructed. The PDNA report noted: “…the
recovery needs of the North East region need to be particularly focused on.”23 The PDNA report also acknowledged that “…any
plan for post-tsunami equitable recovery will need to work within the current political situation and develop mechanisms that
facilitate the redevelopment of all parts of Sri Lanka…”. Thus, the recovery would need to cover both the Government-controlled
areas and the areas controlled by the LTTE (Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam), commonly known as the Tamil Tigers.24

The challenge was to translate these guiding principles into operational reality. In the case of Sri Lanka, the means to do so
was detailed in the PDNA, which proposed five steps:25

                             Figure 3.1 Five Conflict-sensitive Steps (from the Sri Lanka Case)

                         The public consultations include different line agencies within the Government, the legislature, the LTE,
             Public      political parties, local authorities, civil society, the private sector, international NGOs and the general public
       consultation      to reach consensus on implementation modalities. The process would identify possible areas of contention and
                         attempt to secure a compromise where possible, as well as ensure acceptance of the guiding principles.



                         A two-way communication program relying on the Internet, print and electronic media, and a dedicated
                         reconstruction newsletter would reinforce accountability and monitoring. Monthly beneficiary surveys could
    Communication
                         be built into the program to facilitate community monitoring of ongoing reconstruction efforts at the village
      consultation
                         level. Targeting different audiences, from national to local levels, would ensure appropriate feedback from the
                         regions and help build a national consensus through the recovery program.


    Arbitration and      Mediation and arbitration structures would be used to address reconstruction-related disputes and flag
  mediation service      possible bottlenecks that need to be addressed at a higher policy level.



                         District reconstruction plans should be used to guide a balance allocation of resources between different parts
                         of the country. This could well be the mechanism to match resources with needs. Such plans would be complied
      District based
                         in close cooperation with district authorities, municipal and provincial structures, and other stakeholders,
reconstruction plans
                         moving beyond a narrow technical assessment to include social development, livelihood, gender, environment,
                         governance and conflict dimensions.


                         The international development community would work in close conjunction with the Government and other
Appropriate funding      stakeholders to design appropriate funding mechanisms to ensure the coordinated allocation of international
       mechanisms        development assistance for the reconstruction process. Possible trust fund mechanisms should be anchored
                         within a national framework for recovery, where the use of private NGO resources would be synchronized.
12 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         One year after the tsunami, the joint report on the first year of implementation of the recovery
                         published by the Government of Sri Lanka (GoSL) and development partners noted that recovery in
                         areas affected by the conflict had only just begun. The report concluded: “…it is clear that the impact
                         on the conflict-affected areas of this massive tsunami effort needs to be carefully considered and
                         monitored, and equity of treatment, at least with respect to standards, needs to be ensured.”26

                         Based on this conclusion, the report recommended that

                         “…mechanisms to ensure that the potential beneficial impact of the tsunami recovery on the environment
                         for the peace process can be maximized, need to be pursued, including efforts to involve representatives
                         of all parties to the conflict and affected communities in the monitoring and oversight of the recovery
                         program.”

                         These conclusions and recommendations are in line with the established guiding principle of conflict
                         sensitivity set out in the recovery strategy. The joint report also highlighted the difficult challenge of
                         ensuring that policy is put into operation.

                         Rapid assessments had already indicated that the North East region had been heavily affected by the
                         tsunami. The PDNA report also addressed the tsunami’s effects in connection with the conflict. The
                         report pointed out that the region was especially hard hit by the tsunami because its population was
                         still suffering from the effects of 20 years of civil war.

                         Although a cease-fire agreement had been in effect for two-and-a half-years, infrastructure damaged
                         during the conflict was still being rebuilt. Furthermore, many of the assets that had survived the
                         conflict were destroyed or damaged by the disaster.


                         3.2 Institutional Framework for Disaster Recovery
                         Integrating conflict and fragility in a disaster recovery framework can present challenges for the
                         prevailing institutional set-ups of many national governments, donors and NGOs. Disaster and conflict
                         are commonly handled by separate departments, budgets, processes, and staff.

                         This challenge can be tackled in the medium and long term through institutional reform to promote
                         effective integration of disaster recovery and the conflict sensitivity agenda, e.g. through introducing
                         cross-sectoral bodies. Strengthened cooperation and coordination may provide a solution that is
                         achievable in the short term.

                         For more information on the NRRC27




                         S
Box 3.1                         ustainable changes to integrate multiple       between cross sectoral bodies to circumvent
Nepal                           actors into a recovery framework in            silo-ing challenge is the Nepal Risk Reduction
Overcoming                      the medium and long term require               Consortium (NRRC). It brings together different
Institutional                   institutional reform. In the short term        humanitarian and development actors to foster the
                         there are still some immediate options to work        development of a shared agenda, multiple funding
Silos in the
                         around institutional silos. A positive example        sources and joint analysis.
Short Term
                         of strengthened cooperation and coordination
                                                                                        Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 13




                      D
Box 3.2                       uring the 2007 floods in Bolivia during       The polarization became even more evident
Bolivia                       a time of social confrontation, the           and obstructive of the recovery process when
Streamlining                  government created a Transitory Command       international disaster aid was given to local
Response and                  Unit which empowered the government to        governments instead of the national government,
                       ignore established law and control all decision-     which insisted on coordinating the flow of resources
the Tension
                       making. This centralization of power led to a        into the country.1 This case illustrates the kind
between National
                       polarized disaster response and marginalization      of tension that tends to arise between local and
and Local
                       of departmental authorities and their recovery       national governments when power is centralized,
Governance             plans, which they had developed in consultation      and how international interventions may, with the
                       with municipalities and affected communities.        best of intentions, exacerbate these tensions.




An additional challenge is the tendency that can be observed in many post-disaster situations to
centralize the power and control by national government institutions. In many cases, such tendencies
may be justified by a clear rationale. Centralizing power and control in the national government,
creates a lone voice that does not provide, perhaps limits, the space for dialogue, which may hinder
the recovery process and the bringing together of opposing groups. Especially at local level a lack of
opportunities to provide input into the decision making process in the dialogue for disaster response
can leave groups opposed to the central governments vision feeling neglected, and instill hostilities
towards future implementation.

In Sri Lanka, due to the unprecedented scale of the post-tsunami operation and the necessity to
coordinate numerous government actors, the international donors and organizations created a Center
for National Operations under the direct purview of the President. The Center’s purposes were to
oversee and monitor emergency programs, and to liaise with relevant line ministries, the private
sector, NGOs, and other organizations contributing to the relief and recovery phases.28 Three new task
forces were also formed under the President’s Secretariat. At the district level, Disaster Management
Authorities were appointed to coordinate relief efforts.29 The three task forces, which included
representatives of the public and private sectors, were:

1.	 Task Force for Rescue and Relief (TAFOR).

2.	 Task Force to Rebuild the Nation (TAFREN).

3.	 Task Force for Logistics and Law and Order (TAFLOL).

To maintain a transparent approach, communication of actions was ensured by the GoSL through the
Ministry of Information.30




                                Conflict situations have a negative impact on the vital participation
                                of women in the disaster recovery process.
14 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         Later, following the change of Presidency in November 2005, and with the aim to create a single
                         government agency to coordinate the recovery process, all tsunami-related organizations (such as
                         TAFOR and TAFREN) were merged into the Reconstruction and Development Agency (RADA), which
                         operated under the Presidential Secretariat.31

                         One of the challenges of such a centralized power structure is the potential exclusion of local authorities
                         from recovery planning. In addition, ensuring coordination between newly created structures is
                         challenging. Several ministries established recovery schemes, while agencies often acted in isolation,
                         creating confusion and inhibiting the development of unified frameworks.32

                         In addition, the capacity of the existing district-level authorities was not up to the required levels,
                         especially in the North and East of the country. A special program was introduced to overcome the lack
                         of capacity for recovery programs in relation to governance, transparency, information management
                         for recovery and development through human resources, equipment, furniture, transportation and
                         other measures aimed at strengthening local institutions.33

                         To overcome the barriers created by the prevailing institutional set-ups and conflict divides, the conflict
                         parties in Sri Lanka sought to create a joint mechanism—the Post-Tsunami Operational Management
                         Structures (P-TOMS)—to facilitate cooperation and coordination in the recovery process. According




                      A
Box 3.3                        lthough the Post-Tsunami Operations            be accessed by the committees, which would
Example of                     Management Structure (P-TOMS) was              comprise representatives of the GoSL, LTTE and
P-TOMS in                      short lived, it does provide an interesting    the Muslim community. This 2005 agreement
Sri Lanka                      lesson learned from the post-tsunami           made P-TOMS the first joint working system
                       recovery process in Sri Lanka. The reason is that      among the parties to the conflict since the
                       the opportunity—opened by the tsunami tragedy—         collapse of the Subcommittee on Immediate
                       was jointly seized on as a means to revive             Humanitarian and Rehabilitation Needs (SIHRN)
                       the peace process by trying to build trust and         in 2003.
                       confidence between the conflicting parties.
                                                                              The newly established joint mechanism was
                       The conflicting parties began negotiations on          suspended by the Sri Lanka Supreme Court
                       a joint mechanism. Only a few days after the           following a constitutional case brought against
                       tsunami, direct negotiations began between the         the P-TOMS agreement by the nationalistic
                       GoSL and Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (Tamil       Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna (JVP) party which had
                       Tigers, or LTTE) Peace Secretariats, without the       withdrawn from the coalition government.
                       involvement of the Norwegian facilitators of the
                                                                              The ruling that P-TOMS was unconstitutional
                       peace process. Although the initial negotiations
                                                                              caused a major delay in recovery and recovery
                       faced a series of obstacles and direct talks were
                                                                              in the North and East because many donor
                       suspended, with the Norwegians once more
                                                                              funds had been earmarked via this institutional
                       having to act as mediators, an agreement to
                                                                              structure. However, the failure to establish a
                       create P-TOMS was signed six months after the
                                                                              joint mechanism did not evoke a strong response
                       tsunami.
                                                                              from donors as many had already oriented their
                       The agreement provided a structure of three            funding frameworks around the possibility of a
                       committees at the national, regional, and district     P-TOMS collapse. United Nations agencies, for
                       levels to oversee distribution of assistance,          instance, reported no change in their intentions
                       and the creation of a Regional Fund to finance         to distribute aid (Kuhn 2009).
                       recovery and recovery projects. The Fund would
                                                                                           Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 15




to the P-TOMS agreement, review committees comprised of government officials and representatives
of the LTTE and the Muslim community could recommend and monitor projects in areas hit by the
tsunami.

This arrangement was widely seen as an ideal scenario for the conflicting parties to use the disaster
and recovery as a window of opportunity to revive the peace process. However, some members of
the Sri Lankan parliament opposed the concession, claiming that P-TOMS threatened the country’s
sovereignty by legitimizing the LTTE.34 Although the agreement to establish P-TOMS had been reached
six months after the tsunami, the Sri Lanka Supreme Court ruled key provisions of P-TOMS to be
unconstitutional so the agreement was suspended.35

In a joint report by the GoSL and development partners in December 2006, the establishment of
P-TOMS was judged as being “the end of the expectation that post-tsunami recovery work could create
an environment conducive to the revival of the peace process.”36 Nevertheless, it is highlighted that
RADA worked closely with the District Secretariats of all affected areas, despite the fact that “…the
deterioration in the security situation from end 2005 has greatly affected the ability to promote equity
within the tsunami-affected areas and the ability to address the difference of standards between the
conflict-affected and the tsunami-affected populations.”37




                     T
Box 3.4                   he People’s Consultations project engaged         An overwhelming number of complaints were
Promoting                 tsunami-affected Sri Lankan communities           voiced during the People’s Consultations. As a
Dialogue and              in the recovery through organizing public         result, the consultations provided support to
Participation in          consultations on plans for the recovery of        the Human Rights Commission of Sri Lanka to
                   affected regions.                                        establish help desks in each district through
Conflict-Affected,
                                                                            the Disaster Relief Monitoring Unit. The help
Post-Tsunami       Consultations were carried out in over 1,100
                                                                            desks were intended to raise awareness among
Sri Lanka          villages in 13 tsunami-affected districts. A
                                                                            communities about their rights and entitlements,
                      total of 847 focus group discussions were
                                                                            and to follow up on their grievances.a
                      convened. Each had 15–20 representatives
                      from each village participating. Consultations        Such a project cannot be viewed as a substitute
                      were also carried out with host communities to        for systematic incorporation of local participation
                      ascertain their needs and interests regarding the     in recovery planning and implementation.
                      resettlement of tsunami-affected people within        Nevertheless, it proved that, in contexts in which
                      their communities. Local authorities, NGOs and        a range of pressures seriously compromises
                      community-based organizations (CBOs) in the           a bottom-up approach, such exercises help to
                      affected districts were also consulted to ascertain   flag overarching messages and highlight the
                      their needs and challenges in the recovery.           importance of improving consultation.

                      The People’s Consultation Report on Post-Tsunami      Source: UNDP (United Nations Development
                      Recovery thus identified the main concerns and        Programme), “An Integrated Approach to Disaster
                      grievances of the tsunami-affected populations        Recovery: A Toolkit on Cross-Cutting Issues. Lessons
                      and highlighted their recovery priorities. The        from the Tsunami Recovery Unit,” 2007, 77.
                      findings from the consultations were channeled        Note: a World Bank (2006). “Report on People’s
                      into the District Recovery Plans for livelihoods,     Consultations on Post-Tsunami Relief, Recovery and
                      housing, and other recovery projects.                 Rehabilitation in Sri Lanka.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
16 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




Volunteers pack bags     Due to the prevailing centralized institutional structure in post-tsunami Sri Lanka, interventions
of food as it arrives    implemented by the GoSL, LTTE, and, in most cases, by NGOs were top-down. Participation of the
from around
                         affected populations in the planning, design, and implementation of appropriate and sustainable
Sri Lanka and overseas
on January 2, 2005.
                         recovery and recovery processes was rather low. Reports indicate that both the government and LTTE
(Photo credit: Scott     made centralized decisions without consulting the people affected. Lack of consultation with the local
Barbour/Getty images)    affected and non-affected populations resulted in creation of a legitimacy gap at the ground level in
                         the overall response strategy.38

                         Nevertheless, there were promising attempts to implement dialogue mechanisms with affected
                         communities to enhance coordination to improve the participation of the beneficiaries, hence, to
                         improve the quality and promptness of assistance.

                         Gender aspects are integral to institutional set-ups for recovery. However, reports indicate that conflict
                         situations have had a particularly negative impact on the vital participation of women in the disaster
                         recovery process.

                         In general, women in Sri Lanka had lower participation than men in post-tsunami decision-making,
                         although there was significant variation among districts and regions. For example, women’s
                         participation in key government offices and post-tsunami committees was just over 30 percent in
                         the Southern Province, 16 percent in the North, but only 8 percent in the East. Explanations for the
                         regional differences include the higher degree of insecurity and conflict in the North and East. These
                         frightening conditions impeded such things as travelling to meetings, especially for women.39
                                                                                           Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 17




3.3 Disaster Recovery Financing
In the interface between disasters and conflict, assessments show that it often proves extremely
difficult to disaggregate the costs of, for example, road damage caused by both a disaster and the
conflict. In some cases, this might, by default, expand the attention paid to areas affected by both
conflict and disaster.40 In Sri Lanka, it was clear that an insufficiently addressed issue was that
some regions affected by the conflict prior to the disaster were in need of increased attention to
water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH), due to damage to water supply systems caused by the civil
conflict.41 This creates the opportunity for a more comprehensive approach covering the effects of
both overlapping, cumulative damages. Inversely it poses the risk that trying to differentiate them
leads to discriminating areas either because they were not conflict related or because they were not
disaster affected.

Additionally, political uncertainty hampers disaster recovery interventions, leading to insufficient
financing for recovery. In Sri Lanka, the conflict reinforced this uncertainty. In 2006 when the conflict
escalated, the Consortium of Humanitarian Agencies claimed that the renewed fighting was preventing
the agencies from reaching people in need. The UN’s Deputy Special Envoy for Tsunami Recovery
visited the conflict zone and found that “in parts of the North and East, the tsunami recovery process
has ground to a halt and significant investments in recovery are now imperiled.”42

The renewed conflict in the North and East, and the slow pace of recovery in the South, meant that the
disbursement rate was remarkably low. By mid-2006, one-and-a-half years after the tsunami, only 13
percent of the external finance for recovery had been disbursed.43

When disasters strike in conflict-affected regions, addressing problems that go beyond the disaster may
be hampered by bottlenecks affecting the recovery process. In Sri Lanka, as a result of organizational
mandates, agencies were limited mainly to addressing the problems of tsunami-affected people.44 This
structural limitation led to tensions between the “new tsunami affected” and the “long-term conflict-
affected” families, because many of the latter were excluded from the post-disaster recovery programs.

Responding to a tsunami that strikes a coastal belt can lead to the neglect of other equally disadvantaged
groups. For example, families displaced by the civil conflict, who often have had to live in camps for
many years, were ineligible for the housing and welfare benefits directed at tsunami survivors.45 Such
grievances carry the potential to exacerbate existing conflict dynamics. These grievances bring a spot
light to the need for recovery frameworks and funding arrangements that take into account these
conflict realities.

Very positive examples were observed in Sri Lanka when corrective action was taken in 2006. For
example, the majority of the development partners adapted their approaches to target entire districts,
not just the tsunami-affected coastal areas.46

The challenges of equitable distribution of resources were particularly evident in the housing sector.
In Sri Lanka, two types of housing programs were implemented:

1.	 Owner-driven. recovery/repair of houses by homeowners with cash grants and technical assistance
    provided by the government and development partners

2.	 Relocation housing program. Donors and others built, or assisted with building, housing on relocation
    sites for families who had lived within the Buffer Zone created in the conflict-affected North-East.
18 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




Tracking how the recovery resources are used once they are
disbursed is important to identify the geographical gaps between
needs and allocations and ensure appropriate geographical and
social coverage.



                         An analysis shows that expenditure per damaged home was approximately twice as high in the
                         Southern Province as in the conflict-affected Northern and Eastern Provinces (appendix 1). In addition,
                         assistance per home was more than three times higher than the average in the Southern District of
                         Hambantota, the President’s home district; and expenditures per house were four times the average
                         in the LTTE base of Kilinochchi.47

                         The deficit in housing recovery financing in the Northern and Eastern Provinces requires a more
                         detailed look at the finance granted by the three main donor types—bilateral, multilateral and INGO—
                         which together accounted for 97 percent of all housing assistance.

                         The figures (appendix 1) show that the biases toward the South, and to Hambantota in particular, were
                         consistent across nongovernmental, multilateral, and bilateral donors. The last group tended to exert
                         a strong bias against LTTE-controlled areas.48

                         Uneven regional distribution of the recovery financing of micro, small and medium enterprises
                         (MSMEs) was seen as a key issue by a Joint Report of the GoSL and development partners. Restoring
                         livelihoods also varied geographically: progress in the South was more advanced than in the North and
                         East.49 One reported obstacle was the reluctance of donors and the private sector to make long-term
                         investments in conflict-affected areas in the North and East.50

                         Experience has shown the need for contingency plans in peace efforts/processes.51 Conducting rapid,
                         highly localized assessments to feed into the Post-Disaster Assessment, and subsequently the recovery
                         framework, may help to reduce misallocations of recovery resources. Tracking how these resources are
                         used once they are disbursed is important to identify geographical gaps between needs and allocation
                         of these resources and ensure appropriate geographical and social coverage.


                         3.4 Disaster Recovery Implementation and Monitoring
                         Conflict and regional sensitivities play an important role in disaster recovery management. Post-
                         disaster assistance needs to avoid fueling conflicts. Moreover, recovery activities involving any form of
                         resettlement, if not locally rooted, could affect the social fabric and make-up of an area––exacerbating
                         tense situations. In Sri Lanka, the tsunami affected neighboring communities (and houses) differently.
                         Because recovery assistance was targeted only to affected families, tensions between those receiving
                         special assistance and those not became a potential source of tension. Such developments highlight
                         the importance of understanding local situations and the promotion of the principle of equity so that
                         interventions do not add to existing tensions. These two necessities suggest the need for alternative
                         programs to reach the conflict-affected families concomitantly.52
                                                                                         Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 19




The principle of equity requires prioritization of needs regardless of the reasons that the needs arose.    A Sri Lankan boy looks
While various underlying factors may shape how that needs are met, the goal should be that the              out at the temporary
potentially different measures meet common minimum standards. Equity is of particular importance            shelter where his
                                                                                                            family has been living
in conflict environments, in which perceived differences in treatment easily can fuel conflict dynamics.
                                                                                                            in Galle, Sri Lanka.
Two dimensions of the principle of equity may be seen as intrinsically relevant to disaster recovery in     (Photo credit: Paula
                                                                                                            Bronstein)
conflict contexts: the causal dimension and the regional dimension.

1.	 Causal dimension: Equity among the groups affected by the disaster and by the conflict. In Aceh
    (Indonesia), assessments highlighted the need to merge post-tsunami and post-conflict programs.
    If merging were done, the reintegration efforts for the victims of the conflict—as well as the
    recovery of houses and infrastructure destroyed by the 2004 tsunami—would be included in longer
    term programs.53 This change would benefit all affected citizens in Aceh and would avoid the risk
    of creating tensions and jealousies among people who benefit from different support programs.54
    However, according to the World Bank, tsunami survivors received twice the amount of aid for
    home rebuilding than did people recovering from the conflict.55

  Another example is the response to internally displaced persons (IDPs) affected by the tsunami and
  by the conflict in Sri Lanka. Table 3.1 illustrates the common types of losses and needs of both IDP
  groups. It should be emphasized that the vast majority of conflict-affected IDPs came mainly from
  Tamil and Muslim communities in the Northern and Eastern districts, whereas the tsunami affected
  the majority of these same districts, as well as Sinhalese communities in the South.
20 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                                            Table 3.1 Sri Lanka: Summary of Disaster and Conflict Impacts56

                          Indicator                 Conflict                                Tsunami

                                                    Approx. 60,000 over the course of       35,322, including over 4,000
                          Reported deaths
                                                    the conflict (approx. 2 decades)        missing, all on 26 December, 2004

                                                    21,000+ over the course of the
                          Reported missing                                                  See above
                                                    conflict

                                                    Approx. 50,000 over the course of
                          Reported injured                                                  21,441, all on 26 December
                                                    the conflict

                          Reported internally       Approx. 800,000 at peak; total figure
                                                                                           516,150, all on 26 December
                          displaced                 over the course of the conflict varies

                                                    342,717 people in total: 68,605 in      457,576 people in total: 64,467
                          Persons requiring
                                                    welfare centers 274,112 with host       in camps, and 393,109 with host
                          resettlement
                                                    families, as at July 2005               families, as at February 2005

                          Homes damaged
                                                    Over 326,000                            Approx. 98,000
                          or destroyed


                          Livelihoods affected      Approx. 200,000                         Approx. 150,000


                          Recovery needs                                                    Approx. $2.2 billion as reported in
                                                    $3 billion as assessed in May 2003
                          assessment                                                        December 2005

                         Source: Grewal 2006, 9.



                         When comparing tsunami and conflict-affected IDP groups in Sri Lanka, disparities and lessons
                         learned in relation to the principle of equity can be studied along three variables: value, coverage,
                         and timeliness.

                             ■■   Value. The value of support provided to people affected by the tsunami and those affected by
                                  the conflict differed, to the disadvantage of the latter. This discrepancy was true with food
                                  and transitional shelter, and in recovery of permanent housing. To resettle selected conflict
                                  IDPs in permanent housing, the “owner-driven” Unified Assistance Scheme (UAS) provided
                                  grants to enable families to build their own homes. A similar program established in 2005
                                  provided housing grants for the majority of tsunami IDPs. A second main scheme was “donor-
                                  driven”: to build new homes for tsunami IDPs. However, disparities in the value of support
                                  remained because most tsunami IDP families receiving grants also were able to benefit from
                                  supplementary assistance. A case study pointed out that tsunami IDPs benefiting from either of
                                  the two housing schemes received assistance estimated at $3,000 and $11,000, respectively,
                                  whereas conflict IDPs with housing grants largely were unable to access additional support.57

                             ■■   Coverage. All former householders in the tsunami IDP group were eligible for housing assistance.
                                  However, only families in the conflict IDP group with access to land and with family incomes of
                                  less than $250 per month were eligible for the UAS allowances. In other words, only a little over
                                  one-third of the conflict families were eligible.58
                                                                                          Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 21




   ■■   Timeliness. Within 15 months of the disaster, over two-thirds of the eligible 98,000 tsunami
        IDP householders either had a completed donor-built house or had been granted at least the
        first instalment to repair or rebuild their homes through the owner-driven scheme. In contrast,
        between 2003 and 2006,59 only 14 percent of the 105,000 eligible conflict IDPs received
        assistance to reconstruct their houses—again illustrating the issue of equity and inequality.

2.	 Regional dimension: Equity within groups affected by the tsunami. The example of housing recovery
    in post-tsunami Sri Lanka provides valuable insights into the challenges and lessons to be learned
    from the regional dimension of equity.

  Two main housing reconstruction schemes were implemented in Sri Lanka, one “owner-driven” and
  one “donor-driven.” The regional breakdown of housing needs under the owner-driven scheme, and
  the related national disbursement rate show that the disbursement rate decreased continuously
  over the four installments in all regions (appendix 1). However, the conflict-affected North and, to a
  lesser extent, the East experienced much slower rates of progress than the South and West. With 85
  percent of owner-driven housing needs being located in the North and East, these rates underline
  the challenges of ensuring equity within the tsunami-affected population in the implementation of
  recovery programs.

  Transparency and communication are essential components to limit politicization and contribute
  to social cohesion. For example, responding to the Gayo Lues floods in the Aceh region of Indonesia,
  the International Organization for Migration sought to actively engage former members of the GAM
  separatist movement and the local government to build trust among all the parties.60 In Sri Lanka,
  the Sarvodaya NGO addressed the lack of communication across geographic and ethnic divides by
  implementing a program of exchange visits, called “Village-to Village, Heart-to Heart.”61

Access to affected populations is crucial for any post-disaster intervention. Getting access may pose a
specific challenge in areas that are not under government control or for which access is more difficult
due to ongoing fighting or tensions. In Sri Lanka, contractors reportedly were reluctant to work in
LTTE-controlled areas due to safety concerns, spiraling costs, such as transit taxes on construction
materials, and having to unload and reload trucks for security searches at GoSL and LTTE checkpoints.62
In conflict-affected areas, negotiations with key stakeholders in the security sphere, as well as in
recovery programs, are vital to overcome problems that hamper recovery. Similar situations have
been seen in other countries, as was the case of Colombia, where the municipalities worst affected by
the 2012 floods were the very ones that had suffered most from the internal armed conflict, IDPs and
landmine victims.63

Monitoring the recovery process forms a core part of any disaster recovery management. In Sri Lanka,
the ability of RADA (GoSL’s Reconstruction and Development Agency) which coordinated all recovery
efforts—to effectively monitor the process in the conflict-affected districts was greatly affected by the
deterioration in the security situation.64

Additional investment is considered necessary to develop integrated monitoring and evaluation
(M&E) frameworks for assessing results, value for money, and outcomes in fragile and conflict-
affected states. It is essential that the M&E frameworks include conflict benchmarks for disaster
recovery in such contexts.65 Additionally, to strengthen the evidence base for M&E, it is proposed
that multidimensional risk indexes are developed to integrate existing data on conflict and fragility,
natural hazards, vulnerability, poverty, and climate change.66 Finally, M&E can identify geographic
gaps between what is needed (as identified in a PDNA) and what is actually being allocated to allow
for midcourse corrections and avoid inequities in the recovery process.
22 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




4.	 Conclusions and Recommendations
    for Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts

                         T
                               hese conclusions and recommendations, though mostly derived from the Sri Lanka experience,
                               are also informed by other cases in other regions. The experience analyzed emphasizes the
                               importance of recovery frameworks being conflict sensitive for contexts in which disasters occur
                         in conflict-affected environments. Central to the notion of conflict sensitivity is the idea that there
                         is a two-way relationship between intervention/action and conflict. Not only can recovery action in
                         conflict contexts be affected by conflicts, but recovery activities in a conflict-affected setting can have
                         an impact on the conflict itself.

                         The process of constructing a disaster recovery framework needs to be highly context specific, especially
                         in the case of conflict settings. A “one-size-fits-all” model does not exist. Recovery frameworks may
                         potentially use the window of opportunity created by the disaster to contribute to peace-building. Some
                         specific recommendations for developing disaster recovery frameworks in a conflict setting are as follows:


Policy                   Understand the potential co-benefits and negative consequences that a recovery effort may
Framework                bring to a specific conflict context. Disaster recovery in conflict contexts should look at potential
and Vision               synergies with the conflict resolution objectives. Conversely, disaster recovery objectives must be
                         sensitive to potential conflict emanating from the priorities adopted, particularly any possible effects
                         on population groups, specific communities, and/or sectors.

                         All recovery interventions stemming from the vision and recovery policy should be conflict
                         sensitive and be analyzed for their potential impacts on the country’s civil conflict. In this regard,
                         conflict sensitivity means ensuring that recovery activities (1) avoid, to as great an extent as possible,
                         having a negative impact, and (2) maximize the positive impact on conflict dynamics, thereby
                         strengthening conflict prevention, structural stability, and peace-building.67 Such a vision should be
                         established, and then should guide any disaster recovery framework initiative in conflict contexts.
                         Essential to creating an appropriate recovery vision that is sustainable is the incorporation of the
                         aforementioned risk reduction principles: Impartiality, Empowerment, Gender, and Do No Harm.


Institutional            Acknowledge that the mere presence of intervention alters the conflict and post-conflict
Framework                scenarios. It is desirable to establish a mutually agreed upon process between conflicting parties and
                         potential external cooperation organizations and donors that is respectful of human rights, minority
                         and diversity, and humanitarian principles. There may also be a need to foster civil-military relations.
                         Recovery efforts are likely to involve military and civilian authorities. Thus, it may be necessary to
                         develop principles of engagement for the military and principles of effective collaboration among
                         military, civilian, and international actors.68

                         Coordinate appropriately to utilize the presence of external security actors. The presence of
                         external security personnel, such as a peacekeeping mission, could pose important challenges to
                         coordination. However, these actors can also participate in the recovery effort through logistical
                         support and entry into volatile/insecure areas by recovery agents at any given time. The central focus
                         of governments and development partners could be to exploit all available options to promote equity
                         among all groups in fulfillment of their rights.
                                                                                            Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 23




Build and support robust consultation and consensus building mechanisms. Regardless of whether
the final institutional framework takes a bottom up approach or centralized approach there needs
to be clearly defined mechanism that requires consultation with the local affected and non-affected
populations. Missing this component can lead to legitimacy gaps in the recovery strategy for those
most affected by the disaster. Disaster recovery in conflict affected situations, consensus-building
should be strengthened through dialogue, consultation, and coordination, leading to agreements.
Inclusiveness and participation should be inherent throughout the entire disaster recovery process:
from damage and effects assessment, needs identification, and prioritization through implementation,
monitoring, and evaluation.

Gender aspects are integral to institutional set-ups for recovery. Women are often subject to being
marginalized by the conflict. Experience has shown gender participation to be crucial in all facets of
disaster recovery. More so in conflict settings where they may play a crucial role in promoting peace
that may be at risk due to factors induced by the disaster.



Ensure principle of equity across conflict and disaster victims. Historical precedent has shown that            Recovery
the value of support provided to disasters recovery efforts compared to conflict recovery often differs         Financing
greatly. Usually this is to the disadvantage of the groups affected only by conflict, even though the
damage and needs incurred from the conflict might eclipse those created by the disaster. The principle
of equity requires prioritization of needs regardless of the reasons that those needs arose. While
various underlying factors may shape how that needs are met, the goal should be that the potentially
different measures meet common minimum standards.

Use localized assessment to reduce misallocations. Conducting rapid, highly localized assessments
to feed into the Post-Disaster Assessment, and subsequently the recovery framework, may help to
reduce misallocations of recovery resources. Tracking how these resources are used once they are
disbursed is important to identify geographical gaps between needs and allocation of these resources
and ensure appropriate geographical and social coverage.



Recovery activities involving any form of resettlement, if not locally rooted, can affect the social            Implementation
fabric and make-up of an area—exacerbating tense situations. Understanding the local demand and                 Management
obtaining the buy-in of the affected populations at this level should be seen as critical. As this has          and Monitoring
been a recurring principle in the policy and institutional pillars it is the logical that it would again be
emphasized at implementation.

Promote transparency and communication beginning at the initial stage of recovery. These should
be seen as essential components of limiting politicization and of contributing to social cohesion
throughout the entire disaster recovery process. Disseminating a clear vision and providing a venue
for the viewpoints of civil society, humanitarian actors, and other sub-national actors, whether or not
they get incorporated in the final framework, are a relatively low cost best practice towards obtaining
legitimization of a recovery effort.

Establish conflict informed M&E framework. In fragile and conflict-affected states a monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) framework requires additional investment, over a disaster only scenario, to develop
an integrated framework for assessing results, value for money, and outcomes. It is essential that the
M&E frameworks include conflict benchmarks for disaster recovery in such contexts.
24 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




5.	 Practical Considerations to Determine
    the Interface of Disasters and Conflict
    in a Specific Context

                         W
                                   hen disaster recovery overlaps or coincides with a conflict-resolution environment, there is
                                   a need to link both processes and generate synergies between peace-building and disaster-
                                   recovery process. The recovery framework should look, first, at how it will interact with
                         the conflict-resolution process. Second, the framework should consider what (if any) interaction,
                         cross-cutting synergies or contradictions could affect a conflict assessment, either simultaneously
                         or sequentially when the DRF process takes place. Thus, the framework is to be seen not only as
                         an aspiration for coordination but also as mutual reinforcement of conflict resolution and disaster
                         recovery. In other words, the framework should identify synergies between the Post-Conflict Needs
                         Assessment (PCNA) and the PDNA—such as joint public consultations, joint movements across the
                         country, and linear messages to authorities in transition phases—as applicable, appropriate or feasible.

                         In some instances, and when appropriate, it would be desirable to explore the option of avoiding
                         separate processes when the context points to a single Post-Crisis Needs Assessment.69 This option
                         is not to be perceived as advocating or forcing the post-crisis framing over others when the conflict
                         drivers in a disaster setting are minor (or vice versa).

                         However, on the ground, the international community increasingly opts for hybrid solutions in most
                         post-conflict, post-disaster, that is, post-crisis settings in general.70 A case in point is that this “post-
                         crisis” designation was used effectively in Pakistan to circumvent the complications that the terms
                         “post-disaster” or “post-conflict” could bring into the dialogue with the authorities. The hybrid term
                         was expedient and effective. The designation could also be a way to formalize the two-way linkages
                         between disaster recovery and post-conflict response. Actual application should be context-specific,
                         provided the concrete situation warrants a level of joint planning.

                         Table 6.1 is proposed as an example that could act as a guide to explore the interface of disasters and
                         conflict response. Table 5.1 focuses on the content that the framework will contain.

                                                   Table 5.1 Disaster and Conflict Recovery Framework

                                                               Post-Disaster
                                                                                 Post-Conflict situation
                                                               situation
                          1. Institutional framework
                          2. Policy and planning
                          3. Recovery finance
                          4. Management and monitoring
                                                                                           Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 25




To fill the above matrix, an indicative, non-exhaustive list of questions could include the following.

    ■■   Were the conflict dynamics affected by the disaster?                                                  General
                                                                                                               Questions
    ■■   Is the Post-Disaster Needs Assessment (PDNA) hampered in accessing the disaster-affected
         area due to ongoing conflict? If yes, what measures will be adopted to overcome the obstacles?

    ■■   Should the PDNA report have a specific chapter/section that deals with the ongoing conflict?

    ■■   Was a Post-Conflict Needs Assessment (PCNA) conducted in the country prior to the PDNA?
         Does the PDNA cover the same geographic locations?

    ■■   Were conflict evaluation or fragility assessments used in the conflict transition? In the case of
         a disaster, how will those assessments be considered within the multi-hazard focus adopted
         to tackle the root causes of the crisis?

    ■■   What consideration is proposed for the PDNA to link to the PCNA interventions in terms of
         linkages, synergies, or coordination in implementing the post-disaster recovery?

    ■■   Does the PCNA or a conflict assessment/transition process have a specific chapter/section that
         addresses disaster recovery or disaster mitigation?

    ■■   Are there potential conflicts that the PDNA may exacerbate or generate? An example is
         differential or preferential treatment to the disaster-affected population in social services,
         housing, or taxation compared with the treatment given to the general population.

    ■■   Are the criteria used in the post-conflict intervention to be the same in the post-disaster
         recovery, for example, compensation to the population displaced by the disaster compared to
         the population displaced by conflict?



    ■■   Will the government create specific institutions to lead the post-disaster recovery? If so, how       Institutional
         will these institutions integrate, interact, or coordinate with the conflict processes?               Framework
    ■■   At what level of government will recovery coordination be, and will that level be different from
         the level for conflict transition?

    ■■   What were the strengths and weaknesses of the organizational models used in transition? Is
         there any previous in-country experience of synergies or contradictions apparent between the
         recovery and transition processes?

    ■■   Do the international/development partners have different procedures/criteria for transition
         and recovery? Will similar rules be applied in the government’s dealing with the in-country
         agencies for transition and for recovery?

    ■■   What do the primary duties and responsibilities for transition mean in terms of the [national]
         post-disaster recovery framework? How do they relate to the post-disaster procedures
         expected to be taken by other levels of government (sectoral or subnational regional or local)?

    ■■   What governance models does the government envisage for the disaster recovery, compared
         to the post-conflict transition? Table 5.2 may help describe the process followed in each case.
26 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                                      Table 5.2 Processes in Post-Disaster Transition and Post-Conflict Recovery

                                                                     Post-Disaster transition          Post-Conflict recovery
                         1.	 Create a new institution for
                             management?
                         2.	 Strengthen and coordinate
                             existing line ministries to be
                             the recovery leaders, sector by
                             sector?
                         3.	 Use a hybrid option that
                             combines features of both
                             approaches, including creating
                             a temporary taskforce or
                             organizational unit. Did these
                             features include existing
                             ministries and/or local
                             authorities?
                         4.	 Does the process leverage
                             existing institutions and
                             technical and managerial
                             expertise both inside and
                             outside government?
                         5.	 Other mechanisms? Please
                             specify.
                         6.	 How were affected/conflicting
                             parties are incorporated?


                              ■■   What existing capacity do external partners already have on the ground in country? How will
                                   they modify/adapt their capacity to support the transition and/or recovery? Capacity includes
                                   existing portfolios, partners’ comparative advantage, institutional partnerships, humanitarian
                                   emergency operations, peacekeeping, and security operations.

                              ■■   In the post-conflict response, what types of partners—such as of INGOs and CSOs—were
                                   engaged in recovery? Will the same partners take part in the disaster recovery processes?



Policy and                    ■■   How does the timeframe for the transition tie in and overlap with the post-disaster recovery?
Planning:
                                   Was there a consultative process with all necessary stakeholders to prioritize and sequence
Guiding                       ■■
                                   needs in the post-conflict transition framework? Will the mechanisms used in that process be
Principles
                                   used to determine the post-disaster framework?
to Shape
Transition and                ■■   In the post-conflict period, how was prioritization conducted within and among sectors? How
Recovery, Set                      were needs sequenced by time (short-, medium- and long-term needs)?
Priorities, and
Conduct the
Processes
                                                                                            Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 27




   ■■   How was the financing platform set up for the transition? Will there be a different national            Designing,
        strategic and financing platform across multiple sectors for disaster recovery?                         Costing, and
   ■■   In the post-conflict process, was there a pledging conference? What needs were expressed and
                                                                                                                Financing
        which were met? Supplement statements with quantitative analysis.
                                                                                                                Conflict
                                                                                                                sensitive
   ■■   In the post-conflict transition, what were the protocols established for the process? Use table         Recovery
        5.3 as guide.                                                                                           Programs
                  Table 5.3 Protocols for Transition and Disaster Recovery Processes

                          Transition process                    Disaster recovery process
Law/legislation
Policies
Institutional mandate


   ■■   How can the post-disaster recovery framework facilitate the reintegration of persons displaced
        by conflict who are returned or resettled internally?
   ■■   Were longer term aspects—such as building resilience, social accountability, and disaster
        reduction and recovery (DRR)—included in budget plans and undertaken in the post-conflict
        scenario?
   ■■   In the post-conflict period, which agencies or ministries had the greatest responsibility for
        developing financing strategies? Differentiate, if appropriate, between disaster and conflict.
   ■■   Was most of the financing for transition on or off budget? Will similar patterns be expected in
        the post-disaster period?
   ■■   How was the transition budget funded? Use table 5.4 as a guide (actual amounts or percentages
        may be used).

                              Table 5.4 Transition and Recovery Budget

                                                             Transition process             Recovery plan
1.	 International official donor pledges
2.	 International loans and non-reimbursable funds
3.	 Multi-donor trust fund
4.	 Partially funded by government (central, local)
5.	 NGOs
6.	 Community funds or other civil society contributions
7.	 Benevolent institutions and private sector
8.	 Other
9.	 Percentage of unfunded needs in framework


   ■■   In the post-conflict period, which institutions (government, social, international)
        tracked and monitored the use of funds? Which national institution was responsible for
        accounting for funds used across all agencies involved in the transition? Will the same
        procedures be used in the post-disaster recovery/recovery?
   ■■   What were the different sources/criteria of financing? Table 5.5 may be used as a guide.
28 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                                                 Table 5.5 Sources of Transition and Recovery Financing

                                                                        Transition financing          Recovery financing
                          Donors–non-humanitarian actors
                          Long-standing arrangements (such as risk
                          financing, reprogramming, and reorientation
                          of existing funds)?
                          Based on humanitarian impacts?
                          Based on security/conflict-avoidance
                          priorities?
                          Public-private partnerships?
                          Private sector?
                          Remittances from diaspora?
                          Other



Managing                      ■■   To what extent, and how, did government engender the participation of relevant stakeholders
Programs,                          in, and local ownership of, planning post-conflict transition processes?
Ensuring                           In the post-conflict period, how did local communities participate in conducting
Performance,
                              ■■
                                   assessments, setting objectives, and monitoring projects?
and
Delivering                    ■■   During the transition period, was the central government seen as actively responding to the
Results                            needs of all members of the affected communities? How will disaster response be synergized
                                   with conflict transition?

                              ■■   In the post-conflict period, what results-management mechanisms did governments put
                                   in place? How are these mechanisms expected to differ in conflict transition and disaster
                                   recovery?

                              ■■   In the post–conflict period, what were the baseline or target data used to compare and assess
                                   achievements? Table 5.6 may be used as a guide.
                                                                                    Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 29




                                      Table 5.6 Assessing Post-Conflict Achievements

                                                                          Development
                           Security and stabilization                     (socioeconomic,
                           (conflict avoidance)       Humanitarian        environmental)
Goals established
in peace or conflict
resolution agreement
Pre-disaster conditions
incorporating DRR (Build
Back Better principles)
Pre-conflict physical
infrastructure
Adaptive and mitigation
measures
Social cohesion and
social inclusion
targets in specific
sectors
Health
Education
Social services
Formalization and
legitimacy
Property and land tenure
rights
Human rights
Nondiscriminatory
measures (such as
targets, positive
discrimination for
gender, race, religion)
Other
30 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         6.	Appendix

                            Table A1. Sri Lanka: Post-Tsunami Recovery Allocations and Expenditures to Social Services
                            and Infrastructure Compared with Housing Projects Tracked in the Development Assistance
                                                         Database, by Province and District

                                                                   Cost                                         Expenditure
                                                   Housing            Total      Per home               Total                            Cost
                         District                  damage      ($ millions)            ($)       ($ millions)   Per home ($)             (%)
                         Ampara                      12,640               141        11,122               55           4,386             39%
                         Batticaloa                  11,657               140       12,003                46            3,916            33%
                         Trincomalee                  5,322               164       30,787                39            7,287            24%
                         Eastern Province            29,619               444       15,002               140            4,722            31%
                         Jaffna                       4,143               80        19,279                26            6,172            32%
                         Kilinochchi                    288                38      132,464                  7          23,141            17%
                         Mullaitivu                   5,276                53       10,137                23           4,352             43%
                         Northern Province            9,707               172       17,669                55           5,686             32%
                         Galle                         7,071              107        15,122               38            5,355            35%
                         Hambantota                   1,559               103       66,035                35          22,320             34%
                         Matara                       3,492                91       26,176                40          11,560             44%
                         Southern Province            12,121              301       24,852               113           9,324             38%
                         Colombo                      3,739                29         7,692                15          4,124             54%
                         Gampaha                        447                17       38,219                 9          19,388             51%
                         Kalutara                     3,422                51       14,863                19           5,562             37%
                         Western Province             7,607                97       12,709                43           5,667             45%
                         Total                      59,054            1014           17,171              351           5,944             35%

                         Source: Kuhn 2009, Development Assistance Database 2008, and Divisional Secretariats 2006

                         Notes: Development Assistance Database records all projects coded under the Social Services and Infrastructure sector,
                         including national and international donors. Population data came from the secondary data collection in Divisional
                         Secretariats.
                                                                                                     Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 31




     Table A2. Sri Lanka: Post-Tsunami Expenditures to Social Services and Infrastructure Sector per Household and
                      Relative to National per-Household Average for All Donors and by Donor Type

                                      All Donors                 Bilateral                   Multilateral                     INGO
                             Per house         Relative   Per house          Relative   Per house           Relative   Per house      Relative
Ampara                              4,386          0.74       1,266             0.79        2,004              0.57       1,069           0.84
Batticaloa                          3,916          0.66         857             0.54        1,840              0.65       1,208           0.77
Trincomalee                          7,287         1.23       3,663             2.30        2,086              0.79       1,469           0.87
Eastern Province                    4,722          0.79       1,536             0.96         1,954             0.64        1,196          0.82
Jaffna                               6,172         1.04       1,051             0.66         2,131              1.59       2,961          0.89
Kilinochchi                         23,141         3.89       2,507              1.57      13,054              4.00       7,460           5.46
Mullaitivu                          4,352          0.73         669             0.42        1,486               1.18       2,197          0.62
Northern Province                   5,686          0.96         887             0.56         2,104             1.44        2,679          0.88
Galle                               5,355          0.90       1,287             0.81         1,959             1.09       2,030           0.82
Hambantota                      22,320             3.75       4,746              2.97       9,640               3.71      6,910           4.03
Matara                          11,560             1.94       4,316             2.70         4,742              1.17       2,186          1.98
Southern Province                   9,324          1.57       2,604              1.63        3,749              1.45       2,702          1.57
Colombo                             4,124          0.69         618             0.39         2,378             0.46         857           0.99
Gampaha                         19,388             3.26      10,367             6.50         1,887             3.82        7,129          0.79
Kalutara                            5,562          0.94         482             0.30         2,289             1.50        2,791          0.96
Western Province                    5,667          0.95        1,129             0.71       2,309               1.12      2,095           0.97
Total                               5,947          1.00       1,596             1.00        2,393              1.00       1,865          1.00
% of Total                          100%                       27%                           40%                            31%

Source: Kuhn 2009, Development Assistance Database 2008, and Divisional Secretariats 2006.

Notes: Development Assistance Database records all projects coded under the Social Services and Infrastructure sector, including national and
international donors. Population data came from the secondary data collection in Divisional Secretariats.



   Figure A1. Owner-Driven Program: Totally Destroyed Housing Requirements by Region (%)

                                West 3%

                              South 13%                                 North 17%




                               East 67%                                 East 67%

         Source: Grewal 2006, 20.
32 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                                             Figure A2. Owner-Driven Program: National Rate of Disbursement
                                                   for Totally Destroyed Houses (as of March 2006) (%)
                                            100%
                        100


                         80


                         60                                           58%


                         40

                                                                                               21%
                         20
                                                                                                                      8%
                             0
                                             First                   Second                    Third                 Fourth
                                                                                Installments
                         	

                         Source: Gewal 2006, 20.




                                    Table A3. Owner-Driven Programme: Installments Received by Households Benefiting
                                            from the Four Installment Grants to Rebuild (as of March 2006) (%)

                             Installments received as a
                             proportion of the needs required         Fisrt             Second            Third            Fourth
                             by region (with % in parenthesis)    installment         installment      installment       installment
                             North                               4722 (100%)          1046 (22%)        291 (6%)           33 (1%)
                             East                                18,415 (100%)       11,425 (62%)      3190 (17%)        1153 (6%)
                             South                               3447 (100%)          2868 (83%)       1815 53%)         879 (26%)
                             West                                 754 (100%)           617 (82%)       501 (66%)         177 (23%)
                         Source: Grewal 2006, 20.
                                                                                                      Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 33




7.	Bibliography

ADB (Asian Development Bank), JBIC (Japan Bank for International Cooperation), and World Bank. 2005. “Sri Lanka
    2005 Post-Tsunami Recovery Programme: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment.” Colombo, Sri Lanka.
    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2005/01/5586145/sri-lanka-2005-post-tsunami-recovery-
    program-preliminary-damage-needs-assessment.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2012. “Working Differently in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations – The ADB
    Experience.”
Anderson, M.B., D. Brown, and I. Jean. 2012. “Time to Listen. Hearing People on the Receiving End of International
    Aid.” http://www.cdacollaborative.org/media/60478/Time-to-Listen-Book.pdf.
Bauman, P., G. Paul, and M. Ayalew. 2012. “Comparative Analysis of the Impact of Tsunami Interventions on
    Conflicts in Sri Lanka and Aceh/Indonesia.” Executive Summary. http://web.mit.edu/cis/www/migration/pubs/
    rrwp/34_tsunami.pdf.
Enia, J.S. 2007. “Peace in Its Wake? The 2004 Tsunami and Internal Conflict in Indonesia and Sri Lanka.” Princeton
     University, Princeton, NJ. www.princeton.edu/jpia/past-issues-1/2008/1.pdf.
EC (European Commission) and EEAS (European External Action Service). 2012. “Guidance Note on the Use of
    Conflict Analysis in Support of EU External Action.” http://capacity4dev.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/
    file/13/11/2013_-_1900/guidance_note_on_conflict_analysis_in_support_of_eu_external_action.pdf.
Feith, P. 2007. “The Aceh Peace Process: Nothing Less than Success.” United States Institute of Peace Special Report
     184. USIP, Washington, DC. March. http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/sr184.pdf.
Goodhand, J., and B. Klem with D. Fonseka, S.I. Keethaponcalan, and S. Sardesai. 2005. Aid, Conflict, and Peacebuilding
    in Sri Lanka 2000–2005. Vol. 1, 6-part series. Colombo, Sri Lanka: Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Sida
    (Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency), The Asian Foundation, Government of the United
    Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, and World Bank. http://asiafoundation.org/resources/pdfs/
    fullsrreport.pdf.
Government of Japan. 2003. Tokyo Declaration on Reconstruction and Development of Sri Lanka. Tokyo. June 10.
    http://www.mofa.go.jp/region/asia-paci/srilanka/conf0306/declaration.html.
GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners. 2005. “Post Tsunami Recovery and Reconstruction:
    Progress, Challenges, Way Forward.” Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners,
    December 2005. GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka), Colombo. http://www.preventionweb.net/english/
    professional/publications/v.php?id=1591.
_____. 2006. “Post Tsunami Recovery and Reconstruction.” Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and
      Development Partners, December 2006. GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka), Colombo.
Grewal, M.K. 2006. “Approaches to Equity in Post-Tsunami Assistance. Sri Lanka: A Case Study.” DFID (Department
    for International Development) and OSE (UN Special Envoy for Tsunami Recovery), London. http://r4d.dfid.gov.
    uk/PDF/Outputs/Inequality/conferencepaper14.pdf.
Harris, K., D. Keen, and D. Mitchell. 2013. “When Disasters and Conflict Collide: Improving Links
     between Disaster Resilience and Conflict Prevention.” ODI (Overseas Development Institute), London.
Kuhn, R. 2009. “Tsunami and Conflict in Sri Lanka.” Paper commissioned by the Joint World Bank-UN Project on
    the Economics of Disaster Risk Reduction. Josef Korbel School of International Studies, University of Denver,
    Denver, CO.
Mulligan, M., and J. Shaw. 2007. “What the World Can Learn from Sri Lanka’s Post-Tsunami Experiences.” International
     Journal of Asia Pacific Studies 3 (2): November.
OCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs). 2012. Colombia, inundaciones y
   vendaval en Putumayo. Informe de Situación 3, 26 de Septiembre.
34 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         ODI (Overseas Development Institute). 2014. “The Future Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction: A Guide for
                             Decision-Makers.” 2d ed. November. http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-
                             opinion-files/9230.pdf.
                         OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2012. “Evaluating Peacebuilding Activities in
                            Settings of Conflict and Fragility – Improving Learning for Results,” DAC Guidelines and Reference Series.
                         OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2014. “Development Assistance and Approaches
                            to Risk in Fragile and Conflict Affected States.”
                         Patfoort, P. 2001. “Breaking the Ice.” In L. Reychler and T. Paffenholz. eds., Peacebuilding: A Field Guide. Boulder,
                              CO: Lynne Rienner.
                         Raheem, M. 2005. “Post-Tsunami Reconstruction and the Peace Process in Sri Lanka.” In A New Dynamic for Peace?
                             Post-Tsunami Reconstruction and Its Impact on Conflict Resolution. Case Studies from India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka
                             and Thailand.
                         UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2007. “An Integrated Approach to Disaster Recovery: A Toolkit on
                            Cross-Cutting Issues. Lessons from the Tsunami Recovery Unit.” New York.
                         _____. 2011. “Disaster-Conflict Interface: Comparative Experiences.” New York. http://www.undp.org/content/dam/
                                undp/library/crisis%20prevention/DisasterConflict72p.pdf.
                         Wallace, M. 2014. “From Principle to Practice: A Users Guide to Do No Harm.” CDA Collaborative Learning Projects,
                             Cambridge, MA. www.cdacollaborative.org. http://www.scribd.com/doc/217467179/From-Principle-to-
                             Practice-A-Users-Guide-to-Do-No-Harm.
                         Vaux, T. 2001. The Selfish Altruist: Relief Work in Famine and War. London: Routledge/Taylor & Francis Group/Informa
                             UK Ltd.
                         World Bank. 2006. “Report on People’s Consultations on Post-Tsunami Relief, Reconstruction and Rehabilitation in
                             Sri Lanka.” Washington, DC.
                         _____. 2014. “Changing the Paradigm: Disaster Recovery as a Means to Sustainable Development.” Second World
                                Reconstruction Conference Statement. September. https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/gfdrr/files/WRC2%20
                                Conference%20Statement%20for%20Recovery%20in%20HFA2_English.pdf.                  WRC2      (second       World
                                Reconstruction Conference). 2014. Recovery in Conflict and Fragile Situations session report. Held at the World
                                Bank, Washington, DC, September 10–12, 2014.
                         	https://www.gfdrr.org/WRC2.
                         Zicherman, N. with A. Khan, A. Street, H. Heyer, and O. Chevreau. 2011. “Applying Conflict Sensitivity in Emergency
                              Response: Current Practice and Ways Forward.” HPN 70. Humanitarian Practice Network, ODI (Overseas
                              Development Institute), London.
                                                                                                      Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 35




8.	Endnotes
1
 	 EC (European Commission) and EEAS (European External Action Service) (2012). “Guidance Note on the Use
   of Conflict Analysis in Support of EU External Action.” http://capacity4dev.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/
   file/13/11/2013_-_1900/guidance_note_on_conflict_analysis_in_support_of_eu_external_action.pdf.
2
    	 DRF guide may be downloaded at the link https://www.gfdrr.org/recoveryframework
3	
      This principle was clearly acknowledged at the September 2014 Second World Reconstruction Conference
      session on Recovery in Conflict and Fragile Situations (see session report, https://www.gfdrr.org/WRC2).
4	
      T. Vaux (2001). The Selfish Altruist: Relief Work in Famine and War, 20. London: Routledge/Taylor and Francis
      Group/Informa UK Ltd.	
5
    	 P. Patfoort (2001). “Breaking the Ice.” In L. Reychler and T. Paffenholz (eds.), Peacebuilding: A Field Guide.
      Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 461–66, 462.
6
    	The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2014). “Development Assistance and
     Approaches to Risk in Fragile and Conflict Affected States,” p. 32.
7
     The Asian Development Bank (2012). “Working Differently in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations – The ADB
      Experience,” p. 92.
8
    	The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2014). “Development Assistance and
     Approaches to Risk in Fragile and Conflict Affected States,” p. 32.
9
    	 The Asian Development Bank (2012). “Working Differently in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations – The ADB
      Experience,” p. 49.
10
     The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2014). “Development Assistance and Approaches
     to Risk in Fragile and Conflict Affected States,” p. 32.
11
     	 The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2012). “Evaluating Peacebuilding Activities in
       Settings of Conflict and Fragility – Improving Learning for Results,” DAC Guidelines and Reference Series, p.
       48.
12
     	 The Asian Development Bank (2012). “Working Differently in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations – The ADB
       Experience,” p. 63; Fragile Conflict-Affected Situation Team, ADB.
13
     	P. Ninnes (1990) “Building Peace in Bougainville: Gender, Development and Education for Post-Conflict
      Recovery”, Centre for Research on Education in Context School of Education, University of New England,
      Armidale, Australia. http://www.paddle.usp.ac.fj/collect/paddle/index/assoc/anzcies0/4_05.dir/doc.pdf
14
      The Asian Development Bank (2012). “Working Differently in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations – The ADB
      Experience,” p. 64; S. Jnawali (2010). The Nepal Transition to Peace Initiative and the Women Peace Building
      Network: An Effective Way to Include Women? Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue.	
15
     	 Jnawali (2010). The Nepal Transition to Peace Initiative and the Women Peace Building Network: An Effective
      Way to Include Women? Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue.
16
     	The Asian Development Bank (2013). “The Role of Women in Peacebuilding in Nepal”. Supporting ADB’s
      Engagement in Fragile Situations (RETA 7269). ADB http://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/30271/
      role-women-peacebuilding-nepal.pdf.
17
     	See: http://www.principletopractice.org/from-principle-to-practice/a-brief-history-of-the-do-no-harm-project/.
18
     	 M. Wallace (2014). “From Principle to Practice: A User’s Guide to Do No Harm,” 6. CDA Collaborative Learning
       Projects, Cambridge, MA. http://www.principletopractice.org/from-principle-to-practice/.
36 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         19
                              	 The training manual may be found at http://www.cdacollaborative.org/media/52500/Do-No-Harm-Handbook.
                                pdf.
                         20
                              	M.B. Anderson, D. Brown, and I. Jean (2012). “Time to Listen: Hearing People on the Receiving End of
                               International Aid.” CDA Collaborative Learning Projects, Cambridge, MA, 65 ff. http://www.cdacollaborative.
                               org/media/60478/Time-to-Listen-Book.pdf.
                         21
                           	 For a description of the Sri Lanka tsunami and the recovery process, see the Joint Report of the Government of
                             Sri Lanka and Development Partners (December 2005), http://www.preventionweb.net/files/2180_VL323142.
                             pdf.
                         22
                              	ADB (Asian Development Bank), JBIC (Japan Bank for International Cooperation), and WB (World Bank)
                               (2005). Sri Lanka 2005 Post-Tsunami Recovery Programme: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment,” 7 ff.
                               Colombo, Sri Lanka.
                         23
                              	 Ibid., 5.
                         24
                              	 Ibid., 7.
                         25
                              	 Ibid., 2 ff5.
                         26
                              	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2005). “Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery.
                               Joint Re-port of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners,” 36. Colombo, Sri Lanka. December.
                         27
                              	K. Harris, D. Keen, and D. Mitchell (2013). “When Disasters and Conflict Collide: Improving Links between
                               Disaster Resilience and Conflict Prevention,” 29. ODI (Overseas Development Institute), Washington, DC.
                         28
                              	 ADB (Asian Development Bank), JBIC (Japan Bank for International Cooperation), and WB (World Bank) (2005).
                                Sri Lanka 2005 Post-Tsunami Recovery Programme: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment, Appendix XV.
                                Colombo, Sri Lanka.
                         29
                              	 Ibid. 5.
                         30
                              	Ibid.
                         31
                              	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). “Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery:
                               Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners.” Colombo, Sri Lanka, 11. December.
                         32
                              	 M. Mulligan and Judith Shaw (2007). “What the World Can Learn from Sri Lanka’s Post-Tsunami Experiences,”
                                International Journal of Asia Pacific Studies 3 (2) (November): 74.
                         33
                              	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). “Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery:
                               Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners.” Colombo, Sri Lanka, 12. December.
                         34
                              	J.S. Enia (2007). “Peace in Its Wake? The 2004 Tsunami and Internal Conflict in Indonesia and Sri Lanka.”
                               Politics and International Relations at the School of International Relations, University of Southern California,
                               19. http://www.princeton.edu/jpia/past-issues-1/2008/1.pdf.
                         35
                              	M. Raheem (2005). “Post-Tsunami Recovery and the Peace Process in Sri Lanka.” In “A New Dynamic for
                               Peace? Post-Tsunami Recovery and Its Impact on Conflict Resolution: Case Studies from India, Indonesia, Sri
                               Lanka and Thailand,” 32 ff.
                         36
                              	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery:
                               Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners. Colombo, Sri Lanka, xv. December.
                         37
                              	Ibid.
                         38
                              	 P. Bauman, P. Gazala, and M. Ayalew (2012). “Comparative Analysis of the Impact of Tsunami Interventions on
                                Conflicts in Sri Lanka and Aceh/Indonesia,” Executive Summary, 4 ff. http://web.mit.edu/cis/www/migration/
                                pubs/rrwp/34_tsunami.pdf.
                         93	
                               GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). “Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery:
                               Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners.” Colombo, Sri Lanka, 6. December.
                                                                                                           Disaster Recovery in Conflict Contexts / 37




40
     	ADB (Asian Development Bank), JBIC (Japan Bank for International Cooperation), and WB (World Bank) (2005).
      Sri Lanka 2005 Post-Tsunami Recovery Programme: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment, Appendix
      XII. Colombo, Sri Lanka.
41
     	 Ibid. 19.
42
     	M. Mulligan and J. Shaw (2007). “What the World Can Learn from Sri Lanka’s Post-Tsunami Experiences,”
      International Journal of Asia Pacific Studies 3 (2) (November): 76.
43
     	Ibid.
44
     	 P. Bauman, P. Gazala, and M. Ayalew (2012). “Comparative Analysis of the Impact of Tsunami Interventions on
      Con-flicts in Sri Lanka and Aceh/Indonesia,” Executive Summary, 5. http://web.mit.edu/cis/www/migration/
      pubs/rrwp/34_tsunami.pdf.
45
     	M. Mulligan and J. Shaw (2007). “What the World Can Learn from Sri Lanka’s Post-Tsunami Experiences,”
      International Journal of Asia Pacific Studies 3 (2) (November): 87.
46
     	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery,
      Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners, ix. Colombo, Sri Lanka. December.
47
     	 R. Kuhn (2009). “Tsunami and Conflict in Sri Lanka.” Josef Korbel School of International Studies, University of
       Denver. Paper commissioned by the Joint World Bank-UN Project on the Economics of Disaster Risk Reduction.
       Denver, CO.
48
     	Ibid.
49
     	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery,
      Joint Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners, xi. Colombo, Sri Lanka. December.
50
     	Ibid.

 	 P. Bauman, P. Gazala, and M. Ayalew (2012). “Comparative Analysis of the Impact of Tsunami Interventions on
51

   Conflicts in Sri Lanka and Aceh/Indonesia,” Executive Summary, 18. http://web.mit.edu/cis/www/migration/
   pubs/rrwp/34_tsunami.pdf.
52
     	 ADB (Asian Development Bank), JBIC (Japan Bank for International Cooperation), and WB (World Bank) (2005).
       Sri Lanka 2005 Post-Tsunami Recovery Program: Preliminary Damage and Needs Assessment, Appendix VI.
       Colombo, Sri Lanka. December.
53
     	 Due to institutional and political considerations recovery and reintegration processes were separated in Aceh. At the
       same time, projects were designed that met both objectives but were formally not called integrated efforts. When
       objectives converge synergic efforts are to be promoted.
54
     	P. Feith (2007). “The Aceh Peace Process: Nothing Less than Success.” USIP Special Report 184, 7. United States
      Institute of Peace, Washington, DC. http://www.usip.org/sites/default/files/sr184.pdf.
55
     	 UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2011). “Disaster-Conflict Interface: Comparative Experiences,” 38.
       New York.
56
     	 Columns are to be considered distinct although some individuals were both conflict and tsunami affected.
57
     	M.K. Grewal (2006). “Approaches to Equity in Post-Tsunami Assistance, Sri Lanka: A Case Study,” 12. DFID
      (Department for International Development) and OSE (UN Special Envoy for Tsunami Recovery), London. http://r4d.
      dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/Inequality/conferencepaper14.pdf.
58
     	Ibid.
59
     	Ibid.
60
     	 UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2011). “Disaster-Conflict Interface: Comparative Experiences,” 38.
       New York
61
     	 http://www.sarvodaya.org/.
38 / Thematic Case Study for the Disaster Recovery Framework Guide




                         62
                              	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2005). Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery, Joint
                               Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners, 28. Colombo, Sri Lanka. December.
                         63
                              	 OCHA (United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs) (2012). Colombia, inundaciones y vendaval
                                en Putumayo. Informe de Situación 3: 26 de Septiembre.
                         64
                              	GoSL (Government of Sri Lanka) and Development Partners (2006). Post-Tsunami Recovery and Recovery, Joint
                               Report of the Government of Sri Lanka and Development Partners, 59. Colombo, Sri Lanka. December.
                         65
                              	N. Zicherman, A. Khan, A. Street, H. Heyer, and O. Chevreau (2011). “Applying Conflict Sensitivity in Emergency
                               Response: Current Practice and Ways Forward.” Humanitarian Practice Network Paper 70. ODI (Overseas Development
                               Institute), 17. London. http://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/9230.pdf.
                         66
                              	K. Harris, D. Keen, and D. Mitchell (2013). “When Disasters and Conflict Collide: Improving Links between Disaster
                               Resilience and Conflict Prevention.” ODI (Overseas Development Institute), 44. London.
                         66
                              	K. Harris, D. Keen, and D. Mitchell (2013). “When Disasters and Conflict Collide: Improving Links between Disaster
                               Resilience and Conflict Prevention.” ODI (Overseas Development Institute), 44. London.
                         67
                           	 EC (European Commission) and EEAS (European External Action Service) (2012). “Guidance Note on the Use of Conflict
                             Analysis in Support of EU External Action.” http://capacity4dev.ec.europa.eu/sites/default/files/file/13/11/2013_-
                             _1900/guidance_note_on_conflict_analysis_in_support_of_eu_external_action.pdf.
                         68
                              	 From the 2014 second World Reconstruction Conference (WRC2) Recovery in Conflict and Fragile Situations session
                                report. Held at the World Bank, Washington, DC, September 10–12, 2014. https://www.gfdrr.org/WRC2.
                         69
                              	This goes to the heart of the GFDRR-FCV (Fragility, Conflict, and Violence) cooperation and the spirit of ongoing
                               discussions.
                         70
                              	 Opting for hybrid solutions is very evident in the current recovery needs assessments in conflict and disaster contexts
                                such as the Ukraine and Gaza (conflict recovery driven) or the Ebola recovery (health emergency crisis driven).
The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery (GFDRR) is a global partnership that helps
developing countries better understand and reduce their
vulnerabilities to natural hazards and adapt to climate
change. Working with over 400 local, national, regional,
and international partners, GFDRR provides grant
financing, technical assistance, training and knowledge
sharing activities to mainstream disaster and climate
risk management in policies and strategies. Managed
by the World Bank, GFDRR is supported by 34 countries
and 9 international organizations.

https://www.gfdrr.org/recoveryframework
