                   PES Learning Paper 2017-1


  Assessing the Permanence of Land Use Change
Induced by Payments for Environmental Services:
             Evidence from Nicaragua

    Stefano Pagiola, Jordi Honey-Rosés, and Jaume Freire-González




                              May 2017


                 Environment and Natural Resources
                           World Bank
                        Washington DC, USA
Abstract	  
There have been few efforts to evaluate whether the positive land use changes induced by
conservation interventions such as Payments for Environmental Services (PES) persist once the
interventions end. Since gains achieved by conservation interventions may be lost upon
termination of the program, even apparently successful interventions may not result in long-
term conservation benefits, a problem known as that of permanence. This paper examines the
permanence of land use changes induced by a short-term PES program implemented between
2003 and 2008 in Matiguás-Río Blanco, Nicaragua. This PES program had been found to have a
positive and highly significant impact on land use, and particularly on the adoption of
silvopastoral practices. To assess the long-term permanence of these changes, participants were
re-surveyed in 2012, four years after the last payment was made. We find that the land use
changes that had been induced by PES were broadly sustained in intervening years, with minor
differences across specific practices and sub-groups of participants. The patterns of change in
the period after the PES program was completed help us understand the reasons for the
program’s success, and rule out alternative explanations for the program’s success. Our results
suggest that, at least in the case of productive land uses such as silvopastoral practices, PES
programs can be effective at encouraging land owners to adopt environmentally beneficial land
use practices and that the benefits will persist after payments cease.
Authors	  
Stefano Pagiola is Senior Environmental Economist in the Environment and Natural Resources
Global Practice, World Bank; Jordi Honey-Rosés is Assistant Professor at the School of
Community and Regional Planning, University of British Columbia; and Jaume Freire-González is
Researcher at Harvard University.
Keywords	  
Payments for Environmental Services (PES), impact evaluation, permanence, livestock,
silvopastoral, Nicaragua
Acknowledgements	  
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Special Session on Evidence-Based
Ecosystem Management at the 4th Annual Summer Conference of the Association of
Environmental and Resource Economists (AERE) in San Diego, June 3-5, 2015. The survey of long-
term effects and the data analysis were partially funded by a grant from the Bank-Netherlands
Partnership Program (BNPP).
Cover	  photo	  
A pasture planted with high tree density in Matiguás-Río Blanco, Nicaragua, adjacent to a
traditional tree-less pasture (Stefano Pagiola).

PES	  Learning	  Papers	  
PES Learning Papers draw on the World Bank’s extensive experience in supporting programs of Payments
for Environmental Services (PES). They are part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
The PES Learning Paper series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of
ideas about PES. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are
less than fully polished. The papers carry the names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors. They
do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World
Bank or the governments they represent. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                 Assessing the Permanence of Land Use Change
               Induced by Payments for Environmental Services:
                            Evidence from Nicaragua

             Stefano Pagiola, Jordi Honey-Rosés, and Jaume Freire-González


                                         1. Introduction
       In the last two decades, payments for environmental services (PES) have
become a mainstream environmental policy. A recent global review identified 55 PES
programs across nearly every continent (Ezzine-de-Blas and others, 2016). Initially
used primarily as a tool to conserve existing forest, PES has also started to be used to
reforest or to restore degraded ecosystems. Unlike conservation-oriented PES
programs, which usually offer long-term payments to participants, restoration-
oriented PES programs usually only offer short-term payments. Whether the land use
changes induced by such programs persist after payments end thus becomes a critical
issue.
        This paper contributes to the growing literature on the impact of PES by
examining the permanence of land use changes induced by a short-term PES program.
The PES program implemented by the Regional Integrated Ecosystem Management
Project (hereafter the ‘Silvopastoral Project’) at several sites in Latin America
between 2003 and 2008 had been found to have a positive and highly significant
impact on land use, and particularly on the adoption of silvopastoral practices
(Pagiola and Rios, 2013). To assess the long-term permanence of these changes,
participants at two sites—Quindío, Colombia, and Matiguás-Río Blanco, Nicaragua—
were re-surveyed in 2011-12, four years after the last payment was made. This is the
first effort to examine the long-term permanence of land use changes induced by PES.
In this paper, we examine the results from the Matiguás-Río Blanco site.1
       We begin by reviewing the use of PES to induce land use change (section 2),
and discussing alternative hypotheses of what might happen once payments end
(section 3). We then present the PES program implemented by the Silvopastoral
Project (section 4); the Matiguás-Río Blanco study site (section 5); the treatment
groups (section 6); and data collection methods (section 7). We then review the land
use changes that occurred during the period of implementation (section 8). We then
examine land use changes in the four years following the end of the PES program
(section 9), and discuss the implication of these changes for the various hypotheses of
post-PES behavior (section 10).
       We find that the land use changes that had been induced by PES were broadly
sustained in intervening years, with minor differences across specific practices and
sub-groups of participants. The patterns of change in the period after the PES

1
    The results for the Quindío site in Colombia are analyzed in Pagiola and others (2016).


                                                   3
program was completed also help better understand the reasons for the program’s
success, helping to rule out alternative explanations for the program’s success. These
results suggest that, at least in the case of productive land uses such as silvopastoral
practices, PES programs can be effective at encouraging land use changes that persist
after payments cease.

                    2. Using PES to induce land use change
       PES programs make payments that are conditional on managing natural
resources in ways that generate benefits for others (Wunder, 2005, 2015; Pagiola and
Platais, 2007; Engel and others, 2008). The assumption in PES programs is that
environmentally beneficial practices are under-adopted because some (perhaps most)
of their benefits are externalities from the landholders’ perspective. PES programs
seek to remedy this problem by providing payments that increase the returns that
landholders receive from environmentally beneficial land use practices.
       PES has been used primarily to encourage forest conservation—that is, to avoid
the conversion of forested lands to other, environmentally harmful practices (Alix-
García and Wolff, 2014). Mexico’s Pagos por Servicios Ambientales del Bosque (PSAB)
program and Ecuador’s Socio Bosque program focus exclusively on forest conservation,
for example, while 90% of the area enrolled in Costa Rica’s Programa de Pagos por
Servicios Ambientales (PPSA) program is under conservation contracts (Muñoz and
others, 2008; de Koning and others, 2011; Pagiola, 2008). In Brazil, São Paulo’s Mina
d’Água pilot PES program only offered conservation payments (Carrascosa von Glehn
and others, 2013), as did Espírito Santo’s ProdutorES de Água program (Silva and
others, 2013) and Amazonas’ Bolsa Floresta (Viana and others, 2013). Conservation is
also an important element in many watershed PES programs.
       Some PES programs, however, also attempt to induce positive land use
changes. The largest such program is China’s Sloping Land Conversion Program (SLCP,
also known as ‘Grain for Green’) (Xu and others, 2004; Bennett, 2008). In Latin
America, Costa Rica’s PPSA program has supported reforestation from the beginning,
albeit only on a small area (Pagiola, 2008). Espírito Santo’s new Reflorestar program,
which replaced the earlier ProdutorES de Água program, offers both restoration and
conservation payments (Pagiola and others, 2017), while São Paulo’s proposed Crédito
Ambiental Paulista—Mata Ciliares (CAP-MC) program focuses exclusively on
restoration. Many local PES programs also offer restoration payments, some
exclusively so, such as the Equitable Payments for Watershed (EPWS) Program in Lake
Naivasha, Kenya (Ndetei and Muigai, 2012). Most programs that sell carbon emission
reduction credits from forestry activities also focus on reforestation—exclusively so, in
the case of programs that sought to sell to the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).
Wunder (2005) calls PES programs that seek to induce positive land use changes
‘asset-building’, in contrast to the ‘use-restricting’ conservation-focused programs.
Asset-building PES programs often focus on productive land use practices that also
generate environmental benefits, rather than on pure conservation practices.



                                           4
        Relatively few rigorous impact evaluations of PES programs have been
conducted to date (Ferraro and Pattanayak, 2006; Miteva and others, 2012), although
preliminary impact evaluations show some success (Börner and others, 2016). The few
impact evaluations conducted to date have mostly focused on assessing the impact of
use-restricting PES programs such as Costa Rica’s PPSA program (Sills and others,
2008; Arriagada and others, 2012; Robalino and Pfaff, 2013) and Mexico’s PSAB
program (Muñoz-Piña, 2011; Alix-Garcia and others, 2012, 2014). For example, an
initial study of Costa Rica’s PPSA program showed that deforestation rates in the
country dropped in the same period as the program began making payments, however
it was difficult to attribute reduced forest loss to the PES program since other
national forest policies might also explain the reduced deforestation rates (Sánchez-
Azofeifa and others, 2007). An updated assessment of the same program found similar
modest results (Robalino and Pfaff, 2013). Similarly, a national evaluation of Mexico’s
PSAB program suggests that it led to decreased deforestation among enrolled particles
by 1.2 percent (Alix-García and others, 2012). At a smaller scale, Honey-Rosés and
(2011) evaluated a PES program aimed at conserving Mexico’s Monarch Butterfly
Reserve. In the first randomized-control trial of a PES program, Jayachandran and
others (2016) find that a PES program in Uganda reduced deforestation from 7-10
percent in control villages to 2-5 percent in treatment villages.
       The only impact evaluation of an asset-building PES program conducted to date
focused on one of the Silvopastoral Project’s sites, in Colombia’s Quindío region
(Pagiola and Rios, 2013); this was also the only impact evaluation to have a control
group selected at program start until the work of Jayachandran and others (2016), a
decade later.

                3. Permanence of PES-induced land use changes
       PES programs that focus on conservation generally provide long-term payments:
although contracts are typically for five-year periods, they are usually renewable
indefinitely. The working hypothesis in these programs is that the returns to
landholders of conservation are lower than those of alternatives—if this were not
case, there would be no pressure to change land use. Accordingly, perpetual
payments are necessary to induce landholders to retain such land uses. The
assumption is that conservation would cease once payments cease.2
       In contrast, asset-building PES programs usually only make payments for a
finite time. The working hypothesis of these programs is generally that returns to
landholders from environmentally beneficial land uses can exceed those of current
land uses once obstacles to their adoption have been overcome.3 In such cases, a


2
    Indeed, if landholders were to continue to conserve forests even after they cease receiving
    payments, it would strongly suggest that their participation was not additional (Pagiola and others,
    2016).
3
    Costa Rica’s reforestation contract, for example, makes payments for 5 years (with half of the
    payment in the first year) for the establishment of timber plantations, with the objective of


                                                   5
short-term PES program can ‘tip the balance’ between environmentally harmful and
beneficial land uses. This was the hypothesis of the PES program examined here.
Based on this hypothesis, the expectation is that the land use changes induced by the
program would be retained even after payments end—that these land use changes
would be permanent.
       There is reason for concern over this expectation. Many soil conservation and
reforestation programs, as well as many agricultural technology adoption programs,
were based on the same hypothesis that the new practices would be profitable for
landholders once adopted and so would retained once the incentives offered by these
programs ended (Lutz and others, 1994). This has often not been the case. Experience
has shown that many such projects have achieved limited participation, or that
participation has been followed by abandonment of the new practices once the
project ended (Bunch, 2004). Possible lack of permanence has been a major concern
for the sale of carbon credits (Dutschke and Angelsen, 2008; Kim and others, 2008).
       PES programs differ from traditional approaches to induce land use change in
several ways. Whereas traditional approaches have generally relied on up-front
subsidies, PES relies on conditional payments, made after verification of compliance.
In traditional approaches, the support offered to participants can take a wide variety
of forms (the most common being cash, in-kind support, subsidized credit, or direct
implementation of land use change by contractors) but is usually calculated as a share
of the cost of adoption. PES programs—which almost always make payments in cash or
cash equivalents—usually base their payments at least notionally on the value of the
positive externalities.4
        The conditionality of payments means that landholders would not be able to
divert the resources provided by the project to other ends. The risk of non-
compliance is thus much lower than in traditional projects. Whenever project support
is finite in time, however, the risk of abandonment once payments end remains.
       Consider Figure 1, which illustrates the possible configurations of net returns to
landholders over time from environmentally beneficial practices A, B, and C, all of
which are assumed to provide higher levels of environmental services than current
practices.5 The shape of the return profile assumes that there is some cost to
switching to the new practices (for example, to plant trees), and that it takes some
time for them to generate their full benefits (for example, because trees have to
grow, or because soils take time to recover their fertility). What matters, ultimately,
is the extent of the initial costs and the magnitude of the long-term net benefits,


    overcoming financing constraints; thereafter participants receive revenue from thinning and the
    from final harvest, typically after 15-20 years (Pagiola, 2008).
4
    This is not always the case. Many PES programs seek to determine the minimum payment necessary
    to induce land use change, and so their payments are also based to the cost of implementation.
5
    That is, the figure only shows the on-site, private benefits to landholders of each practice. It does
    not show the value of the environmental services being generated (nor the external costs of
    current practices), as these are externalities from the landholders’ perspective.


                                                   6
relative to those of the current practice.6 A short-term PES program modifies these
return profiles by reducing the initial costs (as shown by the dotted lines), which
shortens the time before their returns exceed those of the current practice and the
time before they break even, and increases the net returns to their adoption.




      Figure 1: Typology of net return profiles to alternative land use practices

       In general, practices whose long-term net benefits to landholders exceed those
of current practices (such as practices A and B) are likely to be retained once
established (that is, once the bulk of initial costs are sunk). Conversely, practices
whose long-term benefits to landholders are lower than those of current practices
(such as practice C), if they were ever adopted, are likely to be abandoned once
payments end.
        In an ideal world, designers of short-term PES programs would offer payments
only for adoption of practice B. Practice A has such high returns that landholders are
likely to adopt it without any external support, in spite of its initial costs. Support to
adoption of practice A would thus reduce the program’s additionality. Conversely,
practice C has such low returns, even once it is established, that landholders who
adopt it would likely abandon it as soon as payments end.7


6
    To avoid having to repeat this qualification throughout the paper, when we speak of the
    profitability or attractiveness of a given practice, we shall henceforth always mean profitability or
    attractiveness relative to the current practice.
7
    This also shows one reason why command-and-control mechanisms often work so poorly: because
    they try to force landholders to adopt practices with return profiles such as C, which are less
    profitable to landholders than current practices even once established. Landholders have strong
    incentives to abandon these practices.


                                                   7
       The problem facing PES program designers, however, is that except for limit
cases, determining which profile the net returns of a given practice follow (A, B, or C)
may be difficult. Natural forests in which nothing can be harvested, for example, may
be very beneficial from an environmental perspective but would bring few net
benefits to landholders—indeed, they may have negative net benefits for
landholders.8 Observing widespread spontaneous adoption might identify very
profitable practices. But in many cases, the net returns will not be so clear. It is easy
for projects to over-estimate the benefits to landholders of particular practices they
seek to promote, or to under-estimate the benefits of current practices. Even if
estimates are accurate for a given location, or for average conditions, they may not
be accurate for many landholders in a heterogeneous landscape. Differences in local
soils, climate conditions, productivity, access to markets, and other factors that
affect returns, mean that the specific practices that fall within groups A, B, or C may
differ from place to place. Moreover, landholders have strong incentives to mis-
represent the likely returns to adopting new practices in the hope of securing higher
payments.
       If a PES program were to offer long-term support to all practices, it would
almost certainly have permanent results. As long as the payments offered were
sufficient, landholders would retain practice C. They would, of course, also retain
practices A and B—they would have done so even without payments. Such an approach
would obviously be inefficient. Conversely, if a PES program were to offer only short-
term support to all practices, any landholders who had adopted practice C would
abandon it once payments end.
       Despite the risk of non-permanence, PES programs that offer only short-term
support are attractive for many reasons. First, such programs can be funded by
donors. Long-term payments for adoption of a given practice would require long-term
financing, which cannot be sustainably provided by donors.9 Second, short-term PES
programs can rely on ad hoc organizational structures that employ highly qualified
people for short periods. Long-term programs would require similarly long-lived
organizational structures.
       Many previous projects have tended to assume that environmentally beneficial
practices were either uniformly of type A (and so would be readily adopted with little
outside support except for credit and/or Technical Assistance, TA) or uniformly of
type B (and so would be sustainably adopted with only short-term outside support).

8
    The areas of permanent protection (Areas de Proteção Permanente, APP) that Brazilian law
    stipulates must be maintained under forest in riparian corridors are an example of such a practice.
    By law, forests in APPs cannot be harvested, nor used in any other way. Not only do such forests
    generate no income, but the cost of maintaining them (fencing etc) means that their net return to
    landholders is actually negative, even before considering opportunity costs.
9
    The one exception is when donor funds are placed in an endowment fund, and only the interest is
    used. Such arrangements have often been made to meet the long-term funding requirements of
    protected areas, for example, and there are also a few examples of trust funds being established
    to provide long-term financing to PES programs (Honey-Rosés and others, 2009). The limitations of
    this approach—particularly when interest rates are low—limit its applicability, however.


                                                  8
There was strong resistance to acknowledging that many environmentally beneficial
practices may be of type C and thus would require sustained, long-term support, in
part perhaps because until the advent of PES there were few tools to provide such
support.
      The extent to which the risk of non-permanence is likely to be realized will
depend in part on the reasons environmentally beneficial land uses were not being
adopted prior to the program. There are several possible hypotheses:
   ! Environmentally beneficial practices are less profitable to landholders than
      current practices. If this is the case, PES-induced practices are likely to be
      abandoned once payments end. Payments increased the relative attractiveness
      of environmentally beneficial practices, but this effect ceases when the
      payments cease.
   ! High initial costs make environmentally beneficial practices unattractive,
      but once established, they are more profitable for landholders than current
      practices. Asset-building PES programs are predicated on this hypothesis. If
      this hypothesis is correct, PES-induced practices will be retained even once
      payments end.
   ! High initial costs make adoption of environmentally beneficial and privately
      profitable practices difficult because of financing constraints. Cash-
      constrained landholders may not be able to finance the required investments or
      deal with the reduced (perhaps negative) income before the new practices
      begin generating benefits. In this case, short-term payments would work by
      providing the necessary financing. If this hypothesis is correct, PES-induced
      practices will be retained even once payments end.
   ! Landholders are unaware of the private benefits of environmentally
      beneficial practices. Under this hypothesis, landholders avoid adopting
      environmentally beneficial practices because they do not know whether they
      will receive sufficient benefits. In this case, the payments would reduce the
      risk of adopting new practices. If environmentally beneficial practices do in
      fact generate sufficient benefits to landholders, they would retain them even
      once payments end.
   ! Landholders do not know how to implement environmentally beneficial
      practices. Under this hypothesis, PES would work not through the effect on the
      profitability of environmentally beneficial practices, but through the TA
      provided to participants. If this hypothesis is correct, PES-induced land uses
      will be retained even once payments end.
Of course, these hypotheses are not mutually exclusive.10



10
     There are also other possible constraints to adoption of environmentally beneficial practices.
     Insecure tenure might be an obstacle in many cases, for example (by reducing the expected
     benefits of the investments due to the risk of being forced off the land). But PES is unlikely to
     prove sufficient to induce adoption in such cases. Permanence would not be an issue, therefore.


                                                  9
      These various hypotheses have implications not only for whether
environmentally beneficial practices are maintained once payments end, but also
whether they are expanded. This effect is clearest in the case of knowledge
constraints. Landholders who have adopted environmentally beneficial practices
thanks to payments will clearly no longer be ignorant either of their benefits or of
how to implement them. Thus even without payments, they would be expected to
continue expanding their area. Conversely, if high initial costs were the primary
constraint, expansion of environmentally beneficial practices would cease once
payments end. If financing constraints had been the primary obstacles, the effects on
continued expansion of environmentally beneficial practices is less clear: without
payments, financing would be more limited, but higher returns from previously
adopted practices could help fill the gap.

                               4. The Silvopastoral Project
      The Regional Integrated Silvopastoral Ecosystem Management Project piloted
the use of short-term PES to induce landholders to adopt silvopastoral practices to
replace their traditional cattle production systems.11 The project was implemented in
three areas: Quindío, in Colombia; Esparza, in Costa Rica; and Matiguás-Río Blanco, in
Nicaragua (Pagiola and others, 2005). In this paper, we focus on the Silvopastoral
Project’s Matiguás-Río Blanco site. In a separate paper, we examine results at the
Quindío site in Colombia (Pagiola and others, 2016).
       Silvopastoral practices include (1) planting high densities of trees and shrubs in
pastures, thus providing shade and diet supplements while protecting the soil from
packing and erosion; (2) cut and carry systems, in which livestock is fed with the
foliage of specifically planted trees and shrubs (‘fodder banks’) in areas previously
used for other agricultural practices; and (3) using fast-growing trees and shrubs for
fencing and wind screens. These practices provide deeply rooting, perennial
vegetation that is persistently growing and has a dense but uneven canopy.
       Silvopastoral practices generate high levels of environmental services,
particularly in comparison to traditional pastures. They have important biodiversity
benefits thanks to their increased complexity relative to traditional pastures,
contributing to the survival of wildlife species by providing scarce resources and
refuge; increasing the propagation of native forest plants; providing shelter for wild
birds; and helping to connect protected areas (Dennis et and others, 1996; Harvey and
Haber, 1999). Silvopastoral practices can also fix significant amounts of carbon in the
soil and in the standing tree biomass (Fisher and others, 1994; Swallow and others,
2007). Silvopastoral practices can also affect water services, though the specific

11
     The Silvopastoral Project was financed by a USD4.5 million grant from the Global Environment
     Facility (GEF), with the World Bank as the implementing agency. The project was developed with
     support of the multi-donor Livestock, Environment and Development Initiative (LEAD), hosted by
     the Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). It was implemented in the field by local non-
     governmental organizations (NGOs). In Nicaragua, this work was conducted by Nitlapan, an NGO
     affiliated with the University of Central America.


                                                10
impacts are likely to be site-specific (Bruijnzeel, 2004; Murgueitio, 2003). The
biodiversity, carbon sequestration, and hydrological benefits of silvopastoral practices
are off-site, however, so land users will not take them into account when they are
deciding which practices to adopt. As a result, these practices will tend to be under-
adopted.
       The benefits of silvopastoral practices to landholders may include additional
production from the tree component, such as fruit, fuelwood, fodder, or timber;
maintaining or improving pasture productivity by increasing nutrient recycling; and
diversifying production (Dagang and Nair, 2003). These benefits, while considerable,
may not be sufficient by themselves to justify adopting silvopastoral practices—
particularly practices with substantial tree components, which have high upfront
planting costs and only bring benefits several years later. Estimates prepared for the
project showed rates of return of between 4 and 14 percent, depending on the
country and type of farm (Gobbi, 2002). Other studies found similar results; White
and others (2001), for example, found rates of return to adoption of improved pasture
in Esparza, Costa Rica, of 9 to 12 percent. These estimates, of course, only consider
the on-site benefits of silvopastoral practices.
       To encourage adoption of silvopastoral practices, the Silvopastoral Project
offered payments proportional to the expected level of services provided. To do so, it
developed indices of the biodiversity conservation and carbon sequestration services
that different land uses provide, and aggregated them into a single ‘environmental
services index’ (ESI). The project distinguished 28 different land uses, each with its
own ESI score, and paid participants according to the change in total ESI score over
their entire farm area.12
       The Silvopastoral Project’s central hypothesis is that silvopastoral practices are
unattractive to landholders, despite their long-term benefits, primarily because they
require substantial initial investments and because of the time lag between
investment and returns. By offering a relatively small payment it hoped to ‘tip the
balance’ between current and silvopastoral practices. The project provided a one-
time payment of USD10/point for baseline ESI points followed by four annual
payments of USD75 per incremental ESI point.
       The Silvopastoral Project made its first payments, for baseline ESI points, in
July 2003. It then made annual payments for incremental ESI points, after monitoring
land use changes, from 2004 to 2007. Since 2007, the former participants have
received no systematic support, in terms of either payments or TA.




12
     The ESI is described in detail in CIPAV (2003) and Pagiola and others (2005). Not all practices
     recognized in the ESI are relevant at Matiguás-Río Blanco.


                                                 11
                                         5. Study site
      The Silvopastoral Project piloted the use of PES in three areas: Quindío, in
Colombia; Esparza, in Costa Rica; and Matiguás-Río Blanco, in Nicaragua (Pagiola and
others, 2005). In this paper, we focus on the Matiguás-Río Blanco site.
       Matiguás-Río Blanco is located in the department of Matagalpa, about 140km
northeast of Managua, on the southern slopes of the Cordillera de Darien. It has an
undulating terrain, with an elevation of 300-500m above sea level. Average
temperature is about 25C and average annual rainfall 1700-2500mm. Participants are
clustered in the Bulbul and Paiwas microwatersheds.




Note: Only includes data from PES recipient households still present at the site in 2012.
Source: 2003 and 2007 based on Silvopastoral Project mapping data, 2012 from 2012 survey.

  Figure 2: Land use changes by PES recipients during and after the Silvopastoral
                   Project in Matiguás-Río Blanco, 2003 to 2012

       In 2003, prior to the project’s start, extensive pastures covered about 40% of
the area (Figure 2). Of this, about to two thirds was degraded pasture. Another 10% of
the area was devoted to annual crops. Unlike in Quindío, Silvopastoral practices were
not unknown, though they were not widely used: pastures with high tree density
covered about 17% of the area, and fodder banks 3%. Forest remnants, mostly in
riparian areas, covered about 24% of the area.
      Households in Matiguás-Río Blanco are composed of six members on average,
and have about 31ha of land and about 30 head of livestock. Agriculture is their main
economic activity, with few households having off-farm income. The average per
capita income of about USD340 was below the poverty line. Few households have
water or electricity, and education levels are very low. Although most households
occupy public land, long-term occupancy gives them secure tenure.


                                                12
                                    6. Treatment groups
      As a pilot project, the Silvopastoral Project had limited funding, so only 100
households could be accepted in the treatment group in Matiguás-Río Blanco. A series
of public workshops were held in the area to explain the project. Households who
expressed an interest were then accepted on an essentially first-come basis, provided
they met minimal criteria on herd size.
       Accepted participants received PES for 4 years, as well as TA on the selection
and implementation of appropriate silvopastoral practices. However, some
participants were randomly assigned to sub-groups that only received payments for
two years and/or that did not receive TA, as shown in Table 1. The two-year PES
program represented an initial effort to examine permanence: participants in this
sub-group received a higher payment for land use changes, designed to be roughly
equivalent to the payment that participants in the 4-year payment program would
receive, in present value terms. The idea was to see whether 2-year payment
recipients maintained the practices they had adopted once payments ceased, while
the project was still in a position to monitor them.

Table 1: Participating households at the Matiguás-Río Blanco study site
                 2-year PES        4-year PES        Total PES          Total
TA                   13                39                52              52
No TA                 5                15                20              20
Total                18                54                72              72
Note: Number of households shown is the number found at the time of the 2012 survey.

       Because of out-migration from the area, the project lost a number of its initial
participants over the years, reducing the number of PES recipients at the time of the
re-survey to 72.
       In an effort to distinguish project-induced land use changes from changes
induced by other factors, the Silvopastoral Project also included control groups.13 At
the Quindío site, in Colombia, a control group was selected from the applicants that
had not been accepted.14 In Matiguás-Río Blanco, however, there were not enough
such applicants, as promotional efforts had been focused on two microwatersheds and
most farmers in those areas were participating. Control households had to be sought,
therefore, in other areas, where applications had not been sought. This caused two
problems: there was no way to control for potential fixed effects due to the different
areas, as they were correlated with the treatment, and there was no way to control
for selection bias. As a result, the Matiguás-Río Blanco control group is highly suspect,
and a decision was made not to use it.

13
     To our knowledge, this was the first World Bank natural resource management project ever to
     include a control group.
14
     Rejected applicants are often used as a source of controls. Alix-Garcia and others (2012), for
     example, used rejected applicants from Mexico’s PES program in their evaluation of that program.


                                                 13
                                              7. Data
      We use data from four data sets to examine land use changes in Matiguás-Río
Blanco, including two household surveys and two sets of detailed land use maps.
       A baseline survey conducted in late 2002, during project preparation, collected
detailed information on household characteristics.15 Second, a new survey of former
participants was conducted in 2012. The questionnaire for the survey was based on
that of the 2002 baseline survey. It also included questions on the motivations for
maintaining, extending, or reducing the use of different land uses in the period since
the end of the Project. For the analysis in this paper, we only used data from the 72
households remaining at the time of the 2012 survey.
       From 2003 to 2007, detailed land use maps were prepared annually for each
PES recipient. Remote sensing imagery (Quickbird imagery with a 61cm resolution)
was used to prepare detailed land use maps for each farm, which were then
extensively ground-truthed to match each plot to one of the ESI’s 28 land uses. These
mapping data give accurate and consistent measures of area and ensure that land
uses are classified consistently into the project’s categories. Finally, at the same time
as the 2012 survey, the land use maps for each participant were updated, using the
same methodology as was used during the Silvopastoral Project, by some of the same
personnel, to ensure consistency with the previous land use maps.

                              8. Land use change during PES
      Figure 2 compares land use by PES recipient households in Matiguás-Río Blanco
at the project’s start (2003) and end (2007), and in 2012. Overall, the PES program
induced substantial land use change during its implementation.
       There was a precipitous drop in the area of degraded pasture, which fell by
two-thirds, from almost 27% of farm area in 2003 to less than 8% in 2007. The area
under annual crops also declined substantially (from almost 10% to only 2% of farm
area). The area of pasture with no or few trees also contracted, though less markedly
(from over 13% to under 12% of farm area). These areas were primarily converted to
pasture with high tree density, whose share of farm area doubled from 17% in 2003 to
over 35% in 2007. Fodder banks also increased substantially, from under 3% to almost
8% of farm area. There was also a small increase in the area of riparian and secondary
forest, which went from 24% of farm area to 26.5%. The extent of live fencing more
than tripled, from less than 90km to over 280km. Overall, these changes resulted in a
increase of about 50% in environmental service generation, with ESI/ha increasing
from 0.8 in 2003 (out of 2.0) to 1.2 in 2007 (Figure 3).
       There were no significant differences in the extent of changes undertaken by
the different subgroups of participants. As can be seen in Figure 3, all sub-groups had
very similar initial land uses, in terms of their environmental service generation (as
15
     The questionnaires for this survey and for the 2012 survey discussed below are available from the
     authors on request.


                                                  14
measured by ESI/ha). By 2007, all had increased their environmental service
generation by similar amounts. The sole exception was the group of 2-year PES
recipients without TA. However, this group is so small (5 households) that caution is
needed in coming to any conclusions; indeed, their average ESI/ha in 2007 is not
significantly different from that of the other sub-groups.




Notes: Bars show standard deviations
        Only includes data from PES recipient households still present at the site in 2012.
Source: 2003 and 2007 based on Silvopastoral Project mapping data, 2012 from 2012 survey.
  Figure 3: Changes in environmental service generation under the Silvopastoral
                  Project in Matiguás-Río Blanco, 2003 to 2012

      In the absence of a suitable control group, additionality cannot be confirmed at
Matiguás-Río Blanco, but casual observation suggests that land use changes under the
Project were substantially higher than in other areas, where very few land use
changes were observed.

           9. Permanence of land use changes after the end of PES
       When the Silvopastoral Project closed in early 2008, it could look back with
satisfaction on having induced some very substantial land use changes. Yet there was
considerable concern over whether these changes would persist once payments
ended. The sub-group of 2-year recipients was an initial effort to determine whether
this concern was well-founded. As we have seen, there were no significant differences
in land use changes between 2-year and 4-year PES recipients, at the time of the
project’s end. This result was promising, but did not entirely allay concerns over
permanence, as the continued presence of monitoring teams during the remaining




                                                  15
two years could have inhibited 2-year PES recipients from abandoning the land uses
they had adopted.




Note: Only includes data from PES recipient households still present at the site in 2012.
Source: Based on Silvopastoral Project mapping data for 2007 and 2012 survey.

         Figure 4: Land use changes after the end of the Silvopastoral Project
                         in Matiguás-Río Blanco, 2007 to 2012

      Figure 2 above shows the observed land use four years after the end of PES at
Matiguás-Río Blanco. The observed changes are shown in more detail in Figure 4.
       Changes after the end of the PES program were modest. The area of pasture
with high tree density—the main land use adopted during PES implementation—
continued to expand even after payments ended, growing from 35 percent of farm
area in 2007 to almost 43 percent in 2012. Most of this increase was due to a
continued reduction in the area of degraded pastures and pastures with few or no
trees, as well as to densification of some pastures with low tree density. In some
cases, however, pastures with high tree density were obtained by clearing tacotales
(abandoned fields where forest is re-growing)—a higher-ESI land use. The area under
fodder banks also increased. On the negative side, there was a small decline in the
area under forest. The area of annual crops, which had plummeted during the
project, recovered somewhat, but remains well below its pre-project level. No
landholder increased the extent of live fences, while a few reduced it (two
landholders removed live fences almost entirely). The net changes on ESI/ha resulting
from these changes were very small and not statistically significant (Figure 3).
       Changes were concentrated among relatively few households (Figure 5). Most
landholders made changes that had little or no net impact on their environmental
service generation. There were just three exceptions. Two landholders increased
their environmental service generation significantly, by converting relatively large


                                                   16
areas (13 ha and 17 ha) of degraded pasture or pasture with few trees to pasture with
high tree density. These landholders have large farms (91ha and 140ha) and had
already adopted pasture with high tree density on large areas. Conversely, one
landholder reduced her environmental service generation significantly, by converting
a 5.4ha area of brush to annual crops on her relatively small farm (15.5ha). All three
of these landholders had been part of the 4-year PES program, and had received TA.




Source: Based on Silvopastoral Project mapping data for 2007 and 2011/2012 surveys.
       Figure 5: Post-PES changes in ESI/ha in Matiguás-Río Blanco, by farm size

                                           9. Discussion
      The results of the new survey show that the land use changes induced by PES at
Matiguás-Río Blanco were broadly retained, putting to rest concerns that
environmentally beneficial practices would be abandoned after payments ceased.
However, it is also disappointing to observe that these practices did not significantly
expand in the post-payment period. Although there was some land use changes post-
PES, they did not result in any appreciable increase in environmental service
generation.16
       That silvopastoral practices have not been abandoned after payments ceased
strongly suggests that they are, in fact, more profitable than alternative land uses at

16
     These results are broadly similar to those observed at the project’s site in Quindío, Colombia,
     where land uses were observed to be mostly stable in the post-payment period (Pagiola and others,
     2016). There was a 4 percent decline in the area of treeless pastures and small increase in the area
     of forests. The area of some environmentally beneficial practices fell slightly, but these reductions
     were very small (less than 1 percent), suggesting that the gains made in the payment period were
     largely permanent.


                                                    17
the study site once they are established. Had that not been the case, it would have
been simple for landholders to remove them, and they would have suffered no
penalties from doing so. At the same time, these results also supports the hypothesis
that financial profitability of silvopastoral practices was the main obstacle to their
adoption: that is, that payments ‘tipped the balance’ towards adoption by reducing
the initial costs of adoption and providing some income in the period before
silvopastoral practices begin to generate sufficient benefits to be profitable. If the
practices had been highly profitable for all landholders even without payments,
adoption would probably have continued even without payments.
        These results also shed light on the other hypotheses on obstacles to land use
change. Simple ignorance of their possible benefits, or of how to implement them,
were plausible explanations for lack of adoption prior to the project start, when
silvopastoral practices were little used. After four years in which the use of
silvopastoral practices expanded dramatically, these explanations are no longer
plausible. If ignorance or lack of expertise had been the main obstacles to the
adoption of silvopastoral practices, the area under these practices would have
continued to expand even in the absence of payments, and particularly so among
landholders who received TA. Yet there was very limited expansion, and no significant
differences in the extent of such expansion between those who received TA under the
project and those that did not. Likewise, if the primary constraint had been the
inability to finance the required investments, expansion should have continued even
without payments—at least among better-off households, and perhaps even among
poorer households, as the higher income generated by previously-adopted
silvopastoral practices could have financed additional adoption. Although the few
landholders who substantially expanded the area of pasture with high tree density had
larger farms suggests that financing constraints might have been an issue, other large
farms (which presumably also lacked such constraints) made minimal changes. The
other possible explanations for the lack of adoption of silvopastoral practices are,
thus, inconsistent with the observed results.
       A characteristic of the project that is likely to have contributed to the
permanence of its results is that it offered participants a wide menu of possible land
use changes. Most reforestation/technology change projects tend to focus on one or a
few practices. In a heterogeneous landscape, it is unlikely that any single practice
would be the best option for all landholders. The large range of options offered by the
Project allowed landholders to pick the combination of practices that best suited
their own conditions. As a result, landholders were less likely to find the practices a
poor fit once payments ended. Note, however, that not all PES programs offer such a
wide range of options.17 A PES program that offered only a narrow range of options
may well prove less successful.
       A major reason for the permanence of the land use changes adopted under the
Silvopastoral Project is, quite simply, that land uses that required long-term support

17
     The ‘agroforestry’ contract offered by Costa Rica’s PPSA program, for example, is quite restrictive,
     in that only timber species can be planted.


                                                   18
were simply not adopted by landholders. As shown in section 8, there was very little
adoption of essentially conservation-oriented practices such as forests—even though
the project offered its highest payments for these changes. This can be easily
explained by differences in long-term profitability to landholders of such practices,
compared to those that were adopted. Thus here, too, we see relative profitability to
landholders as being a major factor.
       The observed changes are also disappointing to those who hoped that use of
environmentally beneficial practices would change the ‘culture’ of landholders,
predisposing them to greater use of such practices. There were no significant changes
in the extent to which environmental services were generated, with positive changes
being balanced by negative ones, resulting in little net change. Though the behavior
of some individual landholders could be interpreted as being consistent with more
environmentally conscious attitudes, there are also counter-examples.

                                         11. Conclusions
       This paper describes one of the first efforts to assess the long-term
permanence of land use changed induced by a PES program, years after the program
ceased to operate. The experience of the Silvopastoral Project in Matiguás-Río Blanco
indicates that PES has resulted in additional positive land use changes in terms of
both the area affected and the nature of the changes. Our results show that concerns
about non-permanence of land use changes were unfounded: practices adopted under
the PES program were not abandoned once payments ended.18
       It is important to note the limitations of our conclusions. First, we recognize
that it may be dangerous to generalize from a single result, even though results at the
project’s site in Quindío, Colombia, were very similar. Second, we emphasize that the
conclusion applies to an ‘asset-building’ PES program, in which payments are targeted
primarily at productive activities (which also generate environmental benefits) rather
than conservation activities. We do not expect that ‘use-restricting’ PES programs
aimed at conserving existing environmentally beneficial practices could be sustainable
without payments. In fact, if the practices supported by such a use-restricting
program were maintained after payments cease, it would likely indicate that the
program was non-additional. Lastly, even among ‘asset-building’ programs, the
Silvopastoral Project was unusual in offering a very broad menu of options, and this
may have played an important role in its success.
       In addition to showing that PES-induced land use changes were sustainable,
these results are also help us understand why the original project was successful. That
environmentally beneficial land uses expanded rapidly when payments were offered
but then remained essentially unchanged once payments ended is consistent with the
hypothesis that limited profitability was the primary obstacle to their adoption, and

18
     As long-term permanence has seldom been documented, it is difficult to say whether the results of
     the Silvopastoral Project at our study sites are in fact better than those of other efforts to induce
     land use change.


                                                    19
inconsistent with several other plausible hypotheses, including that the primary
obstacles were lack of knowledge of these practices or of how to implement them, or
lack of financing for the required investments. While these rival hypothesis may be
correct in other contexts, we did not find supporting evidence for them in our case.
       Even with these caveats, the experience of the Silvopastoral Project offers
important lessons, which are already guiding new PES programs. In Nicaragua, the
Adaptation of Water Supplies to Climate Change Project is using a similar mechanism
to induce adoption of practices that facilitate infiltration in the watersheds that
provide water to rural communities. In Colombia, the Mainstreaming Sustainable
Cattle Ranching Project, which promotes similar land use changes and uses a similar
short-term payment mechanism at five sites across the country, is only offering
payments for productive practices, to avoid the risk that landholders adopt practices
that they are unlikely to maintain, while seeking to develop long-term payment
mechanisms that would allow pure conservation practices to be supported as well
(World Bank, 2010). In the Brazilian state of Espírito Santo, the Reflorestar PES
programs offers two complementary payments: short-term payments (over three
years, once only) for ecosystem restoration, and long-term payments (over five years,
renewable indefinitely) for ecosystem conservation. Landholders who adopt
conservation practices such as forests receive both payments, while those who adopt
productive practices such as agroforestry or silvopastoral practices only receive short-
term payments (Pagiola and others, 2017).




                                          20
                                        References
Alix-Garcia, J.M., E.N. Shapiro, and K.R.E. Sims. 2012. “Forest conservation and slippage:
    Evidence from Mexico’s national payments for ecosystem services program.” Land
    Economics, 88(4):613-638.
Alix-Garcia, J.M., K.R.E. Sims, and P. Yañez-Pagans. 2014. “Only one tree from each seed?
    Environmental effectiveness and poverty alleviation in Mexico’s Payments for Ecosystem
    Services Program.” Madison: University of Wisconsin.
Alix-Garcia, J., and H. Wolff. 2014. “Payment for ecosystem services from forests.” Annual
    Review of Resource Economics, 6:361-380.
Arriagada, R.A., P.J. Ferraro, E.O. Sills, S.K. Pattanayak, and S. Cordero-Sancho. 2012. “Do
    payments for environmental services affect forest cover? A farm-level evaluation from
    Costa Rica.” Land Economics, 88(2):382-399.
Bennett, M.T. 2008. “China's Sloping Land Conversion Program: Institutional innovation or
    business as usual?” Ecological Economics, 65(4):699–711.
Börner, J., K. Baylis, E. Corbera, D. Ezzine-de-Blas, P.J. Ferraro, J. Honey-Rosés, M. Persson,
    and S. Wunder. 2016. “Emerging evidence on tropical forest conservation.” PLoS ONE,
    11(11):e0159152.
Bruijnzeel, L.A. 2004. “Hydrological functions of tropical forests: Not seeing the soil for the
    trees?” Agriculture, Ecosystems and Environment, 104(1):185–228.
Bunch, R. 2004. “Reasons for non-adoption of soil conservation technologies and how to
    overcome them.” Mountain Research and Development, 19(3):213–220.
Carrascosa von Glehn, H.Q., D. Taffarello, A. Kamiyama, A.C. Dalla Vecchia, and C.V.
    Cogueto. 2013. “Projeto Mina d’Água.” In: S. Pagiola, H. Carrascosa von Glehn, and D.
    Taffarello (Eds.), Experiências de Pagamentos por Serviços Ambientais no Brasil. São
    Paulo: Secretaria de Estado do Meio Ambiente.
CIPAV (Centro para la Investigación en Sistemas Sostenibles de Producción Agropecuaria).
    2003. Usos de la Tierra en Fincas Ganaderas: Guía para el Pago de Servicios Ambientales
    en el Proyecto Enfoques Silvopastoriles Integrados para el Manejo de Ecosistemas, Cali:
    Fundación CIPAV.
Dagang, A.B.K., and P.K.R. Nair. 2003. “Silvopastoral research and adoption in Central
    America: Recent findings and recommendations for future directions.” Agroforestry
    Systems, 59:149–155.
de Koning, F., M. Aguiñaga, M. Bravo, M. Chiu, M. Lascano, T. Lozada, and L. Suárez. 2011.
    “Bridging the gap between forest conservation and poverty alleviation: the Ecuadorian
    Socio Bosque Program.” Environmental Science and Policy, 14(5):531–542.
Dennis, P., L. Shellard, and R. Agnew. 1996. “Shifts in arthropod species assemblages in
    relation to silvopastoral establishment in upland pastures.” Agroforestry Forum, 7:14-21.
Dutschke, M., and A. Angelsen. 2008. “How do we ensure permanence and assign liability?”
    In: A. Angelsen (Ed.), Moving Ahead with REDD: Issues, Options and Implications. Bogor:
    CIFOR.
Engel, S., S. Pagiola, and S. Wunder. 2008. “Designing payments for environmental services in
    theory and practice: An overview of the issues.” Ecological Economics, 65(4):663-674.




                                              21
Ezzine-De-Blas, D., S. Wunder, M. Ruiz-Pérez, and R. del Pilar Moreno-Sanchez. 2016. “Global
    patterns in the implementation of payments for environmental services.” PLoS ONE,
    11(3):1–16.
Ferraro, P.J., and S.K. Pattanayak. 2006. “Money for nothing? A call for empirical evaluation
    of biodiversity conservation investments.” PLoS Biology, 4(4):482-488.
Fisher, M.J., I.M. Rao, M.A. Ayarza, C.E. Lascano, J.I. Sanz, R.J. Thomas, and R.R. Vera.
    1994. “Carbon storage by introduced deep-rooted grasses in the South American
    savannas.” Nature, 371:236-238.
Gobbi, J. 2002. “Enfoques silvopastoriles integrados para el manejo de ecosistemas en
    Colombia, Costa Rica y Nicaragua: Análisis económico-financiero ex-ante de la inversión
    en los SSP propuestos para cada país.” Turrialba, Costa Rica: CATIE.
Harvey, C., and W. Haber. 1999. “Remnant trees and the conservation of biodiversity in Costa
    Rican pastures.” Agroforestry Systems, 44(1):37-68.
Honey-Rosés, J., J. López-García, E. Rendón-Salinas, A. Peralta-Higuera, and C. Galindo-Leal.
    2009. “To pay or not to pay? Monitoring performance and enforcing conditionality when
    paying for forest conservation in Mexico.” Environmental Conservation, 36(2):120–128.
Honey-Rosés, J., K. Baylis, and M.I. Ramírez. 2011. “A spatially explicit estimate of avoided
    forest loss.” Conservation Biology, 25(5):1032–1043.
Jayachandran, S., J. de Laat, E. Lambin, and C. Stanton. 2016. “Cash for carbon: A
    randomized controlled trial of payments for ecosystem services to reduce deforestation.”
    NBER Working Paper No.22378. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Kim, M.-K., B.A. McCarl, and B.C. Murray. 2008. “Permanence discounting for land-based
    carbon sequestration.” Ecological Economics, 64(1):763–69.
Lutz, E., S. Pagiola, and C. Reiche. 1994. “The costs and benefits of soil conservation: The
    farmers' viewpoint.” World Bank Research Observer, 9(2):273-95.
Miteva, D.A., S.K. Pattanayak, and P.J. Ferraro. 2012. “Evaluation of biodiversity policy
    instruments: what works and what doesn't?” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 28(1):69–
    92.
Muñoz-Piña, C. 2011. “Programa de Pago por Servicios Ambientales Hidrológicos de los
    Bosques.” Presented at the International PES Congress, Ixtapan de la Sal, Estado de
    México, México, 3-5 August, 2011.
Muñoz-Piña, C., A. Guevara, J.M. Torres, and J. Braña. 2008. “Paying for the hydrological
    services of Mexico’s forests: Analysis, negotiations and results.” Ecological Economics,
    65(4):725-736.
Murgueitio, E. 2003. “Impacto ambiental de la ganadería de leche en Colombia y alternativas
    de solución.” Livestock Research for Rural Development, 15(10).
Ndetei, R., and P. Muigai. 2012. “Equitable Payments for Watershed Services (Epws): A Case
    of Lake Naivasha Basin Kenya.” Paper presented at the Regional Workshop for Equitable
    Payments for Watershed Services (EPWS), Morogoro, Tanzania.
Pagiola, S. 2008. “Payments for environmental services in Costa Rica.” Ecological Economics,
    65(4):712-724.
Pagiola, S., and G. Platais. 2007. Payments for Environmental Services: From Theory to
    Practice. Washington: World Bank.




                                             22
Pagiola, S., and A.R. Rios. 2013. “Evaluation of the impact of payments for environmental
     services on land use change in Quindío, Colombia.” PES Learning Paper No.2013-2.
     Washington: World Bank.
Pagiola, S., P. Agostini, J.A. Gobbi, M. Ibrahim, E. Murgueitio, E. Ramírez, M. Rosales, and
     J.P. Ruíz. 2005. “Paying for biodiversity conservation services: Experience in Colombia,
     Costa Rica, and Nicaragua.” Mountain Research and Development, 25:206–11.
Pagiola S., J. Honey-Rosés, and J. Freire-González. 2016. “Evaluation of the permanence of
     land use change induced by payments for environmental services in Quindío, Colombia.”
     PLoS ONE, 11(3):e0147829.
Pagiola, S., G. Platais, and M. Sossai. 2017. “Evolution of payments for environmental services
     in Espírito Santo, Brazil.” Washington: World Bank.
Robalino, J., and A. Pfaff. 2013. “Ecopayments and deforestation in Costa Rica: A nationwide
     analysis of PSA’s initial years.” Land Economics, 89(3):432–448.
Sánchez-Azofeifa, G.A., A. Pfaff, J.A. Robalino, and J.P. Boomhower. 2007. “Costa Rica’s
     payment for environmental services program: Intention, implementation, and impact.”
     Conservation Biology, 21(5):1165–1173.
Sills, E., R. Arriagada, P. Ferraro, S. Pattanayak, L. Carrasco, E. Ortiz, S. Cordero, K. Caldwell
     and K. Andam. 2008. “Impact of Costa Rica’s Program of Payments for Environmental
     Services on land use.” PES Learning Paper No.2008-3. Washington: World Bank.
Silva, T.B., J. de Aquino M. Jr, R.M. dos Santos, and F. Ahnert. 2013. “Projeto ProdutorES de
     Água em Espírito Santo.” In: S. Pagiola, H. Carrascosa von Glehn, and D. Taffarello (Eds.),
     Experiências de Pagamentos por Serviços Ambientais no Brasil. São Paulo: Secretaria de
     Estado do Meio Ambiente.
Swallow, S., M. van Noordwijk, S. Dewi, D. Murdiyarso, D. White, J. Gockowski, G. Hyman, S.
     Budidarsono, V. Robiglio, V. Meadu, A. Ekadinata, F. Agus, K. Hairiah, P. Mbile, D.J.
     Sonwa, and S. Weise. 2007. “Opportunities for avoided deforestation with sustainable
     benefits.” Bogor: ASB partnership for the Tropical Forest Margins.
Viana, V., J. Tezza, V. Salviati, G. Ribenboim, T. Megid, and C. dos Santos. 2013. “O
     Programa Bolsa Floresta no Estado do Amazonas.” In: S. Pagiola, H. Carrascosa von Glehn,
     and D. Taffarello (Eds.), Experiências de Pagamentos por Serviços Ambientais no Brasil.
     São Paulo: Secretaria de Estado do Meio Ambiente.
White, D., F. Holmann, S. Fuijsaka, K. Reategui, and C. Lascano. 2001. “Will intensifying
     pasture management in latin america protect forests? – Or is it the other way round?” In A.
     Angelsen and D. Kaimowitz (eds.), Agricultural Technologies and Tropical Deforestation.
     Oxford: CAB International.
World Bank. 2010. “Colombia Mainstreaming Sustainable Cattle Ranching Project: Project
     Appraisal Document.” Report No.52688-CO. Washington: World Bank.
World Bank. 2012. “Nicaragua Adaptation of Water Supplies to Climate Change Project:
     Project Appraisal Document.” Report No.67746-NI. Washington: World Bank.
Wunder, S. 2005. “Payments for environmental services: Some nuts and bolts.” CIFOR
     Occasional Paper No.42. Bogor: CIFOR.
Wunder, S. 2015. "Revisiting the concept of payments for environmental services." Ecological
     Economics, 117:234-243
Xu, Zhigang, M.T. Bennett, R. Tao, and J. Xu. 2004. “China’s Sloping Land Conversion
     Program four years on: Current situation and pending issues.” International Forestry
     Review, 6(3-4):317-326.


                                               23
