Multi-facility Economic Zones in Zambia: Progress,
      Challenges and Possible Interventions
                   (Working Paper)




                 Douglas Zhihua Zeng
                   Senior Economist
       Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice
                The World Bank Group



                      (February 2016)




                            1
                              Multi-facility Economic Zones in Zambia:
                          Progress, Challenges and Possible Interventions


    I.      Context
The Government of the Republic of Zambia (GoZ) introduced multi-facility economic zones (MFEZ) in
2005 in order to enhance Zambia’s competitiveness and industrialization. The zones were initiated to
foster an attractive business environment, promote exports, and enhance domestic trade. The
enactment of the Zambia Development Act which mandated the creation of the Zambia Development
Agency (ZDA) provides a master framework for the management of investment facilitation activities
within the country. The Act also endorsed the development of MFEZs.

The Ministry of Commerce, Trade and Industry (MCTI) has designated several locations for the
establishment of MFEZs (including the Lusaka South Multi Economic Zone (LS-MFEZ) which is being
developed as a mixed use development) intended to promote manufacturing, exports, technology &
knowledge transfer and job creation.

Another important objective of the MFEZs is to promote the development of Small and Medium Sized
Enterprises (SMEs), especially through integrating SMEs in the value or supply chains of large enterprises
(LEs) within the zones.

The MFEZs are established to overcome the binding constraints faced by the private sector, including
land, infrastructure, business climate (such as inefficiency of the public services, cumbersome customs
clearance and taxation systems, etc.)



    II.     The Existing Multi-facility Economic Zones (MFEZs)

Currently there are mainly three MFEZs in Zambia:

    a) The Lusaka South Multi Economic Zone (LS-MFEZ)

The LS-MFEZ is a public sector led commercial project through which the GoZ is providing hard and soft
infrastructures to support the development of the private sector. It is planned and established with a
strong public sector participation involving ZESCO Limited, Zamtel, Lusake Water and Sewerage
Company (LWSC), Road Development Agency (RDA) and Industrial Development Corporation (IDC). The
LS-MFEZ is the SPV established in June 2012 by the Ministry of Finance (MoF) to manage, operate and
develop the zone. As of August 2015, IDC has taken over the shareholding in LSMFEZ Ltd on behalf of
the MoF.

The LS-MFEZ is approximately 10 km from the Lusaka city center and 21 km from the Kenneth Kaunda
International Airport. It has a total area of 2,100 hectares and has been planned to be developed in 5
phases beginning with Phase I in the North Eastern side of the zone where Chifwema access road has



                                                    2
been constructed. The zone is a mixed use development comprising industrial, commercial and
residential developments.

The intended sectors for the zone include agribusiness, packaging and printing, palm oil processing, pulp
and packaging boards, pharmaceuticals, electrical and electronic appliances, ICTs, education and skills
training, R&D, professional, medical, scientific and measuring services, etc.

    b) Zambia-China Economic & Trade Cooperation Zone (ZCCZ) (also called The Lusaka East Multi-
       Facility Economic Zone)

ZCCZ is the first Multi-Facility Economic Zone (MFEZ) declared by the Government of Republican Zambia
in 2007 according to ZDA Act. It is also the first Chinese overseas economic & trade cooperation zone
established in Africa. The Lusaka East MFEZ has a planned area of 5.7 Km2, is located 25 km north-east of
the City, next to the Kenneth Kaunda International Airport. The phase I is about 1.6 km2.

The zone is a multi-use facility and open for both foreign and Zambian firms. The intended sectors
include agriculture (circular and tourism agricultures), agro-processing, brewery, pharmaceuticals,
building materials, logistics (storage), international commerce, etc.

    c) Chambishi Multi facility Economic Zone (CMFEZ) – a sub-zone of ZCCZ

Chambishi MFEZ is a sub-zone of ZCCZ with the same developer – CNMC, which was opened in 2007. It is
located in the city of Chambishi in the province of copperbelt, and about 308 km North from Lusaka. The
size of the zone is 5.26 km2.

The Chambishi MFEZ is also a multi-functional zone and open for both foreign and domestic investors.
The priority sectors include mining, engineering equipment assembly, construction materials, fertilizers,
agriculture, and service sectors such as banking and hospitals, etc.



    III.    The Management Structure and Beneficiaries

In Zambia, the regulator of the SEZ program is ZDA, and the zones are managed and developed by
development corporations. The Lusaka South Multi Economic Zone (LS-MFEZ) is managed and
developed by the Lusaka South Multi-facility Economic Zone Ltd, a government share-holding company
of IDC. The ZCCZ and CMFEZ are managed and developed by the ZCCZ Development Ltd, a share-holding
company by CNMC, a Chinese state-owned company. It’s not clear if the zones have set up a clear M&E
framework, though they all keep tracking their progresses at least annually.

The main beneficiaries of the zone programs are local people (both skilled and unskilled or semi-skilled),
government at different levels, international firms and local firms. Local households and communities
also benefit from the increased incomes through working within the zones or enhanced local business
opportunities.



    IV.     Progress of the Zones

All three zones have so far made sizable progress in terms of zone construction, infrastructure
development, investment generation and employment creation.

                                                    3
    a)   The Lusaka South Multi Economic Zone (LS-MFEZ)

The phase I and part of phase II are under development. By the end of 2015, 20 km of roads, water
reservoirs, water distribution network, sewer network and one mechanical sewer treatment plant in
Phase I of the zone have been completed. The phase I of a power substation of 330/132/33 KV and a
330 KV power line in the zone will be completed by April 2016, which can provide 150 MW power for
the zone. The national grid line is next to the zone premises. The construction of the LS MFEZ Ltd office
complex was completed in 2014 and is already in use. A dry port will be built through a PPP approach,
and so far 3 contenders are received and are under review.

The zone has approved 22 investment projects, out of which 12 have signed leasing agreements. The
ratio of the foreign and local firms is 50:50. These firms are mostly in agro-processing, pharmaceutical,
motor assembly, plastics, beverages and service sectors (such as education, retail and finance). Two
firms (NRB Pharma Zambia Ltd and Zambian Breweries Plc) have completed their factory and facilities
and are in the testing stage. Three more have started or are ready to start the construction soon. These
firms have generated over US300 millions (including committed) in total. According to the Managing
Director, close to 1000 jobs (including the construction workers) are generated right now.

    b) Zambia-China Economic & Trade Cooperation Zone (ZCCZ)

The ZCCZ has almost completed the phase I, including over 10 km main roads, a 10KV power substation,
underground drilling work, a dozens of standard workshops including two types: 1550 m2 (with office)
and 1080 m2, 6 residential buildings, and other urban amenities.

The zone so far has approved 14 investment projects and 7-8 are operational. The firms are in agro-
processing, pharmaceutical, beverages, new energy and logistics, etc. About US20 million worth of
investments have been committed, and over 207 local jobs have been generated.

    c) Chambishi Multi facility Economic Zone (CMFEZ)

The CMFEZ has made substantial progress over the years. So far over 14km main roads have been tarred
and linked up, and a 330KV substation, 66KV and 10KV transmission lines, water supply with bore hole,
rainwater drainage, sewage and drainage have been completed. Internet access is also available, and a
multifunctional facility of 5000 m2, with offices, meeting room, exhibition hall, internet and financial
banking services is operational. A dozens of standard workshops including two types: 1550 m2 (with
office) and 1080 m2 are completed. The zone also has a SinoZam Friendship Hospital, which offers
comprehensive medical service to the zone staff and local citizens. The hospital has experienced doctors
and quality medical facilities, such as MRI and Laparoscopy System, etc.

The CMFEZ has 48 firms operational, generating an accumulated investments of US1.3 billion, and about
8,211 jobs. The investors are mostly from the mining, copper smelt, equipment assembling,
construction, agro processing, and services (commerce, health and banking, etc.).


    V.      The Key Challenges

Based on the interviews with the zone developers, investors and government officials, the following are
the main challenges in implementing the zone programs.


                                                    4
    1) The weak institutional capacity and inefficient services of the public sector

The Zambia Development Agency (ZDA) under the Ministry of Commerce, Trade and Industry (MCTI) is
the main government entity responsible for the MFEZ program. Given the lack of expertise and
experience of most officials in the agency in terms of SEZ development, they cannot provide the right
incentives and efficient services that are demanded by the private sector.

Three issues stand out:

       Lack of overall understanding of the market demand and industrial positioning of Zambia with
        regards to the global value chain. Although these zones have done some kind of feasibility
        studies at different degrees, the demand side assessment and benchmarking analyses are
        missing or quite weak. For LS-MFEZ, the government has commissioned Kulim Industrial Park Co.
        (a Malaysia firm) to do a master planning in 2010, financed by JICA. This study lacks many key
        elements, such as the detailed sectoral analysis, production costs comparison between Zambia
        and its potential competitors, the comparative advantages of Zambia, the assessment of the
        recent investment trends and projections by sectors. Thus, it’s hard to have a clear
        understanding of Zambia’s competitive position, although the reality shows that the demand for
        the zones are real and increasing.
       Malfunctioning One-Stop-Shop service. Currently Zambia doesn’t have a real automated one-
        stop-shop service center and the whole process has to go through many agencies to get the
        necessary license, permits and paperwork done. The whole duration could take 3-6 months. This
        inevitably increases the transaction costs for investors. Meanwhile, the OSS requires high-level
        coordination of different agencies involved in the SEZ program, but it’s questionable if ZDA
        under MCTI has the convening power to mobilize the resources from different
        ministries/agencies.
       Another is the investment incentives. Both investors within the zones and local SMEs complain
        that the taxation policies are not stable and susceptible to change without proper consultations
        with the private sector. For example, in terms of the VAT, starting from Feb 2015, the
        government requires all the exporting firms to provide the proof of export in order to claim the
        VAT tax. The proof includes copies of export documents bearing a certificate from the Zambian
        Authority, copies of import certificate from the export destination countries or transit certificate
        from the country of transit, tax invoice for the goods exported, and proof that payments for the
        goods have been credited into the exporter’s account in Zambia. To submit all these
        documents/certificates is almost impossible for most firms, especially SMEs. According to the
        Zambia Export Growers Association, many SMEs are severely impacted, and even have to close
        down due to this policy. For zone investors, the income tax was originally exempted for 5 years
        starting from the year they begin to make profit, but now it is changed to the year of operation.
        This also adversely affect the investors.

    2) Inadequate infrastructures

    Although all the zones more or less face different constraints in terms of the hard infrastructures, it
    seems to be most severe for the Zambia-China Economic & Trade Cooperation Zone (ZCCZ). The
    zone developer is responsible for all the on-site infrastructures. When it was started, the
    government had promised to build the off-site infrastructures, such as the power and water lines up

                                                     5
to the zone parameters, however, this was never realized. They even had to build the access road
from the zone to the airport road on their own and pay the government the permit fee and poverty
tax. Due to the power shortage, ZCCZ has rejected over 10 potential investors. This seriously
affected the zone’s ability to grow. The other zones also face difficulties in terms of water, power,
and roads, etc., but seem to be less severe than the ZCCZ (Lusaka).

3) Weak linkages between the zones and local firms

Many firms in the zones show interests in sourcing locally, especially those in agribusiness, which
will help them to reduce the logistics and transaction costs. However, they also feel most local SMEs
cannot meet their requirements in terms of stable volume, quality and standards, etc. This involves
many local products, such as barley, cassava, mushroom, fruits and livestock, etc. If local firms’
productivity, quality and standards can be improved, it will greatly help with the zone-local firm
linkages. In addition, some investors in the zones also feel it’s difficult to find suitable labors from
the local market.



VI.      Possible Interventions to Support the MFEZs

Given the above-mentioned challenges faced by the SEZ programs in Zambia, the following
interventions could be provided to alleviate these constraints:

1)    Institutional and capacity building. This will include two broad areas:
          a. Skills training and knowledge sharing for the key government stakeholders of the SEZ
               program, such as MCTI (especially ZDA), Cabinet Office, MoF, IDC, Customs, ZRA,
               Utilities, Labor, Immigration, etc. The formality could include workshops, structured
               training, study tours, etc. The topics can cover various aspects of the zone management
               and operations.
          b. Investment promotion assistance. This will involve 3 elements which are all important
               for investment promotion:
                i. Assistance in strengthening the one-stop-shop (OSS) service. It’s possible to remap
                    the structure of ZDA to enhance its capacity and convening power. Support for skills
                    training and system automation can be also provided to make the current
                    investment service center a true OSS.
               ii. Improvement of the incentive regime. A benchmarking assessment can be
                    conducted to examine the incentive policies to ensure their consistencies and
                    fairness against international good practices.
              iii. Market demand assessment and competitive positioning of Zambia. This will help
                    the government (especially ZDA) to have a better understanding of the market
                    position of Zambia and properly define its comparative advantages in relation to
                    other peer countries, thus, to come up with a strong value proposition for
                    investment promotion.

2) Infrastructure support. The foremost constraint is the power shortage. One of the key objectives
   of the zones is to help overcome the overall poor business environment in the country, including
   the energy problem. Therefore, to provide adequate infrastructure is crucial for the success of

                                                  6
    the zones. While the Chambishi and Lusaka South MFEZs seem to be in a better situation, the
    Lusaka East is suffering severely from the power problem, and has to turn down many potential
    investors. Beyond the power issues, other infrastructures such as roads, water, sewerage, and
    transport logistics are also in a great need. Various PPP (public-private partnership) options
    could be explored to address these issues.

3) Support for the SEZ-local economy linkages. To maximize the spillover effects of the MFEZs in
   terms of employment generation, skills and knowledge transfer, as well as growth opportunities
   of local firms, it’s important that the project devote some resources to support the zone-local
   economy linkages. This could be an effective means of SMEs support. This intervention can also
   include two areas:
        a. Skills training for local workers (including potential workers to be employed in the
            zones) in the non-technical areas, such as basic business, professional, and work ethics,
            etc., depending on the needs of the investors within the zones. In some highly
            demanded sectors, such as agribusiness, some basic technical trainings can be added as
            well. The intervention can focus on needs assessment, curriculum development and
            training of trainers.
        b. Skills training for local SMEs (both managers and technical workers), starting with a few
            sectors that have the strongest connections (e.g., the agribusiness) with the zone
            investors. The training for managers will focus on business, management, marketing, as
            well as quality control skills, and for technical workers, the training will be more
            technical. The skills training center could be placed within the LS-MFEZ. This activity can
            be done in partnership with the Zambia Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ZACCI)
            and sectoral associations, such as the Zambia National Farmers Union (ZNFU) or the
            Zambia Exports Growers Association (ZEGA).




                                                 7
References

LS-MFEZ. 2014. “Small and Medium Enterprise Development Strategy”. Lusaka, Zambia.

LS-MFEZ. 2016. “Progress Report on the Development of the Lusaka South Multi-facility Economic Zone
as at December 31st, 2015”. Lusaka, Zambia.

Ministry of Commerce, Trade and Industry. 2016. “Multi-Facility Economic Zone (MFEZ)”.
http://www.mcti.gov.zm/index.php/investing-in-zambia/multifacility-economic-zones

Zambia Development Agency. 2015. “Multi-Facility Economic Zone (MFEZ)”.
http://www.zda.org.zm/?q=content/multi-facility-economic-zone-mfez

ZCCZ. 2016. “ZCCZ Development Progress Report”. Lusaka, Zambia.




                                                  8
