                                            Document of
                                        The World Bank Group

                                    FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY




                 INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

                     INTERNATIONAL FINANCE CORPORATION

             MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY

                  COUNTRY GENDER ACTION PLAN

                                                 FOR

            LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC


                           FOR THE PERIOD FY2017 – FY2021
                                          February 13, 2017
                                   (version cleared by PM and CM)


Lao People’s Democratic Republic
South East Asia Country Management Unit
East Asia and Pacific Region

The International Finance Corporation
East Asia and Pacific Region

The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency



This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their
official duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank Group authorization.
                              CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
                        Exchange Rate Effective as of February 13, 2017
                                    Kip 8,178 = US$1.00

                                          FISCAL YEAR
                                        January to December


                             ABBREVIATION AND ACRONYMS
ADB       Asian Development Bank                        MCH      Maternal and Child Health
BOL       Bank of Lao PDR                               MDG      Millennium Development Goals
CGA       Country Gender Assessment                     MDTF     Multi-Donor Trust Fund
CGAP      Country Gender Action Plan                    MMR      Maternal Mortality Ratio
CLR       Completion and Learning Review                MAF      Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
CPF       Country Partnership Framework                 MEM      Ministry of Energy and Mines
CPIA      Country Policy and Institutional              MOF      Ministry of Finance
          Assessment
CRVS      Civil Registration and Vital Statistics       MIGA     Multilateral Investment Guarantee
                                                                 Agency
DRM       Disaster Risk Management                      MONRE    Ministry of Natural Resources and
                                                                 Environment
EAP       East Asia and Pacific                         MPI      Ministry of Planning and Investment
EdL       Electricité du Laos                           NSEDP    National Socio-Economic
                                                                 Development Plan
EU        European Union                                NT2      Nam Theun 2
                                                        PRF      Poverty Reduction Fund
GOL       Government of Lao PDR                         SCD      Systematic Country Diagnostic
HMTA      TA for Capacity Development in                SDG      Sustainable Development Goal
          Hydropower and Mining Sector
ICA       Investment Climate Assessment                 SME      Small and Medium-size Enterprise
IDA       International Development                     UHC      Universal Health Coverage
          Association
IFC       International Finance Corporation             UN       United Nations
IWRM      Mekong Integrated Water Resources             UNFPA    United Nations Population Fund
          Management
Lao PDR   Lao People’s Democratic Republic              UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund
LECS      Lao PDR Expenditure and                       WBG      World Bank Group
          Consumption Survey




                                                    i
                COUNTRY GENDER ACTION PLAN FY2017-2021 FOR
                           LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
                                                          Table of Contents


1.   Rationale and Objective............................................................................................................. 1
2.   Key gender inequalities in Lao PDR ......................................................................................... 2
3.   Government’s priorities and commitment to gender issues ...................................................... 9
4.   The World Bank’s gender priorities in the country ................................................................. 11
5.   CGAP Actions and Target ....................................................................................................... 12
6.   Implementation responsibilities............................................................................................... 16
7.   Monitoring and reporting......................................................................................................... 16
8.   Resource allocation and needs ................................................................................................. 17
Annex 1: Lao PDR Gender Action Plan Summary ........................................................................ 19
Annex 2: Lao PDR: CGAP 2017-2021 Result Monitoring Framework ......................................... 23
Annex 3: WB IDA Portfolio with Gender Tags (as of February 2017).......................................... 29




                                                                    ii
                 COUNTRY GENDER ACTION PLAN FY2017-2021 FOR
                          LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC

1. Rationale and Objective

1.      This Country Gender Action Plan (CGAP) is formulated to facilitate dialogue within the
WBG and with the Government of Lao PDR in addressing gender-related priorities in Lao
PDR in order to achieve the goals set in the five year National Plan on Promoting Gender Equality
and the 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP) 2016-2020. The CGAP aims to
contribute to inclusive development and poverty reduction by reducing gaps between men, women,
and ethnic groups and promoting human development and economic opportunities. The plan
identifies gender priorities in line with the conclusion from the Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD)
and the focus areas of the Country Partnership Framework (CPF), which aligns with the 8th NSEDP.

            “Gender equality is also central to the World Bank Group’s own goals of ending poverty and
            boosting shared prosperity in a sustainable manner. No society can develop sustainably
            without transforming the distribution of opportunities, resources, and choices for males and
            females so that they have equal power to shape their own lives and contribute to their families,
            communities, and countries. Promoting gender equality is smart development policy.” World
            Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23)3

2.     The CPF sets out the core framework for engagement by the World Bank and the
International Finance Corporation during FY2017-2021 based on findings from the SCD. These
three main focus areas and a cross cutting theme of the CPF, to support the outcomes of the NSEDP,
namely:
           1. Supporting Inclusive Growth
           2. Investing in People
           3. Protecting the environment
           4. Cross-cutting theme: strengthening institutions
3.     The CGAP aligns with these focus areas in the CPF and sets out the following priorities to be
addressed:
          i.   Early marriage, adolescent pregnancy and high maternal mortality rate (CPF Focus
               area 2)
         ii.   Low literacy among women and skills gap (Focus Area 1 and 2)
        iii. Equal opportunities for men and women to participate in livelihood activities and
               wage jobs (Focus Area 1 and cross cutting theme)
        iv.    Promote participation of women in planning and decision making at the local level
               (Focus Area 1, 2 and 3 and the cross cutting theme)

4.    Besides being a plan of action, the C-GAP is a tool for the country team to (i) keep track of
commitments related to gender and the contribution of the World Bank’s engagement on gender in

3
    The World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive Growth

                                                          1
Lao PDR to corporate goals on gender, and (ii) to identify human resources, working processes,
budget, knowledge work and training needs that can help ensure that targets related to gender are
reached. The is the third C-GAP for Lao PDR, and builds on lessons learned from the implementation
of the 2011-12 and 2013-2016 action plans.

2. Key gender inequalities in Lao PDR

5.      Women and men have equal rights under the laws and regulations in Lao PDR. The
government formulated a five-year strategy for the advancement of women and promotion of gender
equality (2011-2015), followed by the formulation of a long-term Vision 2030 on promoting gender
equality and a new five year plan (2016-2020) that aligns with the Nation Socio-Economic
Development Plan (2016-2020). Although the legal framework provides equal rights to men and
women, the application of these rights is still hindered by customs, traditions and the socio-economic
characteristics of different population groups. Significant gaps between men and women still persist
among different groups.

6.      Over the past decade, poverty in Lao PDR has declined considerably. The country met
its MDG target of halving extreme poverty to below 24 percent by 2015 and overall, living conditions
have improved significantly. The Lao Expenditure and Consumption Survey (LECS) showed that the
poverty rate based on the national poverty line declined from 33.5 percent in 2002/03 to 23.2 percent
in 2012/13. Over the same period, poverty, measured using the internationally comparable poverty
line of $1.25 in 2005 PPP a day, declined from 41.4 percent to 28.8 percent.

7.      However, development and gender equality progress varies across the country, with a
strong rural-urban divide. The poverty rate in rural areas is 28 percent, more than double that of
urban poverty, estimated at 10 percent. This also implies significant socio-economic differences
between ethnic groups and, despite some improvements, lags in development particularly for women
across the country. For example, less than 60 percent of women in poor households are able to read
and write, compared to a figure of over 80 percent for men. Maternal mortality rate remains high at
220 (per 100,000 live births) (as of 2014).

8.     As Lao PDR continues its development, the ability of women and men, young and old,
to have demand and have equal access to opportunities must be a central element of translating
the country’s economic growth and the energies of its young people into improved living
standards that benefit women and men alike. Promoting more gender equality in development
processes can result in stronger inclusiveness and synergies, thereby achieving national goals of
development and equity.

9.     Following the framework developed by the World Bank’s World Development Report1 on
Gender, this CGAP divides issues into four main dimensions (i) endowments, (ii) economic
opportunities, (iii) voice and agency and (iv) emerging areas of development and growing risks.




                                                  2
(i)      Endowments:

Health

10.      The country has made gradual progress on several indicators but significant gender
gaps remain. The country made gradual progress in reducing maternal mortality to 220 in 2013 from
796 per 100,000 live births in 1995. Still the rate remains high compared to regional peers. A high
maternal mortality rate places women at a higher risk while early marriages and pregnancy raises the
risks for health complications for young mothers and their babies (Asian Development Bank and The
World Bank, 2012). The low level of education, social norms and poverty contribute to early
marriages and unplanned pregnancies, which prevent women’s readiness in pre-maternity. This
contribute to the high rate of maternal mortality. Child mortality declined from 170 per 1,000 in 1993
to 79 per 1,000 in 2011 but the MDG’s target of reducing child mortality to one-third of 1990 level
is yet to be met.

11.     Lao PDR has the highest rate of early marriage and adolescent pregnancies in Asia. In
2012, 36 percent of Lao girls aged 18 were found to be married as compared to 9 percent in Vietnam
and 18 percent in Cambodia. Factors inducing early marriage include social norms, the level of
poverty combined with low levels of education of the adolescent girls and of the parents, particularly
in rural areas and among ethnic groups. Early marriage and teenage pregnancy is both a cause and a
consequence of a high school dropout rate. They often see less value in continuing to pursue
education, a view enforced by the economic conditions of the households and society norms of early
marriage in some areas..

12.     The persistent high incidence of early marriage contributes to an alarmingly high rate
of adolescent pregnancies and to a stronger hindrance of girls from secondary and tertiary
education. Adolescent birth rate is 94 per 1000, comparable to Afghanistan (90), Nepal (87), the
Marshall Islands (85), and Nauru (81), while neighbouring countries of Thailand and Vietnam have
adolescent birth rates of 60 and 38. Early age pregnancy impacts the health of the young mothers and
limits that ability of the girls to be physically prepared and learn about preparing for pregnancies,
family planning, child rearing, etc.

13.     As a result, there are other, longer term, health consequences for women. The World
Health Organization states that adolescent mothers face higher risks of maternal deaths and health
problems during and after pregnancy, and a greater likelihood of stillbirths, preterm births, and
children with low birth weights. Aside from health risks for mother and child, early childbearing can
significantly reduce opportunities for schooling and employment for the mother, which may lead to
the persistence of poverty across generations. Early pregnancy can cause health complications for
girls, exacerbated by insufficient provision of quality health services in rural areas and cultural
barriers. Early marriage and adolescent pregnancies are also linked to high fertility rates, which
reinforce malnutrition and increase health risks for mothers, infants and young children. An estimated
20 percent of women have unmet demand for family planning of which 12 percent of women have
unmet need for limiting pregnancy and 8 percent having unmet need for birth spacing (LSIS 2012).

14.    Malnutrition remains persistently high, making Lao PDR lagging on the MDG goal on
reducing chronic undernutrition. The proportion of stunted children under 5 years old declined

                                                  3
only by 4 percentage points over a decade from 48 percent in 2001 to 44 percent in 2012 while poverty
declined by more than 11 percentage points. Consequently, Lao PDR failed to meet the MDG goal
on stunting even as it achieved the goal of halving extreme poverty. The trend appeared to have
improved with the latest study from UNICEF showing a reduction of stunting to 35 percent. Stunting
has long-term effect on the children’s health and their learning ability later on in life. This problem
is mainly caused by poor dietary diversity (driven by poor nutrition habits), lack of access to improved
water and sanitation and the poverty level of the household. Half of the bottom 40 percent of the
population had no toilet in 2012/13, compared to 26 percent without a toilet among the top 60 percent.
Among several influential factors, the health and education levels of mothers also determine their
own wellbeing and that of their children’s (CGA, 2012). With an issue of early pregnancy, low quality
and low utilization of health services and poverty, young mothers particularly in the rural areas have
limited capacity in healthily raising their children, the next generation of Lao population.

15.     In a detailed study of the inter-generational changes in pregnancy and childbirth practices in
remote areas of Lao PDR over a period of 30 years, Alvesson et al (2013) find that childbirth practices
are gradually evolving and a transition from forest-based to home-based delivery, and health facility-
based deliveries when complications occur is taking place. Today’s generation of women aged 40+
do not recommend all the practices of their mothers, and are adopting practices to reduce social and
medical risk. Increased home-based deliveries and a recognition that health services are beneficial is
a sign that young women are responding to local outreach programmes for formalized maternity care.
Strengthening the skills of community-based health workers, could therefore contribute to improving
maternal and neonatal survival and reducing health inequalities4.

16.      All these factors limit the opportunities to improve living conditions and economic
contributions of the younger generation, especially girls. Delaying early marriage, empowering
and educating adolescent girls and addressing the unmet demand for family planning are therefore
critical actions that can contribute to realizing the economic potential of young women and address
poverty reduction [see box 1].

         Box 1: Adolescent Girls in Lao PDR – an urgent need for action

         Lao PDR has the highest rate of adolescent pregnancies in South East Asia, with four in 10 Lao girls
         becoming pregnant before the age of 19. Nearly one out of ten Laotian girls between 15 and 19 gives
         birth each year. The proportion is much higher in remote areas, where some cultural practices, such as
         giving birth in the bush/forest, pose additional risks to the health of young mothers and their babies.
         Children marry young and have low access to contraceptives or family planning advice.

         Adolescents and young adults have many unmet needs for health care, and experience barriers that
         include their inexperience, lack of knowledge about health care, restrictive legislative frameworks,
         costs, stigma, and community attitudes. Complications in pregnancy and childbirth are the leading cause
         of death for girls aged 15–19 in developing countries5. Overall, 20 percent of women have unmet family
         planning needs, with this figure being much higher in some ethnic groups and geographical areas of Lao
         PDR. Early childbirth reduces economic potential, reinforces malnutrition and increases health risks. The
         prevailing high teenage pregnancy rate (65 births per 1000 women aged 15 to 19, WDI) demands a need to
         focus on this group and promote delayed marriage, increased contraceptive and family planning support

4
  Alvesson et al (2013) Changes in pregnancy and childbirth practices in remote areas in Lao PDR within two
generations of women: implications for maternity services, Reproductive Health Matters 2013;21(42):203 –211
5
  Evenhuis, M. and Burn, J. (2014) Just Married, Just a Child. Child marriage in the Indo-Pacific region. Plan
International Australia.

                                                          4
           along with increased health services in general. Laws can prevent child marriage and provide access to
           services and goods such as contraception but access and application of these depend on community outreach
           and investments. Currently, public investment in the health and education sectors have been limited with
           1.9 percent (about US$ 230 million) and 3.7 percent of GDP (about US$ 454 million) respectively in
           2014/15 budget plan. Therefore, much more investment is needed in creating effective health service
           systems that include high-quality health worker training, adolescent responsive facilities, and broad
           community engagement.

           Early marriage and teenage pregnancies are associated with no school attendance, high drop-outs,
           health complications, stunting and poverty. Keeping girls in school longer, improving access to birth
           control tools and reproductive health education and providing equal opportunities for women’s participation
           in the non-farm labor market can help. With schools often requiring a considerable walk many families
           don’t see the value of continued education, especially for girls. To increase sch ool enrolment and
           attendance, communities need to perceive and access economic benefits. Education in ethnic communities
           must address challenges posed by language, culture and geographic remoteness 6. The expansion of quality
           secondary education in many countries, particularly for girls, offers remarkable opportunities for health and
           wellbeing, enhances cognitive abilities, and improves mental health and sexual and reproductive health.
           Schools also provide a platform for health promotion including comprehensive sexuality education and
           maintaining lifestyles that minimise health risks. Outreach activities and social transfers conditioned on
           school attendance may help to change cultural practices and behavior while programs such as the
           Adolescent Girls Initiative (implemented in Liberia, Nepal, and Afghanistan) could be promoted for
           increasing training on life-skills and vocations.

Education

17.    Progress has been made to reduce the gender gap in education but impacts vary across
population groups. The 2014 Lao PDR Development Report found that many workers lack
foundational skills, even the ability to read. A literacy survey conducted during the study showed that
more than 50 percent of grade 2 students score zero on comprehension and more than 30 percent
score zero on fluency. This also affects their ability to learn in later years in schools. The average
years of schooling of the labor force in 2010 was 5.1 years with only 10 percent of the workforce
completing upper secondary, and 5 percent having either vocational or tertiary degrees. The
remaining out of schools children contained largely girls (Lao Development Report, 2014).

18.     Although the literacy rate has risen from 80 percent in 2008 to 83 percent in 2013 the
gap between male and female literacy remains high, with 91 percent of men aged 15 years old
and above literate compared to only 76 percent of women (Lao PDR Poverty Profile, 2014) . The
gap is wider among the poor, where the male literacy rate is 82 percent compared to the female
literacy rate of only 59 percent and girls constitute the majority of those who have never been to
school. Literacy is thus lowest among females in poor households, indicating that opportunities are
not yet reaching this population. The returns to higher education are found to be significant, ranging
from three to four percent for each extra year of education. For women, the returns for each additional
year could be as high as seven percent (Lao PDR SCD, 2017). Thus, keeping girls in school is
essential for helping them in their adult life in livelihood activities and participation in economic
activity and the society.

19.    While gaps in enrollment have closed and the net enrollment of girls equaled that of boys
in both primary and secondary education in 2012/13, the gap still persists in completion rates

6
    [ref: http://www.unfpa.org/news/teenage-pregnancy-way-life-remote-laotian-villages#sthash.QTnVIo8d.dpuf]

                                                              5
and further access to tertiary education. The net-enrollment rate in primary education got close to
100 percent in recent years; however drop-out rates are high (only 77.5 percent of pupils starting in
grade 1 reach last – fifth – grade of primary) and transition to secondary education is low (only 44.7
percent of children enroll in secondary education, compared to 77.1 percent in EAP on average).
While primary school participation is roughly equivalent (98.3% for boys; 96.4% for girls) this figure
drops sharply to upper secondary school enrollment of 48.6% for boys and 42.9% for girls (School
year 14/15 from EMIS). Therefore, girl enrollment into higher education is much less than boys,
making the gaps even wider when it comes to tertiary education. Using girl-to-boy ratio among
children attending school as a measure of gender inequality, findings show that nationwide the ratio
slightly favors boys at all education levels. In addition, there is a strong regional dimension with the
survival rate to grade five being lowest amongst children living in rural areas without road access,
children in the poorest quintile and children of mothers with no education.

(ii)      Economic Opportunities:

20.     How will a growing economy ensure equity and inclusion? A rapidly growing economy
with strong contribution from the natural resource and closer regional integration present real benefits
to the Lao population, from a gradually expanding private sector to the commercialization of
agriculture, all realized through increased availability of year-round access to roads and electricity.
The private sector is creating opportunities for entrepreneurs in Lao PDR, and 30-40 percent of these
new entrepreneurs are women. Since such emerging opportunities and new risks affect women and
men differently, they need to be addressed in gender-informed and sensitive ways. The impact of
these trends on women is addressed in the gender action plan through two lenses: One, there is a need
to focus on reducing gender inequality and vulnerability in remote rural areas that are also home to
more marginalized ethnic groups. Men and women in these groups are at particular risk of being left
behind during this period of rapid economic development. Two, there is also a need to focus on
increasing women’s ability to take full advantage, on equal terms, of the expansion of new economic
opportunities in the market, particularly among women in urban, lowland areas where accessibility
to market opportunities should not be as much of a constraint as in remote areas.

21.     The proportion of women in wage employment in the non-agricultural sector is low (only
12.6 percent of total employment) relative to men (20.3 percent)7 while a relatively higher proportion
of women are engaged in own account/self-employment (12.6 percent in total employment for female
compared to 9 percent for male)7 and in informal non-wage jobs. For employees, a wage gap appears
to exist but more likely related to differences in asset endowments (skills, access to opportunities,
etc) rather than discriminatory practices.

22.     In terms of the labour market, the lack of skills is still reported as one of the top
constraints to doing businesses in Lao PDR. Nearly half of firms in Lao PDR reported that they
cannot get applicants for even non-skilled jobs while about 44 percent of firms face difficulty in
getting job applications for medium skilled jobs. These ratios are much higher than in neighboring
Vietnam and Yunan province of China (Lao development report 2014). Therefore, targeted skills
training or business development programs for women could help them in acquiring opportunities in
the formal economic sector and paid jobs. However, such plan will have to be coupled with lowering
the cost or providing incentives for entering the formal sector.
7
    Ministry of Planning and Investment (2016) “Lao PDR 2015 -CENSUS based poverty map”, June 2016.

                                                         6
23.     Women own 31 percent of SMEs in Lao PDR, but firms are small. Compared to global
averages, a bigger percentage of firms in Lao PDR have female ownership, more firms have female
top managers and the proportion of female workers is higher, particularly in the services sector.
Female management and employment dominates in retail trade while it is lower in manufacturing.
Between 2009 and 2012, female-owned firms became more concentrated in services and grew larger
and more profitable compared to male-owned firms. However, the high cost and complication related
to formalizing businesses also keep many businesses small and informal and female business tend to
be smaller than male owned businesses. The latest enterprise survey 2016 shows that small enterprises
with female participation in ownership account for about 46 percent compared to ownership
participation in medium (17 percent) to large businesses (only 8 percent).

24.     Firms headed by females have easier access to finance, in part due to their reputation in
loan repayment disciplines (ICA 2014), however only 16 percent have a loan or overdraft. The
proportion of loans requiring collateral is smaller for firms headed by females and loan rejection rates
are lower. At the same time, firms headed by females also have lower demand for financial services.
Promoting SMEs, business forum for women headed businesses, access to finance and capacity
building for business planning and skill development for workers are areas of opportunity. Improving
the ease of doing business would also help new and small businesses, and developing gender friendly
program on access to finance can help promote women-owned enterprises.

25.     Recent analysis of small scale cross-border trade shows that this is an important avenue
for women’s income generation and empowerment8. While the evidence shows that women traders
face constraints and have weaker bargaining power, the evidence also shows that trading households
headed by women derive more of their income from small-scale cross-border trade than do trading
households headed by men. Both factors—the constraints and the benefits—argue for enhanced
inclusiveness and in trade-facilitation projects working for more transparent custom systems.

(iii)   Voice and Agency

26.     Agency, or women’s voice and participation has steadily advanced in Lao PDR. Although
the legal framework provides equal rights to men and women, customs and traditions, which still
have a strong role in Lao society, may limit implementation in practice in some cases. However,
women’s rights are recognized in the legal system, and women’s political representation in the
National Assembly (NA) has grown to 27.5 percent of the total NA members after the election in
March 2016 compared to 23 percent in 2005. It is now amongst the highest in the region. However,
women’s increasing representation within central government structures has not filtered down to the
provincial and local levels, where significant gender gaps in representation persist, despite the fact
that the Lao Women’s Union is reaching out to women from the national to village levels. While
women in ministerial positions account for about 11 percent of total ministerial positions (18 out of
160 positions) and about 16 percent in director general level (71 out of 437 positions), the ratio for
female provincial deputy governors and district governors are only 9 percent (4 out of 42) and 7
percent (10 out of 145) respectively (Lao NCAW report 2015). Fostering an environment where

8
 Gender Dimensions of Small-Scale Cross-Border Trade in Cambodia and the Lao People’s Democratic Republic
(2016) EAP Gender and Trade Policy Note, July 2016.

                                                      7
women and the poor are encouraged to planning and decision making process at the local level can
help reflect their views, needs and concerns in the local development plans.

(iv)       Emerging Areas and Growing Risks

27.     Lao PDR’s current growth environment hosts a number of emerging opportunities and
threats to the achievement of key development goals. Among these are the potential challenges
associated with regional integration and trade; the question of migration (and its mirror image of
trafficking); and growing risks due to climate change – all of which may affect men and women in
different ways. Migration in the context of Lao PDR has a strong gender dimension. The majority of
irregular migrants from Lao PDR in Thailand are women, most of whom work as domestic helpers
(United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, 2015). Formalizing migration flows and providing better
access to social services with improved access to life-skills training, awareness raising for health
safety will improve the wellbeing of female migrants. Violence against women in the context of
family or human trafficking is also an emerging area that deserve attention (see Box 2).

28.    Therefore, there remains an important role for public policies in Lao PDR aimed at reducing
the most costly gender disparities that are non-responsive to growth and those that have a significant
impact on vulnerable groups but at the same time promoting those areas which support women’s
voice and aspirations. The Lao PDR is at a critical juncture to harness the power of its economic
growth to improve its human development and to ensure that society can holistically benefit from its
empowerment at the center of national development plans.

         Box 2: Violence Against Women

         According to the Lao Social Indicator Survey (LSIS) 2011-2012, 58% of women and 49% of men
         reported that violence against women (VAW) was justified if women did not adhere to traditional
         gender norms, roles and relations. A National Study on Women’s Health and Life Experiences (2014)
         finds that when looking at three types of violence – physical, sexual, emotional - among ever-partnered
         women, 30.3% experienced physical, sexual and/or emotional violence from an intimate partner. The
         study also found that 5.1% of women had experienced physical violence from a non-partner since the age
         of 15 years. Female family members were the most commonly reported perpetrators (34.9%), specifically
         mothers/stepmothers (26.8%). 5.3% of women had experienced some type of sexual violence and 1.1%
         had forced sexual intercourse since the age of 15 years. The proportion of women who disclosed Child
         Sexual Abuse (CSA) in face-to-face interviews was 0.9%. However, when answers could be given
         anonymously by using a card, 9.9% of women disclosed CSA and this further increased to 10.3% when
         a direct interview and/or a card were employed.

         Girls who marry before the age of 18 are at increased risk of experiencing gender based violence
         (GBV). In general young girls will lack status and bargaining power within the household. They are
         more likely to be physically and mentally abused by family, their husbands or in-laws, and more likely
         to be isolated from the community.

         A global review of evidence for interventions to reduce the prevalence and incidence of violence
         against women and girls suggests that research on violence prevention in low income and middle
         income countries shows encouraging results from group training for women and men, community
         mobilization interventions and combined livelihoods and training interventions for women 9. Noting
         the link between early marriage and increased risk of GBV, financial and material incentives have also


9
    Ellsberg et al (2015) The Lancet vol 385

                                                            8
      been used successfully to reduce child marriage, with the incentives conditioned on the girls staying in
      school and delaying marriage. Findings from public schemes in India, where savings bonds are used as
      incentives to keep girls unmarried and in schools until the age of 18, indicate that these girls have higher
      educational outcomes and delayed marriages.



3. Government’s priorities and commitment to gender issues

29.      In general, Government policies combined with rapid economic modernization have
supported the steady advancement of women’s status in Lao PDR, particularly in urban areas.
The equal participation of men and women in economic, social, and political life is supported by the
1991 Constitution, various national laws and policies, and international treaties such as the
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW), to which
Lao PDR is a signatory. To promote gender equality, the Government has established a National
Commission for the Advancement of Women programs aimed at the 1) development of an
information system, sex segregated statistics, advocacy and dissemination, awareness raising,
movements to promote gender equality and women’s empowerment to participate in all fields, 2)
institutional and personnel strengthening to promote women’s advancement, 3) ensure gender
equality and women’s empowerment to participate in all fields and 4) fulfilment of Lao PDR’s
obligations under CEDAW Conventions and other international conventions pertaining to women.
These directions are reflected in the five year plan (2016-2020) and long-term vision 2030 on
promoting gender equality that aligns with the NSEDP. The Lao Women’s Union also plays an
important role, in its capacity as a mass-based organization with a strong network, to promote
women’s rights. Gender aspects are also prominent in national development policies.

30.      Reducing violence against women and trafficking has become an increasingly important
areas of focus. The Law on Protection of Women and Children was passed in 2004. In 2004, the
Government developed and approved a National Plan of Action on Prevention and Elimination of
Violence against Women and Children (NPAVAW). The NPAVAW specifies concrete actions and
activities to prevent and protect women and girls from violence through enhancement of the quality
and quantity of social and health services, police and judiciary systems, with relevant trainings and
advocacy to achieve fender equality and equity. Subsequently, the new Law in Resistance and
Prevention of Violence against Women and Children (new law on VAWC) was also developed and
passed in the National Assembly in December 2014. The VAWC aims to respond to violence against
women and children as well as provide assistance to survivors to protect their rights and promote
gender equality. Overall, it is seen as a step forward as it provides clear definitions and for the first
time marital rape is classified as a criminal offence. A National Study on Women’s Health and Life
Experiences 20142 in Lao PDR has shown that violence against women is widespread, socially
embedded and has a significant impact on the health and well-being of women, children and families.
[ref. box 2]

31.     Lao PDR’s Poverty Reduction Strategy, the National Socio Economic Development
Plans have made strong commitments to poverty reduction and continue commitment under
the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by focusing on education, health, natural resources,
and agriculture and transport sectors; as well as by establishing strategies and programs for cross-
cutting areas. The NSEDP’s gender strategy – aimed at reducing poverty – recognized that the
effective participation of women, especially poor ethnic women, is essential for the country to achieve

                                                            9
the goals of reducing poverty and improving living standards. It also stressed the importance of
encouraging women to obtain professional skills and gain access to information as necessary
prerequisites to stimulate economic development. This commitment remains in the 8th NSEDP (2016-
2020) where the overall goal is to reduce poverty and to prepare Lao PDR for LDC graduation,
focusing on three main outcomes: Outcome 1: Continued, firm, and inclusive growth by consolidating
strong economic foundations and reducing economic vulnerability, Outcome 2: Human resources are
developed and the capacities of the public and private sectors is upgraded; poverty in all ethnic groups
is reduced, all ethnic groups and both genders have access to quality education and health services;
the unique culture of the nation is protected and consolidated; political stability, social peace and
order, justice and transparency are maintained, and Outcome 3: Natural resources and the
environment are effectively protected and utilized according to climate change and for reconstruction
following natural disaster.

32.     To support these outcomes, all ministries are expected to develop strategies and action
plans to promote gender equality at national, provincial, district and village levels. The National
Committee for the Advancement of Women (NCAW) and Lao Women’s Union have supported key
ministries, including education and agriculture, in mainstreaming gender in their core activities. Line
ministries are expected to mainstream gender concerns. However, these efforts have been largely
donor-driven, fragmented, and hampered by the continuation of traditional approaches, limited
internal capacities, resources and institutional commitment for gender-mainstreaming in some
sectors.

33.      Mechanisms to implement policies and laws providing for gender equality in education,
access to antenatal care and delivery, and access to family planning services exist. The
Government is addressing the gender issue in education through its ‘Plan of Action for Basic
Education for All’ and has taken a number of actions to improve the access and quality of education.
The steady progress on gender parity in education is partly due to greater vigor in the implementation
of education policies, an increase in school feeding programs, gradual improvements in infrastructure
facilities including sanitation, as well as an increasing awareness of the positive impacts of gender
equality in education on the households’ overall wellbeing. In health, progress is made to put in place
programs to address reproductive health through major health care initiatives. The Government has
established safe motherhood, child care and birth-spacing program in order to reduce maternal
mortality, infant and child morbidity and mortality by 25 percent, and men are also being sensitized
on family planning. As part of its efforts to reduce the very high maternal and newborn mortality and
the presumed high levels of morbidity, the Ministry of Health of the Lao PDR reviewed the human
resources for health needed to deliver high quality, culturally appropriate, accessible, quality ‘skilled
care’ in pregnancy childbirth and for mother and newborn in the postnatal period. Most importantly,
the Government has started to implement the ‘Free Maternal and Child Health policy’ in 2012,
providing free antenatal, delivery and postnatal services to women.

34.    Women and men hold the same rights regarding land access and tenure. The Lao
Women’s Union has been closely involved in land tilting efforts, addressing women’s issues in land
adjudication and registration and helping to ensure that women’s rights to inherited land or land
acquired during marriage are reflected in the names on land titles.




                                                   10
4. The World Bank’s gender priorities in the country

35.      How will gender equity be achieved as Lao PDR’s development continues? The
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Lao PDR, completed in 2016, identified an overarching
priority of enhancing institutional quality and creating a rules-based environment; as well as the
following three development pathways: (i) Sustainable and efficient management of natural
resources; (ii) Unlocking the potential in non-resources sectors to create opportunities; and (iii)
Building the assets of people to be able to take on these opportunities and to mitigate risks and protect
gains. The SCD identifies policy areas that address constraints for lagging groups (such as ethnic
minorities) and address gender gaps. The SCD prioritizes actions that require immediate attention,
either because they address a pressing challenge (malnutrition, teenage pregnancies and rapid
depletion of natural resources) or the long period it takes to yield results calls for early intervention
(skills and improved governance). This prioritization process was complemented by the outcomes of
an extensive engagement process with a broad range of stakeholders, including representatives of
central and local governments, the business sector, non-profit organizations and development
partners.


36.    Based on findings from the SCD, the CPF sets out the core framework for engagement by the
World Bank Group including the International Finance Corporation (IFC) during FY17-21. These
three main focus areas and a cross cutting theme of the CPF, to support the outcomes of the NSEDP,
namely:
           1. Supporting Inclusive Growth
           2. Investing in People
           3. Protecting the environment
           4. Cross-cutting theme: strengthening institutions

37.    The CGAP aligns with the focus areas in the CPF and sets out the following priorities to be
addressed:
          i. Early marriage, adolescent pregnancy and high maternal mortality rate (CPF focus
             areas 2)
         ii. Low literacy among poor and ethnic women and skills gap (CPF focus area 1 and 2)
        iii. Equal opportunities for men and women to participate in livelihood activities and
             wage jobs (CPF focus area 1)
        iv.  Promote participation of women in planning and decision making at the local level
             (CPF focus are 1, 2, 3)

38.     The implementation of the previous CGAP provided key lessons learned. First, the share
of gender informed portfolio has been maintained due to a clear WBG commitment on gender
equality and awareness of the task teams in integrating a gender consideration in the operation design.
In addition, there is a continuous and systematic upstream review process where the country gender
focal point provides advice to teams. However, there is still an opportunity to improve the gender
M&E and reporting in the operations, particularly during supervision missions. This will enable better
assessment of impacts from the operations on gender equality and allow more strategic planning on
which projects will have substantial impacts on gender gaps.

                                                   11
39.     The previous CGAP informed the CPF in supporting improved service delivery to poor
and remote areas through participatory and gender-sensitive platforms. The Poverty Reduction
Fund and the Khammouane Development Project provided improved access to basic services,
markets and livelihood opportunities through participatory planning processes and capacity building
to the local level. The health operation contributed to higher number of women accessing primary
health care in rural areas. The education operation contributed to achieving gender parity in primary
enrollment. On the ASAs, a Country Gender Assessment was completed in FY13 and informed the
design of new projects since then. There were also trade and private sector related gender studies that
contributed to the gender knowledge pool. (Refer to the Lao CPF Completion and Learning Review
for more detail).


5. CGAP Actions and Target

The CGAP takes a four action approach which will help to ensure that the CPF delivers on the four
gender priority areas identified above. These pillars are:

      1.   Maintaining a gender informed portfolio. Strategic inclusion and focus on gender
           supportive actions in World Bank operational work, including routinely addressing gender
           related actions and impacts monitoring throughout project preparation, implementation in
           supervision aide memoires, implementation status and completion reports in order to ensure
           that the lending portfolio aligns with the corporate and regional gender targets.
      2.   Supporting Priority Gender Results. This pillar establishes a plan of action for gender-
           specific support to the active and pipeline lending portfolio. Support will be prioritized to
           projects which have the potential to impact the four CGAP priority areas mentioned above.
           Support will involve measuring results and/or filling knowledge gaps that can leverage
           existing and planned projects that have the potential to impact on one or more of the four
           gender priority areas.
      3.   Filling knowledge gap and strengthening analytical platform on gender issues in Lao
           PDR, in collaboration with the Government, development partners and civil society to
           support informed decision making and identify development trends of concern or positive
           outcomes to build on.
      4.   Building Partnership and Sharing Gender Results. This pillar covers a plan to share
           information on results on reducing gender inequalities from the WBG operations and to build
           dialogue with internal and external partners on gender in Lao PDR.

This 2017-2021 C-GAP will be implemented over the same complementary period as the current
Country Partnership Framework for Lao PDR, with the following summary key targets and action:

1)         Maintain a gender informed portfolio

Operational work: Currently 85% of the Lao active Portfolio (IDA) is gender informed as of Q3
2017, i.e. meeting the three dimensions of having gender analysis, actions and monitoring. This is

                                                    12
relatively high by regional standard. The aim is to have 100% of new lending to include or be
informed by gender analysis and 75% of them be gender informed in all three dimensions of the
gender flag. To help meet this target, the country gender focal point will coordinate with the Regional
Gender Team and systematically provide comments to upstream review process (PCN, ROC
meetings). In comments, the focal point will emphasis to team better attention to strong and
informative monitoring of impact on specific gender gaps.

2)          Supporting Priority Gender Results

A two category approach is applied to help the active and pipeline portfolio to achieve the priorities
set in the CGAP.

          Category 1 - Gender Analysis and Potential Mitigating Measures. Category 1 projects will
           include gender analysis to identify the potential gender inequalities that the operation might
           impact. At the PCN stage, project teams will outline whether gender issues were found to be
           relevant and if/how these will be taken forward as part of project preparation. Based on a
           simple gender analysis, projects under category 1 are expected to conclude that i) the
           investment will have limited or no different impact - positive or negative - on males and
           females respectively; ii) gender will be addressed through standard safeguards only; or iii)
           additional research and data will be needed during preparation/implementation to inform
           potential gender entry points. In category 1 projects, the results framework will often be limited
           to quite general gender disaggregated indicators, such as “share of total beneficiaries
           (male/female)” or; “user satisfaction (male/female)”.

          Category 2 - Potential for Impacting Gender Priority Areas. Category 2 projects are those
           that have the potential to positively impact gender equalities and introduce or modify activities
           to support one or more of the priority areas of the CGAP and/or help to create a better
           understanding of specific gender inequalities. These “category 2” project are expected to
           address priority gender inequality areas either through activities and mechanisms that are part
           of project implementation and/or through TA and diagnostic work linked to the operations and
           policy dialogue (see below on filling knowledge gaps) (See also Annex 1).

           Table 1: Projects in Category 1 - Gender Analysis and Potential Mitigating Measures
         World Bank Group Operation               GP                      CGAP Output/Outcome Indicator
         Active Projects
         Power Grid Improvement project           Energy and Extractive   Percent of female beneficiary

                                                                          Number of EDL staff receiving training,
                                                                          of which % are female
         Customs and Trade facilitation project   Trade and               Percent of female beneficiary
                                                  Competitiveness
         Forest Carbon partnership facility       Environment             Percent of female beneficiary
         REDD+ Readiness Grants
         Nam Et Phou Louey Tiger Landscape        Environment             Percent of female beneficiary
         Conservation Project
         Mekong Integrated Water Resource         Water                   Percent of female beneficiary
         Management


                                                            13
Table 2: Projects in Category 2 - Potential for Impacting Gender Priority Areas
 CGAP               World Bank          Intervention by the WBG                    CGAP Output/Outcome
 priorities         Group                                                          Indicator
                    Operation
                    Active Projects
 Low literacy       Second Global       - Promote the representation, role and     - Percentage of Grade 2 students
 among women        Partnership for       capacity of the Inclusive Education        in pilot schools who cannot read
 and skills gap     Education Project     Centre under MOEs in school based          a single word, disaggregated by
                                          management support team                    gender
                                        - Provide financial support and            - Number of school principals and
                                          capacity building for schools in their     head of schools receiving
                                          management to achieve quality              capacity building on SBM,
                                          standards,                                 disaggregated by gender
                                        - Improve teaching and learning for        - Number of VEDCs members
                                          early grade literacy                       receiving capacity building on
                                        - Encourage women stakeholders               SBM disaggregated by gender
                                          (school principals, VEDCs                - Number of pedagogical advisors
                                          members, pedagogical advisors) in          and school principals trained as a
                                          school based management training,          part of project interventions,
                                          which include gender aspects in            disaggregated by gender
                                          safeguard modules

                    Early childhood     - Provide scholarships, school meals       - Net enrollment rate of 3 and 4-
                    Education Project     and build school facilities to attract     year-olds in target districts
                                          girls’ attendance.                         (disaggregated by gender)
                                                                                   - Net enrollment rate of 5-year-
                                                                                     olds in target districts
                                                                                     (disaggregated by gender
 Early marriage,    Health              - Target reproductive health age           - Number of women who deliver
 adolescent         Governance and        group, Nutrition advice and                with a skilled birth attendant
 pregnancy and      Nutrition             behavior change communications             (SBA)
 high maternal      Development           aimed at pre-maternity stage             - (b) Number of pregnant women
 mortality rate     Project             - Availability and access to family          having received 4 antenatal care
                                          planning advice, commodities and           visits
                                          services                                 - (c) Number of women 15-49
                                        - Availability to accessible and             years who have adopted long-
                                          affordable health services, including      term methods of family Planning
                                          reproductive health services             - (d) Percentage of children age 0-
                                             -                                       6 months exclusively breastfed.

 Low                NT2 Social and      - Develop gender resettlement plan in      - Vulnerable/marginalized people
 participation of   Environment           areas affected by resource project          aware of project in. & benefits –
 women in           Project                                                           male (Number, Core
 ethnic groups                                                                        Supplement)
 and poor                                                                          - Vulnerable/marginalized people
 households in                                                                        aware of project inv. & benefits
 livelihood                                                                           – female (Number, Core
 activities and                                                                       Supplement)
 wage jobs                                                                         - Project beneficiaries – male and
                                                                                      female
                    TDF2’s Business     - Matching grants and advisory to           - Increased share of firms with
                    Assistance            eligible entrepreneur                        female management/ownership
                    Facility                                                           participation



                                                         14
                                                                                   - Increase in share of female
                                                                                     owned/managed businesses
                                                                                     supported using advisory
                                                                                     services (benefiting from
                                                                                     Business Assistance Facility
                                                                                     matching grants)
                     Road Sector           - Improving road connectivity           - At least 26500 people (49%
                     Projects I                                                      female) most of whom live by
                                                                                     the road side, served with paved
                                                                                     road along NR1B and 6A.
                     SME Access to         - Advisory services to female           - % of female receive advice on
                     Finance project         entrepreneurs                           business development.
                     Second Lao            - Promoting women involvement in        - Direct project beneficiary
                     Environment and         sub-project designs on livelihood       recipient of livelihood or
                     Social Project          and forest resource utilisation         conservation grants (of which
                                                                                     women or women
                                                                                     organizations)
                                                                                   - Direct project beneficiary (of
                                                                                     which women) as measured by
                                                                                     additional staff of public and
                                                                                     partner institutions having
                                                                                     completed basic adaptive
                                                                                     training (short courses)
                     IFC’s project on      - Setting up a US$10 million facility   - Number of women-owned/ run
                     risk sharing            fully dedicated to women owned          SME borrowers receive finance
                     facility with BFL       SMEs along with a training              during the life of the SME RSF
                     Bank                    program aimed at making BFL a
                                             bank of choice for women
Low                  - PRF II and III      - Advocacy and training                 - PRF sub-projects are identified,
participation of                           - Promote participatory planning for      planned and implemented
women in                                     community and kum ban                   through participatory processes
planning and                                 development plans and                   that involve at least 40 percent
decision making                              identification of sub-projects. The     of women and at least 60
at the local level                           selection of sub-project for            percent of the poorest villagers
                                             financial support by kum ban            in planning, decision-making
                                             committee, which include elected        implementation and monitoring
                                             villagers including women and
                                             ethnic group.
                     Road         Sector   - Potential women participation in      - Share of women participating in
                     Project II              maintenance activities                  paid routine maintenance work
                                                                                     (percentage)
                     Social Protection     - Under discussion                      - To be determined based on
                     Project                                                         gender analysis in preparation
                                                                                     phase
                     Lao PDR Disaster      - Under preparation                     - The number of beneficiaries
                     and Risk                                                        protected against flood in target
                     Management                                                      areas, including women
                     Project
                     Agriculture           - Under preparation                     - To be determined based on
                     commercialization                                               gender analysis in preparation
                     Project                                                         phase




                                                          15
3) Filling knowledge gaps and strengthening analytical platform on gender issues in Lao PDR:
Core country policy dialogue takes place through the lending operations and the development policy
lending as well as analytical work. Current pipeline where opportunities for gender analysis to be
integrated include:
            a. Programmatic studies on quality of education
            b. Clean stove initiative in East Asia and Pacific (EAP Gender and Energy Facility)
            c. Public expenditure analysis that examine the public financing of the health and
                education sectors
            d. Impact evaluation on use of incentives and pro-poor sanitation.
            e. Poverty targeting study.
            f. Addressing malnutrition in Lao PDR
            g. Policy note on targeted subsidies for pro-poor sanitation

Potential priority knowledge work that could be pursued during the CGAP to inform policy dialogues
and operations include:

          a. Informing an approach to Adolescent Girls: Specific analysis or evaluation of
             programs on reducing adolescent birth rates; links between adolescent pregnancies
             and maternal health and nutrition; and/or identifying employment opportunities for
             young girls. Analytical work related to Adolescent girls would be pursued with a view
             to informing operations and/or possible reintroduction of a special initiatives such as
             the Adolescent Girls Initiative, which showed success in Liberia and Nepal.
          b. Better knowledge of constraints and opportunities for women led SMEs, including a
             better understanding of what works to address underlying causes of gender gaps in
             this area;
          c. Better knowledge of impacts of rural-urban and cross border migration for job
             opportunities on women
          d. Increased knowledge of women’s agency in relation to disaster: impacts of disaster
             risk management on women and the vulnerable groups and adaptation measures in the
             Lao context.

4) Gender informed policy dialogue with Government across relevant sectors. The most recent
Country Gender Assessment (CGA) that was prepared jointly with the ADB in 2013. There is an
opportunity to update the CGA during the implementation of this CGAP. The proposed ASA listed
above would seek to contribute to such an update.

6. Implementation responsibilities

40.     The country team will collectively incorporate gender analysis into the mainstream
process of operations, strategy and portfolio management. The project task teams are primarily
responsible for implementing and monitoring the impacts of the operations on reducing gender gaps
as part of achieving shared prosperity.

7. Monitoring and reporting


                                                16
41.     The country team will monitor the implementation of the C-GAP according to the
actions summarized in Table 2 and gender trends at the country level through the monitoring
framework attached as an annex to this document10. The Monitoring Framework includes baseline
and targets established during the preparation of the C-GAP and serves to assist the country office in
monitoring the country gender action plan implementation and country level adherence to corporate
and regional and country office commitments on gender.

42.     In preparation for the annual WPA discussion, the country gender focal point will
coordinate the annual reporting on results achieved next steps and submit to the country
manager and regional gender team. The country gender focal point is responsible for coordinating
the inputs with the task teams for the annual result framework update with oversight from the CMU,
Program Leader and the Regional Gender Coordinator.

8. Resource allocation and needs

43.    Certain resources will be allocated each year to support implementation of the CGAP through
the Work Program Agreement (WPA). FY17 received an allocation of US$ 30K. This budget have
been supporting targeting outcomes related to WB country level commitment in its portfolio; gender
technical support and coordination to task team; inputs and upstream reviews of lending operations
and knowledge work; and dialogues and coordination with the government and development partners.
From FY18 onward more focus will be on using the CGAP budget allocation to pursue funding and
conceptualization of ASA priorities.

44.    Supporting policy dialogue and uptake of evidence of what works: The EAP Gender
Innovation Lab (EAPGIL) was established to generate evidence about and support increased policy
uptake of what works to close gender gaps in key areas related to improving women’s economic
opportunities, particularly with regard to i) removing barriers to productivity and access to markets
of women framers; ii) reducing trade-offs between women’s household and market roles; iii) and
enhancing women’s skills. The Lao PDR country team is encouraged to respond to the call for
proposals and cooperation with the EAPGIL on issues relevant to the CGAP priority gender gaps.




10
     See Results Framework in Annex 2 for further detail.

                                                            17
      Table 3: Outcomes and Cost estimates (FY17 sample)

Outcome                 Output                           Input
                                                         Activity              FY17     Unit
                                                                               USD

The Lao CGAP is         CGAP 2017-2021                   Update CGAP draft     16000
updated and informed                                     and result matrix
by current issues and
results from current
operations
Lao CGAP and EAP        All pipeline projects informed   Gender comments at    2,800
regional gender         by gender analysis               PCN, QER, ROC
commitment met.
66% or more of new      66% or more of new projects
projects are gender     are gender informed in 3
informed in 3           dimensions: analysis, action,
dimensions              M&E
(corporate target)
Increased awareness     Gender outcomes published.       Disseminate short     6,600
of knowledge of what                                     notes from relevant
works to decrease                                        ASAs, advocacy
key gender                                               materials
inequalities in Lao
PDR
Management and          Annual CGAP monitoring           Discuss progress       2,800
CPF regularly           report                           with task teams and
informed of                                              PLs; keep track of
consolidate gender                                       ASA with gender
outcomes made in                                         data generated. Lao
CPF portfolio                                            PDR input to RGAP.
Gov’t and donor         Representing the country         Briefs, presentations, 1,800
partners regularly      office in meetings and events    meeting attendance
informed of the         as needed                        nationally;
Bank’s gender-
related work
Total                                                                          30,000




                                               18
    Annex 1: Lao PDR Gender Action Plan Summary
Link to SCD     Link to CPF      CGAP               Primary Causes         Interventions at project    World Bank        Sample CGAP Output/Outcome
Pathways        Focus Areas      Priorities                                level                       Group             Indicator
                                                                                                       Operations
Enhancing       Cross-cutting    Voice and          - Culture, norms       - Advocacy and training     - Poverty         - PRF sub-projects are identified, planned
Institutional   theme:           Agency:              and attitudes        - Promote participatory       Reduction         and implemented through participatory
quality and     Enhancing                           - Limited law            planning for                Fund II           processes that involve at least 40 percent
creating a      Governance       Promote              enforcement            community and kum           (PRF)             of women and at least 60 percent of the
rules-based     and Creating a   participation of   - Low                    ban development           - PRF III           poorest villagers in planning, decision-
environment     Rules Based      women in             representation at      plans and                                     making implementation and monitoring
                Environment      planning and         provincial and         identification of sub-                      - % of PRF III sub-projects prioritized by
                                 decision             local levels           projects. The selection                       women
                                 making at the                               of sub-project for                          - % of PRF III sub-projects prioritized by
                                 local level                                 financial support by                          ethnic groups
                                                                             kum ban committee,
                                                                             which include elected
                                                                             villagers including
                                                                             women and ethnic
                                                                             group.

Unlocking the   Sharing          Access to          - Investment climate   - Matching grants and       - TDF2’s          - Increased share of firms with female
potential in    Growth           Economic             constraints to         advisory to eligible        Business          management/ownership participation
non-resource                     Opportunities:       business growth        entrepreneur                Assistance      - Increase in share of female
sectors to                                          - Limited                                            Facility          owned/managed businesses supported
create                           Equal                opportunities for                                                    using advisory services (benefiting from
opportunities                    opportunities        formal sector work                                                   Business Assistance Facility matching
                                 for men and        - Access to land and                                                   grants)
                                 women to             credit
                                 participate in     - Low agriculture      - Advisory services on      - IFC’s project   - Number of women-owned/ run SME
                                 livelihood           productivity           financial product           on Risk           borrowers receive finance during the life
                                 activities and                              development and risk        Sharing           of the SME RSF
                                 wage jobs          - Limited                sharing facility            Facility
                                                      connectivity           sensitive to needs of       (SRF) with a
                                                    - Remote rural           female entrepreneurs        commercial
                                                      communities with                                   bank, BFL
                                                      limited access to                                  Bank
                                                      services



                                                                               19
Link to SCD       Link to CPF   CGAP              Primary Causes       Interventions at project     World Bank       Sample CGAP Output/Outcome
Pathways          Focus Areas   Priorities                             level                        Group            Indicator
                                                                                                    Operations
                                                                       - Improving road             - Road Sector    - At least 26,500 people (49% female)
                                                                         connectivity                 Project I        most of whom live by the road side,
                                                                                                                       served with paved road along NR1B and
                                                                                                                       6A.
                                                                                                    - Road Sector    - Share of rural population with access to
                                                                                                      Project II       an all-season road (National)
                                                                                                                     - Share of women participating in paid
                                                                                                                       routine maintenance work (percentage)

                                                                       - Improving agriculture      - Agriculture    - In preparation
                                                                         productivity                 Commercial
                                                                                                      ization
                                                                                                      Project

Building the      Human         Endowments:       - Low school         - Promote the                - Second        - Percentage of Grade 2 students in pilot
assets to be      Development                       attendance, high     representation, role and     Global          schools who cannot read a single word,
take up                         Low literacy        drop-outs            capacity of the              Partnership     disaggregated by gender
opportunities                   among women       - early marriage       Inclusive Education          for Education - Number of female village facilitators
and to mitigate                 and skills gap                           Centre under MOEs in         Project         trained in SBCC in target districts
risks and                                                                school based                                 (administrative data)
protect gain                                                             management support
                                Early marriage,                          team
                                adolescent                             - Provide financial
                                pregnancy and                            support and capacity
                                high maternal                            building for schools in
                                mortality rate                           their management to
                                                                         achieve quality
                                                                         standards,
                                                                       - Improve teaching and
                                                                         learning for early grade
                                                                         literacy
                                                                       - Encourage women
                                                                         stakeholders (school
                                                                         principals, VEDCs
                                                                         members, pedagogical
                                                                         advisors) in school
                                                                         based management
                                                                         training, which include

                                                                            20
Link to SCD     Link to CPF     CGAP               Primary Causes           Interventions at project     World Bank        Sample CGAP Output/Outcome
Pathways        Focus Areas     Priorities                                  level                        Group             Indicator
                                                                                                         Operations
                                                                              gender aspects in
                                                                              safeguard modules

                                                                            - Provide scholarships,      - Early           - Net enrollment rate of 3 and 4-year-olds
                                                                              school meals and build       Childhood         in target districts (disaggregated by
                                                                              school facilities to         Education         gender)
                                                                              attract girls’               Project         - Net enrollment rate of 5-year-olds in
                                                                              attendance.                                    target districts (disaggregated by gender)
                                                                                                                           - Primary education dropout rate
                                                                                                                             (disaggregated by gender)
                                                                                                                           - Number of out of school children of
                                                                                                                             primary age (SDG 4.1.2)


                                                   - Inadequate access      - Support                    - Health          - Number of women who deliver with a
                                                     to services in rural     implementation of            Governance        skilled birth attendant at home or at a
                                                     areas                    health sector reform         and Nutrition     health facility (SDG 3.1)
                                                   - Unmet demand for         and Multi Sectoral           Development     - Number of pregnant women who received
                                                     family planning          Food and Nutrition           Project           the 4th Antenatal Care contacts
                                                   - Inadequate levels        Security Action Plan                         - Number of new women aged 15-49 years
                                                     of maternal and                                                         adopting long term family planning
                                                     child nutrition                                                         methods in target provinces
                                                                                                                           - Percentage of children age 0-6 months
                                                                                                                             exclusively breastfed.
                                                                                                                           - Maternal mortality rate (SDG 3.1.1

                                                                            - To be defined               - Social         - Under discussion
                                                                                                            protection
                                                                                                            Project
Sustainable     Protection of   Risks:             - Natural disasters      - Promote gender             - NT2 Social      - Vulnerable/marginalized people aware of
and Efficient   the             Vulnerability to   - Migration                sensitive and                 and              project in. & benefits – male (Number,
management      Environment     emerging risks     - Inadequate               participatory planning ,      Environment      Core Supplement)
of natural                      and low benefit      incentives to            monitoring and                Project        - Vulnerable/marginalized people aware of
resources                       sharing from         promote socially         mitigation mechanisms                          project inv. & benefits – female (Number,
                                NRM                  responsible            - Promote gender                                 Core Supplement)
                                                     investments and          balanced project                             - Project beneficiaries – male and female
                                                     weak enforcement         community institutions                         (number) (number, Core Supplement)


                                                                                 21
Link to SCD     Link to CPF       CGAP               Primary Causes         Interventions at project     World Bank        Sample CGAP Output/Outcome
Pathways        Focus Areas       Priorities                                level                        Group             Indicator
                                                                                                         Operations
                                                       of environmental     - Promote gender
                                                       requirements           sensitive income
                                                                              generation and skill
                                                                              development
                                                                            - Community education
                                                                              on health and domestic
                                                                              households matters


                                                                            - Capacity building in       - Road Sector     - Preparation and implementation of three-
                                                                              adaption to climate          Project II        year rolling climate resilient road
                                                                              change and disaster        -                   maintenance plans, on annual basis
                                                                              risk management                                (Yes/No)
                                                                            - Design and finance                           - Length of road receiving climate resilient
                                                                              climate resilient                              periodic maintenance (Km)
                                                                              transport infrastructure                       (Cumulative)11




   11
     Although these two indicators are not direct sex-disaggregated indicators, achieving them do imply lesson impacts of climate change and disasters on the road
   and living conditions of female and male population. Women may find themselves less resilience in a case of disaster struck.

                                                                                 22
   Annex 2: Lao PDR: CGAP 2017-2021 Result Monitoring Framework
                                                            Actual
                                                                       Target
       Result                      Indicator                FY16*                           Comments and targets                       Responsible party
                                                                        FY21
                                                           baseline
Tier I- Global Development Results (indicating the long-term development outcomes that countries are achieving, e.g., SDGs, that measure country-level
progress)
Part 1: National level targets and strategies
1.1: Progress toward    1.1.1 Primary education dropout F: 4.5       F: 3.8                                                      Gender Focal Point (for
gender-related          rate (disaggregated by gender)    T: 4.7     T: 4                                                        obtaining and recording data
Sustainable                                               (2015-16)                                                              from task teams)
Development Goals       1.1.2 Female/Male Gender parity P: 0.95
is achieved             indices for enrolment and         LS: 0.91
                        completion rates (Primary,        US: 0.84
                        Lower and Upper Secondary)        T: 0.6
                        (SDG 4.5.1)                       (2013-14)

                       1.1.3 Percentage of labor force     F: 76                     WB WDI data. Labor participation rate,
                       participation rate, male/female     M: 79                     female/male (% of female/male
                                                           (2014)                    population ages 15+)

                       1.1.4 Proportion of seats held by   27.5%                     National Assembly data.
                       women in national parliament        (2016)
                       (SDG 5.5.1)
                       1.1.5 Maternal mortality rate       197          180          Target: SDGs
                       (SDG 3.1.1)                         (2015)
                       1.1.6 Adolescent birth rate (aged   94
                       10-14 years; aged 15-19 years)      (2013)
                       per 1,000 women in that age
                       group (SDG 3.7.2)
                       1.1.7 Number of women who           95,528       10%          DHIS2 data. Target: SDGs
                       deliver with a skilled birth        (around      increase
                       attendant at home or at a health    53% of       over
                       facility (SDG 3.1)                  total        baseline
                                                           births)      (>105,080)
                                                           (2016)
                       1.1.8 Prevalence of HIV/AIDS,       0.1 (2013)                Target not available.
                       female (age 15-24)
1.2 Country Policy     1.2.1 CPIA rating: Promote          3.5                       WB CPIA data. Target not applicable.        Country Economist and
and Institutional      equal access for men/women to       (2015)                                                                Gender Focal Point
Assessment (CPIA)      human capital development

                                                                               23
                                                          Actual
                                                                       Target
       Result                     Indicator               FY16*                            Comments and targets                    Responsible party
                                                                       FY21
                                                         baseline
indicates progress on     1.2.2 CPIA rating: Promote    3.5
key gender issues         equal access for men/women to (2015)
                          productive and economic
                          resources
                          1.2.3 CPIA rating: Give men and 4.5
                          women equal status and             (2015)
                          protection under the law
Tier II - Outcomes and outputs supported by Bank operations (aggregate data collected for World Bank operations and reported upon through country
assistance strategies and progress reports, project implementation status reports, core sector indicators, and implementation completion reports)
Part 2: Operational work
2.1 Projects are          2.1.1 Number of IDA projects in 79%               At least       EAP RVP target is for at least 66% of       Task teams
gender informed           country portfolio and percentage (2016)           75%            new projects to be gender informed.
                          that is gender informed in three
                          dimensions
                          2.1.2 Number of IBRD projects      n/a            n/a            County is not yet eligible for IBRD
                          in country portfolio and                                         financing.
                          percentage that is gender
                          informed
                          2.1.3 Number of non-lending        n/a            n/a            Non lending not reported on here
                          operations in country portfolio
                          and percentage that is gender
                          informed
2.2 Projects’ results     2.2.1 Number and percentage of     93%                           Monitoring purpose. No target.              Task teams
frameworks are            all of projects under
gender responsive         implementation that have a sex-
                          disaggregated indicator in
                          results framework
2.3 Evaluation of         2.2.2 Number of projects in        1              >1                                                         Task teams
projects provides         portfolio that will conduct an
information on the        evaluation that include an
gender-related            analysis of the project’s gender-
consequences              specific impacts
Part 3: Project results across four dimensions: Endowment; economic opportunity; voice; and emerging risks




                                                                             24
                                                            Actual
                                                                           Target
       Result                    Indicator                  FY16*                               Comments and targets                  Responsible party
                                                                           FY21
                                                           baseline
3.1 Gender equality   3.1.1: Number of women who          95,528         10%            Health Governance and Nutrition          HGNDP task team
in endowments and     deliver with a skilled birth        (18            increase       Development Project (P151425) – closes
human development     attendant at home or at a health    provinces,     over           Dec 2020
is promoted           facility (SDG 3.1)                  2016,          baseline
                                                          based on       (> 105,080)
                                                          DHIS2) –
                                                          around
                                                          53% of
                                                          total births
                      3.1.2: Number of new women          45,746         10%
                      aged 15-49 years adopting long      women          increase
                      term family planning methods in     (14            over
                      target provinces                    provinces,     baseline
                                                          2016,          (> 50,320)
                                                          based on
                                                          HGNDP
                                                          DLIs/
                                                          DHIS2)
                      3.1.3: Number of pregnant           94,511         10%
                      women who received the 4th          (18            increase
                      Antenatal Care contacts             provinces,     over
                                                          2016,          baseline
                                                          based on       (>103,962)
                                                          DHIS2) –
                                                          around
                                                          53% of
                                                          total births

                      3.1.4: Percentage of pre-school     T: 11%         T: 48%         Early Childhood Education Project        Education team
                      aged children (3-5 year olds)       F: 11%         F: 48%         (P145544) – closes July 2019
                      attending ECD/ECE/preschool         (2016)
                      program increases in target areas
                      (SDG 4.2.2)
                      3.1.5: Number of out of school      T: 8761        T: 6500
                      children of primary age, (SDG       F: 5217        F: 3000
                      4.1.2)                              (2016)




                                                                                   25
                                                                Actual
                                                                            Target
       Result                       Indicator                   FY16*                            Comments and targets                   Responsible party
                                                                            FY21
                                                               baseline
                        3.1.6: Net enrollment rate of 3       T: 11.4     T: 23.7
                        and 4-year-olds in target districts   (2014)
                        (disaggregated by gender)
                        3.1.7: Net enrollment rate of 5-      T: 42.6     T: 74.9
                        year-olds in target districts         (2014)
                        (disaggregated by gender)
                        3.1.8: Percentage of Grade 2          TBD         M: 15%         Second Global Partnership for Education
                        students in pilot schools who                     F: 15%         (P149130)
                        cannot read a single word,
                        disaggregated by gender

3.2 Active measures     3.2.1: Share of women                 0           15%            Road Sector Project II (P102398)          RSP task team
taken to close gender   participating in paid routine         (2016)
gaps in economic        maintenance work (percentage)
opportunity             Female beneficiary (from line of      5%          15%            SME Access to Finance Project
                        credit)                                                          (P131201) – closes June 2019

                        3.2.5a: Increased share of firms      41.9%                      Second Trade Development Facility         TDF-2 task team
                        with female                           (2015)                     Project, 2013-2017 (PREM)
                        management/ownership
                        participation
                        3.2.5b: Average percentage of         0%          30%
                        female owned businesses among         (2015)
                        approved applications by
                        Business Assistance Facility
                        (BAF) matching grants)

3.3 Active measures    3.3.1: % of PRF III sub-projects   90%           90%           Poverty Reduction Fund III Project, 2011- PRF task team
taken to strengthen    prioritized by women               (2015)                      16 (SD)
women’s voice and
influence
3.4 Gender             Share of rural population with     53%           57%           Road Sector Project II (P102398) – closes Transport Team
inequalities addressed access to an all-season road                                   Sept 2017
in emerging risk       (SDG 9.1)
areas
Tier III - Operational Effectiveness(focuses upon the effectiveness of the Bank’s products and services, and the Bank’s portfolio performance)
Part 4: Gender-related organization within the country office


                                                                                    26
                                                          Actual
                                                                      Target
       Result                    Indicator                FY16*                         Comments and targets                  Responsible party
                                                                      FY21
                                                         baseline
4.1 Gender focal       4.1.1 Appointment of gender      Yes         Yes                                                  Country Manager
point is appointed     focal point
                       (yes/no)
4.2 System in place    4.2.1 Existence of terms of       n/a        Yes         County level TOR to be developed based   Country Manager
to review gender in    reference (TOR) for gender                               on regional template
project preparation    practice group approved by the
phase                  country manager with target of
                       membership representing all
                       networks (yes/no/not applicable)
                       4.2.2 The country office has a    Yes        Yes         Reviewed as part of standard PCN         Country Manager and Gender
                       system in place for reviewing                            distribution to full country team with   Focal Point
                       attention to gender at PCN phase                         comments to be provided by the Gender
                       (yes/no)                                                 Focal Point
4.3 Collaboration      4.3.1 Participation in a          Yes        Yes                                                  Gender Focal Point / Gender
with other donors on   multidonor forum on gender                                                                        Practice group (as appropriate)
gender-related issues  (yes/no)
4.4 Resources are      4.4.1 Amount (USD) CMU            30,000     ≥ 30,000    IO for country gender coordination       Country Manager
available through the annual allocation to gender        (FY16)                 activities
WPA                    mainstream (incl. cost of GFP
                       and GPG)
Part 5: Country gender action plan (CGAP)
5.1 CPF is gender      5.1.1 CPF is gender informed      Yes        Yes                                                  Country Manager and task
informed and                                                                                                             teams
responsive
5.2 A CGAP has         5.2.1 C-GAP is endorsed           Yes        Yes         2011-12 C-GAP endorsed. 2013-16 C-       Country Director / Gender
been completed and     (yes/no)                          (2016)                 GAP update under preparation             Focal Point / Gender Practice
endorsed by country                                                                                                      Group
management             5.2.2 C-GAP is distributed to     Yes        Yes         Updated draft C-GAP to be circulated     Country Manager
                       sector managers and country                              upon completion and after endorsement
                       team (yes/no)
Part 6: Non-lending tasks, including analytic and diagnostic work
6.1 Country gender     6.1.1 Year of latest gender       2013                   New CGA completed in FY13                Country Manager / Gender
profile is current     profile or/country gender                                                                         Focal Point / Gender Practice
                       assessment or/country poverty                                                                     Group
                       and gender assessment




                                                                           27
                                                              Actual
                                                                         Target
       Result                       Indicator                 FY16*                         Comments and targets                      Responsible party
                                                                         FY21
                                                             baseline
6.2. ESW and AAA         6.2.1 Number of ASA completed      2           >1         a. Planned for FY17 (to start or complete):   Task teams
is gender responsive     in fiscal year where gender                                  Programmatic studies on quality of
                         analysis is integrated                                       education
                                                                                   b.Clean stove initiative in East Asia and
                                                                                      Pacific
                                                                                   c. Public expenditure analysis that examine
                                                                                      the public financing of the health and
                                                                                      education sectors
                                                                                   d.Impact evaluation on use of incentives
                                                                                      and pro-poor sanitation.
                                                                                   e. Poverty targeting study.
                                                                                   f. Adolescent Girls

6.3 Gender-related       6.3.1 Number of gender-focused     0           >1         At least one capacity-building initiative     Country Manager / Gender
capacity among           capacity-building initiatives                             per year to inform country-office staff on    Focal Point / Gender Practice
Bank staff and the its   completed during the fiscal year                          corporate gender targets and/or key           Group
institutional            for country-office staff and/or                           knowledge work.
counterparts is          counterparts
strengthened




                                                                              28
Annex 3: WB IDA Portfolio with Gender Tags (as of February 2017)
 PROJECT ID




              PROJECT NAME




                                                                                                        Dimension 3: M&E (1/0)
                                                                                 Dimension 2: ACTIONS
                                                                ANALYSIS (1/0)




                                                                                                                                     Aggregate score
                                                                 Dimension 1:




                                                                                         (1/0)
P049290       Nam Theun 2 Social abd Environment Project                  1                     1                                1                     3
P102398       Road Sector Project                                         0                     1                                1                     2
P104806       Mekong Integrate Water Resources Management                 1                     1                                1                     3
P130512       Lao PDR Trade Development Facility 2                        1                     1                                1                     3
P101750       Lao PDR CTFP                                                1                     1                                1                     3
P130222       Scaling-Up Participatory Sustainable                        1                     1                                1                     3
P145544       Early Childhood Education Project                           1                     1                                1                     3
P131201       Lao PDR SME Access to Finance                               1                     1                                1                     3
P128393       Second Lao Environment and Social Project                   1                     1                                1                     3
P149599       Power Grid Improvement Project                              0                     1                                1                     2
P151425       Lao PDR Health Governance and Nutrition                     1                     1                                1                     3
              Development Project
P157963       POV Reduction Fund III                                      1                     1                                1                     3
P158504       Lao Road Sector Project 2 (LRSP2)                           1                     1                                1                     3


                                                                      85%              100%                            100%                        85%




                                                           29
