Private
Sector                                        Headaches, Concerns, and Regrets:
Opinion                                       What Does the Experience of 102
                                              Brazilian Directors Tell Us?

                                              Sandra Guerra and Rafael Liza Santos



39                                            T
                  IFC Corporate                     his paper takes a look inside the functioning of the modern corporate
                  Governance
                  Knowledge                         board “black box.” Using results of an anonymous online survey, it
                  Publication                 investigates the experiences and behavior of 102 Brazilian directors—from
                                              an individual perspective as well as from a group one. To gain insight
                                              into what goes on in directors’ minds, the authors adopted a behavioral
                                              approach based on extensive literature regarding cognitive biases and group
                                              dynamics.


                                              Foreword
                                              In my work with boards and interactions with practitioners and
                                              policymakers, I have been keen to emphasize the transition of focus in
                                              board governance from structures and processes to group dynamics
                                              and individual director behavior. There is growing recognition in many
                                              markets that the requisite board “hardware” is generally in place at large
                                              listed companies (although not always implemented effectively) and that it
                                              is now vital to improve its “software” to enable these bodies to perform to
                                              their potential.

                                              Veteran banking expert David Walker, in his examination of corporate
                                              governance shortcomings at financial institutions in the run-up to the
                                              global financial crisis, observed that the “principal deficiencies in [bank]
                                              boards related much more to patterns of behavior than to organization.”
About IFC Corporate Governance Group
                                              Recently, the U.K. Financial Reporting Council began homing in on the
The Group brings together staff from
                                              behavioral aspects of board functioning, warning—for example—that
investment support and advisory operations    a “dominant personality or group of directors on the board can inhibit
into a single, global team. This unified      contribution from other directors.”
team advises on all aspects of corporate
governance and offers targeted client
services in areas such as increasing board    In my different capacities, I have come across problematic boardroom
effectiveness, improving the control
environment, and family businesses
                                              dynamics and behavior, such as a chairman who was persistently
governance. The Group also helps support      overshadowed by a “star” chief executive officer, outside directors who
corporate governance improvements and
reform efforts in emerging markets and
                                              relished playing “gotcha” with management by repeatedly pointing out
developing countries, while leveraging and    their missteps, and a board that allowed the allure of complex quantitative
integrating knowledge tools, expertise, and   models to dull the critical faculties and common sense of its members.
networks at the global and regional levels.
                             In this vein, it has been delightful to review Sandra Guerra’s and Rafael Liza Santos’s
                             Private Sector Opinion. Their pioneering effort to open the boardroom black box and
                             peer into the minds of Brazilian directors has yielded a number of fascinating insights. It
                             is my hope that their work will lead to further exploration—by the authors and others—of
                             this and related areas in an effort to expand the empirical fact base, strengthen statistical
                             robustness, and deepen our collective understanding.

                             With regard to their findings, it is remarkable that cognitive biases are so pervasive in
                             Brazilian boardrooms. According to the authors, 74 percent of the survey respondents
                             mentioned herd behavior as a frequent or very frequent occurrence in board decision
                             making, and nearly two-thirds cited groupthink as a common malaise. It would be
                             interesting to see whether these biases plague boardrooms in other countries to the same
                             (or even greater) extent.

                             Directors I have spoken with over the years acknowledge—although they may be reticent
                             to state it publicly—stylistic differences between men and women that affect, among other
                             things, the character of board discussion, the way feedback is delivered and received, and
                             the collegial nature of the board itself. Guerra’s and Santos’s research has found that gender
                             differences extend to the willingness to express regrets, with men less comfortable admitting
                             mistakes and perhaps also suffering from overconfidence. In my view, exploring ways to
                             encourage honest introspection on the part of individual directors and the collective board
                             would help improve the quality of its work by enhancing its ability to take early corrective
                             action and avoid the recurrence of errors.

                             All over the world, boards have performed inadequately on succession planning, often
                             tackling it too late or allowing the incumbent chief executive officer to be overly influential.
                             While some may focus on the finding that one-third of the survey respondents had regrets
                             about the way their company’s chief executive was selected, I was surprised that two-
                             thirds felt that their companies had adopted the right approach on chief executive officer
                             succession. It would be a great service to boards everywhere to gain a better understanding
                             of what these boards had done right.

                             The differences in views between independent and non-independent directors are also
                             intriguing. The authors provide further support for the value of independent directors in
                             the boardroom, who—the survey revealed—exhibited a stronger awareness of conflicts
                             of interest. At the same time, it surprised me to learn that non-independent directors
                             were more concerned about poor corporate governance practices and inadequate risk
                             management than their independent peers.

                             This Private Sector Opinion by Sandra Guerra and Rafael Liza Santos contains many
                             illuminating insights, and I believe that board members, corporate management, and
                             others with an interest in corporate governance will find it a worthwhile read.

                                                                                                       Simon C.Y. Wong
                                                                                                     Independent Adviser
                                                         Adjunct Professor of Law, Northwestern University School of Law
                                                         Visiting Fellow, London School of Economics and Political Science
                                                                           External Senior Advisor, McKinsey & Company


2   ISSUE 39
    Private Sector Opinion
Headaches, Concerns, and Regrets: What Does
the Experience of 102 Brazilian Directors Tell Us?
Sandra Guerra and Rafael Liza Santos1

Boards of directors are among the most secretive, obscure, and influential corporate entities
in modern capitalism. Very few people in the business world ever have the opportunity to
actually see how board meetings are conducted and how directors interact. Nonetheless,
corporate finance literature indicates that boards and the decisions they make play a crucial
role in the performance of companies.2

This paper aims to take a closer look inside this so-called “black box.” Specifically, we
investigated the experiences and behavior of 102 Brazilian directors, from an individual
as well as a group perspective. Using a questionnaire, we conducted an online survey that
guaranteed anonymity to the participants.3 We asked questions about their profile, board
seats, experiences, concerns, and regrets. To understand what goes on in directors’ minds,
we adopted a behavioral approach based on extensive literature regarding cognitive biases
and group dynamics. Our results identify the hardest decisions that directors face in the
course of their work, how their so-called level of independence affects their perception of
difficulty on any given subject, and how gender is linked to their regrets in connection with
a certain “wrong” decision they feel that they made. Our survey also sheds some light on
what directors would have done differently had they known at the time what the results of
their decisions would be. Overall, this article provides a pioneering insight into the work
and inner workings of boards of directors—from the insider’s point of view.


A Black Box
The board of directors operates like a closed black box. Boards are very complex social
structures that have to perform extremely difficult duties. It is getting tougher and tougher
to be an effective director. The pace of change in today’s world is, in its own way, forcing
every business to become global and is constantly making the
business world less secure. Boards have to deal with disruptions
that are changing the face of businesses in just a couple of years. As      The board of directors operates like
a consequence, it is not surprising that some boards are failing to         a closed black box.
perform their tasks properly.




1
    	 Sandra Guerra has more than 21 years of experience in corporate governance as well as an extensive career as a c-level executive and board
      member in multiple companies. She was a co-founder and chair of the Brazilian Institute for Corporate Governance and a board governor
      of the International Corporate Governance Network. Sandra holds a master of science degree in business and is an accredited mediator at
      the Centre for Effective Dispute Resolution in London.
	 Rafael Liza Santos has 10 years of experience as a management consultant in corporate governance, business strategy, and corporate
  finance. His research on corporate governance has been published in local and international journals. Rafael holds a degree in economics
  from the University of São Paulo and has completed specialized study in applied economics at the University Paris-Dauphine in France.
	  The authors wish to thank Alessandra Polastrini who was key in preparing and reviewing the charts presented in this paper.
2
 	 Prior research has suggested that there is a direct relationship between board performance and the resulting corporate financial
   performance and that companies with active boards produce higher levels of investor returns and economic value creation than those with
   passive boards, but this has not yet been proven by means of empirical research (Charas 2015).
3
 	 Directors answered the survey questionnaire between May 2015 and January 2016.

                                                                                                                                                                  ISSUE 39   3
                                                                                                                                                   Private Sector Opinion
                               Sir Adrian Cadbury,4 who was a leading expert on corporate governance, pointed out that
                               boards are failing to prevent corporate scandals. After all, despite tremendous efforts in
                               the 1980s and 1990s to establish and strengthen corporate governance regulations, boards
                               were still failing in 2001 and beyond. In Cadbury’s opinion, directors are not asking the
                               right questions, they are not monitoring chief executive officers adequately, and they are
                               failing to support executives in defining strategy guidelines and corporate purposes. This
                               scenario is fertile ground for corporate governance issues to arise and grow.

                               Over the last 50 years, research into the performance of boards of directors has focused on
                               individual directors’ economically motivated behaviors and outcomes, and it has generated
                               inconsistent and disappointing results. Most research does not consider the board as a
                               team, despite recent calls for a focus on collective board processes and behaviors (Charas
                               2015; Forbes and Milliken 1999). To better understand board performance, it is important
                               to be aware of how directors interact with each other and how they actually make decisions.
                               Morten Huse (2005) suggests that analyzing boards’ composition, processes, working style,
                               and internal dynamics may well provide a more solid conclusion. Therefore, understanding
                               boards requires a new approach that focuses on the reasons for the destructive board
                               dynamics that have undermined the abilities of well-intentioned board members to provide
                               good corporate oversight.

                               Recent studies5 show that the limits of rationality, information asymmetry, and cognitive
                               biases provoke a sort of “blindness” that prevents directors from making the proper
                               decisions.

                                     “. . . .[I]deal boards, those with ‘best practice’ size, composition, and structure, with
                                     enough staff support, and with enough time to consider issues carefully, can still fail
                                     to provide good governance, simply because they fall victim to some problems inherent
                                     in all groups. That is, all groups of individuals who are trying to work together for
                                     the common good are subject to some destructive group dynamics that cause blind
                                     spots, biases, and other decision-making pathologies. Recognizing these problems is a
                                     first necessary step. Only then can steps be taken to avoid the problems, or at least to
                                     minimize their consequences” (Pick and Merchant 2010).

                            Some researchers believe that, in addition to all the rules, practices, mechanisms, and
                            processes adopted by a board, there are factors that are not yet on the radar of most boards: the
                            behavioral dimensions—from individual or group perspectives (Pick and Merchant 2010;
                                                      Forbes and Milliken 1999). Perhaps the reason the behavioral
                                                      dimension was outside the main focus was because companies
     Studying how directors make                      and business leaders were working under the classical assumption
     decisions and what role their limited            that people are rational and that consequently their decisions—
     rationality plays in the performance             particularly in business environments—are essentially rational.
     of firms is one of the most relevant             This assumption of classical economics theory prevailed for a
     challenges facing corporate                      long time before modern concepts of psychology and sociology
     governance studies today                         came forth to challenge it.



                               4
                                	 Sir Adrian Cadbury authored the Cadbury Report, published in 1992, which helped define corporate governance standards all over the
                                  world, and was chairman of Cadbury Schweppes board. Before his death on September 3, 2015, at the age of 86, he gave an interview to
                                  Sandra Guerra at his residence in Dorridge, in the United Kingdom. That December 4, 2013, interview is the source of comments referenced
                                  here.
                               5
                                	 For example, Nutt 1986; Jackson, Stone, and Alvarez 1992; Pearce and Zahra 1992; Zald 1969; Pfeffer 1972, 1973; Pfeffer and Salancik
                                  1978.

4   ISSUE 39
    Private Sector Opinion
Herbert Simon, who won the 1978 Nobel Prize in Economics for his pioneering research
into decision making within economic organizations, argued that it is impossible for the
behavior of a single, isolated individual to reach any high degree of rationality. Simon
concludes that human behavior is intentionally rational but only limitedly so.

The concept of bounded rationality opens up a whole new perspective, recognizing human
limits in the processing of information and the consequent inability of managers to make
optimal decisions in an economically rational manner. However, assessing the behavioral
dynamics of an individual or a group is an extremely difficult task. Most of these cognitive
biases are unperceived by us, and we can see nothing but their effects on the outcomes
of decisions we make. For this reason, studying how directors make decisions and what
role their limited rationality plays in the performance of firms is one of the most relevant
challenges facing corporate governance studies today.

This study aims to contribute to the understanding of this aspect of decision making by
investigating individual and group attitudes and behaviors in a board setting. For example,
how frequently do directors recognize cognitive biases? And it puts these data into the
context of multiple characteristics of board members, such as background, major concerns,
and regrets.


Inside the Box: What Directors Actually Do
Our sample broadly reflects the characteristics of the average board member in Brazil.
More than 83 percent of the directors who answered the questionnaire are male, almost
half (46 percent) are 60 years old or older, and 55 percent have been serving on boards for
the last 10 years. The 102 directors who answered this questionnaire average more than 11
years of board experience, and at least 30 percent have spent most of their professional life
on the boards of publicly listed companies.

We should note that the participants in our survey were contacted through the personal
and professional network of one of the authors of this report. Therefore, that author’s
expertise in the field of corporate governance and her efforts to promote good practices
may have weighted the survey toward directors who were already inclined to have a higher
commitment to good corporate governance practices, causing a certain bias in their answers.

In Brazil, as in most emerging markets, there is a high concentration of ownership among
a few shareholders. Therefore, 48 percent of the directors in our sample have served on
the boards of privately held firms where there is a clear controlling block. More than half
of them have served as an independent board member, according to their self-declaration.
Unfortunately, we cannot ensure actual independence, given that they were elected by
controlling shareholders.




                                                                                                               ISSUE 39   5
                                                                                                Private Sector Opinion
                             Hardest Decisions and Regrets
                             The questionnaire asked, “What was the most difficult decision you have taken in your
                             time as a board director?” Figure 1 shows the top six responses, accounting for 70 percent
                             of the total number of answers from a list of 15 alternatives. Note that hiring a new chief
                             executive officer and dismissing one, combined, gathered more than a quarter of the votes.


                             Figure 1: Hardest Decisions as Board Members

                                                         M&A                                            19%

                                          Hiring a new CEO                                       15%

                                                CEO Dismissal                             11%

                                           Judicial recovery                         9%

                                       Selling the company                           9%

                                                      Lay-offs                  7%



                             Sometimes the results of director’s decisions are not exactly what they expected. We
                             looked into this further and asked directors, “About this decision, would you have taken a
                             different approach now that you know the results and consequences?” Almost a quarter of
                             all directors (24 percent) responded positively. Figure 2 shows the top five answers from the
                             15 alternatives. It is notable that a third of all respondents (33 percent) would have done
                             something differently in hiring a new chief executive officer and in selling the company, by
                             far the largest number of “yes” responses.


                             Figure 2: Top Five Decisions and Directors’ Regrets

                                             M&A                 Hiring a new CEO          CEO Dismissal

                                                  79%                        67%                       82%


                                                                      33%
                                          21%                                                18%


                                          Yes      No                  Yes   No              Yes       No

                                                         Lay-offs              Selling the company
                                                                 86%                        67%


                                                                                   33%

                                                        14%


                                                        Yes      No                Yes      No

6   ISSUE 39
    Private Sector Opinion
We asked, “About this decision, what would you have done differently now that you know
the results and implications?” We found it interesting that 36 percent of the directors said
they wouldn’t do anything differently regarding their hardest decisions. This indicates that,
though the decision was considered hard in hindsight, they believe they made the right call
and don’t regret it.

Of the 64 percent who would have done something differently,
the most common reason mentioned (21 percent) was the lack of           Distinguishing between truly
sufficient analysis. Decisions on the board are often presented as      urgent decisions and those that
urgent or very urgent: “The opportunity window will close, so we        need further analysis is one of the
need to reach a decision quickly.” “The buyer will only wait until      challenges a board director faces.
next week for our offer.” In the face of tight time constraints and
uncertainty, directors may be subject to cognitive biases, such as
herd behavior—following the opinions of others who previously
stated their personal views. This may lead to bad decisions on the part of the board.

At the same time, 10 percent of the directors said they would have reached the decision
more quickly, indicating that the speed of the board decision is indeed sometimes an
important component of the quality of the outcome. Distinguishing between truly urgent
decisions and those that need further analysis is one of the challenges a board director
faces. Figure 3 shows the top four categories of responses to the question, accounting for
83 percent of the total answers.


Figure 3: Hardest Decisions: Adoption of a Different Approach



            I wouldn't do                                                        36%
      anything differently


          I would request                                   21%
          further analysis



         I would be more                             16%
                 assertive



    I would try to reach a                   10%
         quicker decision




                                                                                                                 ISSUE 39   7
                                                                                                  Private Sector Opinion
                              Regrets: women are more prone to admit that they would do things differently. Once
                              they are aware of the impact of their decisions, female directors are more prone to assume
                              that they would have taken a different approach. While only 16 percent of male directors
                              answered that they would do something differently regarding a past decision, the number
                              is more than double (39 percent) for female directors. Although we do not have the means
                              to test the reasons for this discrepancy, we can speculate that 1) women may be more
                              comfortable admitting their mistakes, and 2) men more frequently exhibit overconfidence
                              and excessive optimism, which can cause them to think they have made the right decisions
                              even though this might not be true.

                            Decisions: some decisions are harder for independent directors. A director’s independence
                            may affect how he or she sees a set of alternative solutions to a particular problem. In Brazil,
                            the norm is for ownership to be concentrated. Usually, controlling shareholders are able to
                            own a large stake in the company or create shareholders’ agreements in which they hold
                            controlling blocks. For this reason, those major shareholders are able to elect their own
                                                          directors or at least have a high degree of influence over the
                                                          election of the board, even if the company is a publicly listed
     When directors are somehow linked to                 one, due to the low level of free float in the market. When
     the controlling shareholders, they may               directors are somehow linked to the controlling shareholders,
     face a conflict of interest when taking              either because the shareholders elect them or because they feel
     decisions for the company.                           they should act as representatives of the controlling block,
                                                          they may face a conflict of interest when taking decisions for
                                                          the company.

                              Since this link to a certain group of shareholders may interfere in their decisions, we
                              separated the two groups of directors, based on their self-declared level of independence,
                              when considering their answers to the question, “What was the most difficult decision you
                              have taken in your life as a board director?” Figure 4 shows the percentage of combined
                              “frequent” and “very frequent” responses to the top five areas of decision making from self-
                              declared independent and non-independent directors.


                              Figure 4: Hardest Decisions: Variations Based on Directors’ Self-Declared
                              Independence

                                   Top 5 responses Percentage of “Frequent or Very Frequent” answers (%)

                                                                                           59.1%
                                Hiring or Dismissing CEO
                                                                                   40.9%

                                                                       25.0%
                                               Lay-offs
                                                                                                    75.0%

                                                                                                    73.3%
                                                 M&A
                                                                        26.7%

                                                                                            62.5%
                                       Judicial recovery
                                                                                37.5%

                                                                                                      77.8%
                                   Selling the company
                                                                     22.2%


                                                           Independent Directors
                                                           Non-Independent Directors



8   ISSUE 39
    Private Sector Opinion
Independent directors tended to find the questions about most of the issues listed in Figure
4 more difficult than non-independent directors did. The exception was the issue of layoffs,
which non-independent directors found more difficult. The reason for this exception is
beyond the scope of our survey, but it may be linked to the non-independent directors’
greater involvement in the firm’s operations (as executive directors) and the consequences
of their decisions regarding layoffs.


Independence and Conflicts of Interest
The independent directors also seem to be more alert to the actual or perceived conflicts
of interest in board decisions. The questionnaire asked, “In certain situations, do you ask
yourself if the other director’s motivation is really the best alternative for the company
or if he or she has another reason that is directing his or her behavior? What were
the most frequent causes that prevented them from acting in the best interests of the
company?” Figure 5 shows the percentage of answers for self-declared independent and
non-independent directors and indicates that independent directors have a higher degree
of perception regarding the reasons directors sometimes may not act in the company’s best
interests.


Figure 5: Reasons for Not Acting in the Company’s Best Interest—Based
on Self-Declared Independence


                                                                                 61.7%
 Not to affect social ties with controlling shareholders
                                                                     38.3%

                                                                                   65.3%
   Not to affect social ties with relevant shareholders
                                                                   34.7%

                                                                                   64.0%
                     Not to affect trade relationships
                                                                    36.0%

                                                                                      70.0%
        Not to affect business with another company
                                                                 30.0%

                                                                                  62.2%
       Concern in relation to his/her own reputation
                                                                     37.8%



                                    Independent Directors
                                    Non-Independent Directors




Independence also affects how directors see the reasons for their own mistakes. Asked
to “choose up to three causes related to your performance that you consider a mistake
nowadays,” significantly more independent than non-independent directors indicated that
they were “influenced by others who intentionally underestimated risks and costs” (14
percent versus 7 percent) or “did not investigate the source of the information” (8 percent
versus 2 percent). Both causes speak to the well-known information asymmetry between
independent and other directors, especially executive directors.

At the same time, the non-independent directors indicated that they were more often
“influenced by a previously declared decision of other directors” (10 percent versus 6
percent of independent directors).

                                                                                                              ISSUE 39   9
                                                                                               Private Sector Opinion
                               Beyond Box Ticking: Behavioral Approach to Boards
                               Fundamentally, board performance depends on how directors interact with each other
                               and how they get along with the executives. Pick and Merchant (2010) indicate that
                               some aspects of directors’ interactions can jeopardize the talents of intelligent and well-
                               intentioned people, causing blind spots, biases, and inefficiencies that can lead to boards
                               becoming ineffective. In some cases, cognitive biases can cause highly qualified boards to
                               ignore risks and problems that they would otherwise easily perceive. Also according to these
                               researchers, boards sometimes make decisions that none of their individual participants
                               would make alone.

                               But what are those “cognitive biases,” and how do they affect our thoughts? Cognitive
                               biases are mental behaviors that poison the decision-making process. They can occur at the
                               individual as well as the group level.

                                                          Some cognitive biases have to do with the way the information
                                                          is presented to someone. For instance, we tend to prefer a
      Cognitive biases are mental behaviors
                                                          product that’s described as “90 percent fat free” instead of as
      that poison the decision-making process.            “contains 10 percent fat,” even though both statements are
                                                          essentially the same. This common form of presentation bias
                                                          is known as “framing.” A framing bias occurs when the way or
                            order in which a piece of information is presented affects our opinion about it. At a board
                            meeting, when a certain director is the first one to state his or her opinion, this might affect
                            (or frame) the other members’ opinions as well, therefore creating a bias toward the view
                            presented.

                               Our questionnaire asked, “Some decision-making processes begin with previously formed
                               perceptions and beliefs, which almost never disappear, even though there’s no empirical
                               evidence supporting them. How relevant was this phenomenon in your life as a board
                               member?” Figure 6 breaks down the responses.


                               Figure 6: Biases Regarding Previously Formed Beliefs and Opinions

                                                                38%


                                         26%
                                                                                       23%

                                                                                                              13%


                                         High.              Intermediate.             Moderate.             Not at all.
                                   This is a problem     I have experienced     It is not a relevant      I have never
                                 that I see frequently      this problem         factor, although        had this kind of
                                                             sometimes             it does happen          experience



                               Within boardrooms, individual biases seldom occur in isolation. When people are grouped
                               together, biases can be intensified and may expand to become group biases. The dynamics
                               of the group can become more complex or, eventually, even ineffective. Below are some of
                               the group biases most frequently reported on boards.

10   ISSUE 39
     Private Sector Opinion
Herd behavior. In general, herd behavior occurs in a group when one person believes that
he or she has less information than the others. Therefore, the person is influenced by the
opinion of the majority and expresses the same opinion as his or her peers without giving
the matter proper consideration.

Groupthink. In overly homogenous groups, groupthink is a tendency to avoid conflict
and reach consensus no matter what, which may lead to the suppression of dissenting
opinions and can cause groups to lean toward conformity in perceptions and attitudes,
even when those perceptions and attitudes are wrong.

False consensus. False consensus happens when people tend to overestimate the extent to
which their opinions, beliefs, preferences, values, and habits are normal and accepted by
others (that is, that others also think the same way they do). This cognitive bias tends to
lead to the perception of a consensus that does not exist—a “false consensus.”

In-group favoritism. This bias reveals a pattern of favoring members who belong to a certain
group as opposed to those who do not. This can be seen in a board when a certain subgroup
of directors (such as insiders or members of the board elected by a certain shareholder) tend
to prefer proposals from their own group instead of analyzing all propositions without bias.
This can also be expressed in the evaluation of others, in the allocation of resources, and in
the rejection of certain issues.

Self-cause bias. This is the tendency to attribute success to internal actors and to blame
any failures on external factors or third parties. This bias can limit the director’s ability to
see the real facts that are causing a problem.

In our survey, we asked directors, “How frequently do you observe the following phenomena
during the board’s decision-making process?” Then the survey provided a brief description
of each of the cognitive biases listed above. Figure 7 presents the results.


Figure 7: Decision Making and Bias Perception




         74%               65%                59%                56%               52%




                                                                 40%               40%
                           27%                35%
         23%

         3%                 8%                 6%                4%                 8%
        Herd               Group             False            Favoritism          Bias in
       behavior           thinking         consensus            within             own
                                                              the group           cause

               Frequent or very frequent         Less frequent          Never

                                                                                                                  ISSUE 39   11
                                                                                                   Private Sector Opinion
                              We also noted that the survey revealed an apparent contradiction: the less experienced
                              directors were more aware of the biases. Directors with less than five years’ experience on
                              boards tended to point out cognitive biases more frequently than directors with more than
                              20 years’ experience did. This result might lack statistical robustness, but it may indicate
                              that younger or less experienced directors are less prone to habit or attenuation biases, both
                              of which are situational biases, and that such directors may have a fresher and more critical
                              view of boards.


                              What Directors Admit They Did Wrong
                              Directors—as any other decision makers in companies—make mistakes. We asked directors
                              to look back at their own performance and consider the main factors that caused them to
                              make bad decisions. The specific question in the survey was, “Choose up to three causes
                              that resulted in a decision that in hindsight you consider a mistake (in a particular board
                              situation).” It was possible to choose more than one alternative from the list provided, so
                              the sample of 102 respondents produced 197 answers.

                              The factor cited most often (17 percent of total answers) was an excessive reliance on
                              executives, which reassures us about the relevance of the oversight role that boards perform.

                              The answer that received the second-highest number of votes was “I let myself be pressed
                              for time and urgency imposed by others.” When directors lack sufficient time to analyze
                              their alternatives properly, they may exacerbate both individual and group cognitive biases
                              that jeopardize decision making.

                              The answer that ranked third was, “I was influenced by others who underestimated risks
                              and costs,” which alludes to groupthink and in-group favoritism, in addition to other
                              situational biases.

                                                            The other answers directors mentioned also indicate a lack of
                                                            adequate assessment of risks and costs and insufficient depth
      The mistake-causing factor cited
                                                            of analysis. Overall, the main sources of bad decision making
      most often was an excessive reliance
                                                            are associated with 1) overconfidence, 2) being influenced by
      on executives, which reinforces the
                                                            others, and 3) lack of proper analysis (risks, costs, and so on).
      relevance of a board’s oversight role.                Figure 8 shows the seven main factors that cause directors to
                                                            make wrong decisions.




12   ISSUE 39
     Private Sector Opinion
Figure 8: What Directors Admit They Do Wrong

    I relied too much on propositions suggested                                                       17%
                           by executive officers

              I let myself be pressed for time and
                       urgency imposed by others                                             13%


   I was influenced by others who intentionally
                                                                                       11%
                 underestimated risks and costs

                    I didn't properly evaluate all the
                                                                                      10%
                              context of the decision

  I overestimated my knowledge of the subject
                                                                                 9%
      and/or I didn't look into it deeply enough

     I relied on the neutrality of other directors/                              8%
                      I trusted in their judgment

  My decision was very conservative (risk-averse)                                8%




Conflicts of Interest
Aside from honest mistakes, various conflicts of interest may lead directors to make
decisions that are not in the company’s best interest. We asked, “In certain situations,
do you ask yourself if the other director’s motivation is really the best alternative for the
company or if he or she has another reason that is directing his or her behavior? What
were the most frequent causes that prevented them from acting in the best interests of the
company?” Figure 9 shows the percentages of the answers.


Figure 9: Reasons for Not Acting in the Company’s Best Interests

                                                                         6%                    5%
                               26%                  20%                                        8%
      35%                                                                26%


                                                    37%                                       48%
                               30%

      37%
                                                                         50%


                               36%                  34%
                                                                                              39%
      22%
                                                                        18%
       6%                      8%                   9%
  Not to affect        Concern in relation     Not to affect            Not to            Not to affect
 social ties with         to his/her own      social ties with       affect trade         business with
   controlling         reputationis greater       relevant          relationships      another company
  shareholders           than in relation       shareholders                              where he or
                        to the company's                                              she is also a director
                           reputation                                                     or executive


             Very frequent               Frequent                Less frequent               Never


                                                                                                                              ISSUE 39   13
                                                                                                               Private Sector Opinion
                              Respondents most frequently chose “not to affect social ties with controlling shareholders”
                              to explain why directors do not act in the company’s best interests. This result is consistent
                              with the typical Brazilian ownership structure, in which ownership is heavily concentrated
                              among just a few controlling shareholders (as opposed to the situation found in the United
                              States, where the dispersed ownership structure is much more common). The third answer
                              (social ties with relevant shareholders) is also associated with the same evidence.

                              Other alternatives are linked to the director’s reputation and relationships with another
                              business. About 56 percent of directors point out that frequently or very frequently their
                              colleagues’ concern for their own reputation (rather than the company’s) has prevented
                              them from acting in the company’s best interests.


                              What Keeps Directors Awake at Night?
                              Our survey investigated the main causes of persistent concern among the directors. We
                              asked, “Thinking generally about your experience on boards, what kind of question or
                              situation has kept you awake at night?” The top responses were poor corporate governance
                              practices, inappropriate chief executive officers, and unfavorable economic conditions.
                              Corruption, a very topical subject in corporate circles nowadays in Brazil, was selected by
                              fewer than 5 percent of directors. The top 9 (out of 13) answers account for 87 percent of
                              the total and are shown in Figure 10.


                              Figure 10: Top Issues That Keep Directors Awake at Night


                                       Poor corporate
                                  governance practices                                                                 16%

                                    Inappropriate CEO                                                     13%

                                        Unfavorable                                                11%
                                  economic conditions
                                     Relationship with                                            10%
                                          stakeholders

                               Issues related to people                                          10%

                                      Corporate deals                                       9%
                                      (including M&A)
                                       Inadequate risk                                 8%
                                         management
                                    Persistently poor                             7%
                                company performance
                                            Corruption                 4%


                              Here, again, independence plays an important role in the perception of directors’ concerns.
                              In seven of the top nine answers, independent directors exhibited a higher level of
                              concern in our survey than non-independent directors did. Regarding the relationship
                              with stakeholders, for example, more than twice as many independent directors as non-
                              independent directors indicated distress. Figure 11 breaks down percentages of responses
                              by independent and non-independent directors.




14   ISSUE 39
     Private Sector Opinion
Figure 11: Top Issues That Keep Directors Awake at Night —Independent
versus Non-Independent Directors

                                                                                13%
       Unfavorable economic conditions
                                                                     9%

                                                                               13%
          Relationship with stakeholders
                                                           5%

                                                                           12%
    Poor corporate governance practices
                                                                                      16%

                                                                          11%
                       Inappropriate CEO
                                                                         11%

                                                                     10%
                  Issues related to people
                                                                     9%

                                                                   9%
 Persistently poor company performance
                                                              7%

                                                                   9%
        Corporate deals (including M&A)
                                                              7%

                                                              6%
                     Reputation problems
                                                        4%

                                                             6%
            Inadequate risk management
                                                                         11%

                                                 Independent Directors
                                                 Non-Independent Directors




When Directors’ Behavior Threatens Proper Board Functioning
With the next questions, our survey focused on the functioning characteristics of the board,
aiming to investigate how the interactions between directors influence their decisions.
We asked, “What are the behavioral elements that have the greatest negative effect on
the proper functioning of the board?” Responses suggest that
corporate governance problems may have a negative impact,          Independent directors exhibited a
with 58 percent of the respondents saying that directors who       higher level of concern than non-
are not adequately prepared for meetings “significantly disturb”   independent directors do.
the proper functioning of the board. Also, 56 percent say that a
bossy chairman, who doesn’t accept different views, harms the
proper functioning of the board.

“Directors who don’t listen” is listed as the third main cause restricting the board’s ability
to function properly. The list also mentions other behaviors, such as “directors who text
during meetings” and “directors who talk too much.” This is particularly interesting,
because it highlights the importance of behavioral aspects in the success of the board. Of
course, technical aspects, such as formal knowledge about a certain subject, are definitely
relevant, but directors’ contributions may be significantly diminished if the behavior inside
the board doesn’t create the correct atmosphere for a productive debate. Figure 12 shows
the full range of results.
                                                                                                                ISSUE 39   15
                                                                                                 Private Sector Opinion
                              Figure 12: Behavior—What Prevents the Board from Functioning Well
                                    1%                             2%                            3%
                                    4%             6%                             6%                               5%              10%           8%             5%
                                                                  12%
                                                   8%
                                                                                 18%             22%              19%                                          18%
                                                                                                                                   22%           27%
                                    37%
                                                   30%
                                                                  41%

                                                                                 37%             38%              43%
                                                                                                                                   42%
                                                                                                                                                               58%
                                                                                                                                                 44%

                                    58%
                                                   56%
                                                                  45%
                                                                                 39%             37%
                                                                                                                  33%                                          20%
                                                                                                                                   26%
                                                                                                                                                 21%


                               Directors who   Chairman who     Directors      Directors       Directors        Executives    Directors who Executives         Overly
                                  are not      doesn't accept   who don't      who talk       who aren't        who react      text during (indirectly) run   optimistic
                                adequately       different       listen        too much    straightforward        badly         meetings     the meeting      executives
                               prepared for       views
                                 meetings
                                                                      Don't disturb    Disturb a little      Disturb         Disturb a lot




                              The Role of the Chairman
                              Strong business leaders, such as the chairmen of boards, can create an atmosphere of
                              pressure and unease during meetings. According to KFMC (2015) research, 98 percent
                              of chairmen had previous experience as chief executive officers. This background is
                              usually associated with firm, autocratic professionals, often with strong personalities and a
                              tendency to impose their views. When the chairman of the board is excessively dominant,
                              the quality of board discussions may be diminished and may not reach the level of depth
                              that is necessary for a correct conclusion.

                              We asked, “In your experience with different chairmen, how do you evaluate the effectiveness
                              of them, regarding the following activities?” Then we listed the activities shown in Figure
                              13. Balancing the different views and leading the meetings in such a way as to ensure good
                              and in-depth discussion is one of the roles of a chairman. Our survey confirms that there
                              is room for improvement in this regard, especially when it comes to defining an effective
                              board agenda. Of the directors participating in the survey, 36 percent suggested that the
                              chairman was not really effective in accomplishing this task.


                              Figure 13: Chairman—Room for Improvement

                                                         28%                     25%                      24%                      23%



                                                                                 49%                      40%
                                                         53%                                                                       52%



                                                                                 21%                      31%                      24%
                                                         15%
                                                         4%                      5%                       5%                        1%
                                                     Conducting               Ensuring               Planning                Considering the
                                                      meetings                 good                 effectively              individual views
                                                     effectively             governance           board's annual              of the directors
                                                                                                      agenda
                                                         Very effective       Effective      Somewhat effective                Not effective

16   ISSUE 39
     Private Sector Opinion
Conclusion: Research Findings and Actual
Experience
Results of this research are in line with the professional experience of the authors. For
example, we were not surprised that directors chose as their main concerns merger and
acquisition transactions, chief executive officer hiring and dismissal, and ownership
transactions. The risk level and impact involved in such decisions are usually very high,
and the decisions themselves are often enmeshed in a web of uncertainty.

Equally unsurprising is that board directors are not always right in their calls, and that—
when asked whether they would have taken a different approach regarding their hardest
decisions—only 24 percent of the directors admitted that they would. Why no surprise?
According to what one of us, Sandra, has observed in boardrooms, for directors to admit
that they would have taken a different approach after knowing the result of their decisions
would be to assume they have not done their best. This level of candor is not commonly
found in boardrooms—or in our research, where only about a quarter of directors owned
up to having regrets.

The reasons behind directors’ regrets mostly centered on overconfidence in executives’
propositions, insufficient time for analysis, and lack of in-depth reasoning, which agrees
with Sandra’s own experience serving on different boards. However, directors admitting
to being risk-averse and having overestimated their own knowledge as main causes for
their regrets is a surprising fact, since overconfidence seems to prevail in boards. The board
environment fosters overconfidence, as directors’ individual limitations are not mitigated.
For directors, the willingness to question the facts and their own certainty is just as
important a tool as knowledge and experience are.

Also not surprising was the finding that independence and gender are factors that affect the
behavior of directors. This research found that both characteristics influence how directors
see their own decisions and how much they regret their mistakes. As in actual boardrooms,
self-declared independent directors in our survey tended to find it harder to deal with
subjects that encompass such big responsibilities as hiring or dismissing a chief executive
officer, entering into mergers or acquisitions, or handling ownership transactions and
judicial recovery. However, the questions remain: Why do they consider those decisions
harder than their non-independent peers do? Is it because they act more responsibly
toward all stakeholders? Or do they face more difficulties precisely because, as independent
members, they lack access to information or to the right actors in the decision process? This
is something that remains to be investigated.

The influence of gender is much more difficult to observe, because boardrooms are not
yet sufficiently diverse—and not only in Brazil, by the way. Despite the progress in many
countries—and even where the percentage of women is higher—it is still far from full
parity. In Brazil particularly, women are still rara avis in boardrooms. In the great majority
of Brazilians boards that Sandra served on, she was the only woman, and in the rare
exceptions, generally it was only one other and in a single case two other women peers.
In one special case she did serve on an international board where 5 out of 12 directors
were women, but we should note that it was an organization where the core activity was
corporate governance.



                                                                                                                ISSUE 39   17
                                                                                                 Private Sector Opinion
                              The findings that women are more prone to assume that they would have done something
                              differently, now that they know the outcomes of their decisions, are consistent with Sandra’s
                              observations that the behavior of women may be more anchored by a sense of duty and
                              responsibility above all than that of men. Also, the ego factor, so common in boardrooms,
                              seems to be less pervasive with women directors. However, this conclusion has to be viewed
                              with caution, because it is based on a subjective interpretation.

                              Nevertheless, this perception is bolstered by anecdotal evidence from an experienced
                              board director in family-owned companies in Brazil. In an interview, this male director
                              described a conflict situation between the board and the chief executive officer. According
                              to him, the board was overreacting to an attitude of the executive—much more because of
                              their egos than because of what the chief executive officer had actually done. The director
                              commented, “It is important to have a good quantity of women on boards, as they are
                              not so much influenced by the ego. A woman director may be opposed one, two, or three
                              times, and she will simply go ahead, focused on the topic and not on her own ego. A man
                              has more difficulty in accepting that another man is opposing him, and then his ego may
                              enter the scene as part of the equation.”

                              Our findings regarding conflicts of interest also align with our own observations.
                              Sandra’s experience in boards of companies with concentrated ownership in the hands of
                              controlling owners confirms that a major reason for conflict of interest is the directors’
                              desire to preserve social ties with controlling shareholders and other relevant shareholders.
                              The prevailing culture does not support board members’ challenging or contradicting the
                              controlling owners. The Brazilian culture, in particular, tends to avoid conflict instead of
                              dealing directly with it. In addition, the aura of the power of ownership—and that it is the
                              controlling owner who elects the directors—also establishes an environment susceptible to
                              this sort of conflict of interest.

                                                        For all the reasons discussed above, diverse thinking does not
      “The elephant in the room” has been               always prevail in boardrooms, as directors may have biases
      underestimated for too long.                      that prevent the diverse vision from arising. In closed groups
                                                        such as a board of directors, some directors are prone to be
                                                        influenced by the comments and views of others. Pick and
                                                        Merchant (2010) cite excess conformity as a problem that
                          emerges in overly homogeneous groups. The lack of diversity and contradictory opinions
                          results in an excessive cohesion, which may lead directors to approve decisions that they
                          will later regret—whether they admit it or not.

                              There is a long road ahead to increase the boards’ awareness of “the elephant in the room”:
                              the behavioral aspects and the effects of cognitive bias on the working of the board. Perhaps
                              this elephant has been underestimated for too long. Understanding biases, blind spots, and
                              pathologies that may represent pitfalls for boards is the first step toward mitigating them
                              and improving decision making as well as the board’s supervisory role. The chairman has a
                              pivotal role in leading the board to such understanding and can benefit importantly from
                              taking these aspects into account when leading the board. The black box enters now into a
                              new era that requires it to open itself to the fresh perspective of the behavioral lens—and
                              from that, start to rethink the working and functioning of the board.




18   ISSUE 39
     Private Sector Opinion
References
Arnott, David. 2006. Cognitive biases and decision support systems development: A
       design science approach. Information Systems Journal 16 (1): 55–78.

Charas, Solange. 2015. Improving corporate performance by enhancing team dynamics at
       the board level. International Journal of Disclosure and Governance 12 (2): 107–31.

Erhardt, Niclas L., James D. Werbel, and Charles B. Shrader. 2003. Board of director
       diversity and firm financial performance. Corporate Governance: An International
       Review 11 (2): 102–11.

Forbes, Daniel P., and Frances J. Milliken. 1999. Cognition and corporate governance:
        Understanding boards of directors as strategic decision-making groups. Academy of
        Management Review 24 (3): 489–505.

Hillman, Amy J., and Thomas Dalziel. 2003. Boards of directors and firm performance:
       Integrating agency and resource dependence perspectives. Academy of Management
       Review 28 (3): 383–96.

Huff, A. S., ed. 1990. Mapping Strategic Thought. Chichester, United Kingdom: John
       Wiley and Sons.

Huse, Morten. 2005. Corporate governance: Understanding important contingencies.
      Corporate Ownership & Control 2 (4): 41–50.

Jackson, S. E., V. K. Stone, and E. B. Alvarez. 1993. Socialization amidst diversity: The
       impact of demographics on work team oldtimers and newcomers. In Research in
       Organizational Behavior, Volume 15, B. M. Staw and L. L. Cummings, eds. New
       York: JAI Press. 45–109.

Kahneman, Daniel. 2011. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Macmillan.

KFMC. 2015. The Korn Ferry Market Cap 100: Governance Changes at the Top 100 US
     Companies by market Capitalization. Washington, D.C.: Korn Ferry Institute.
     http://www.kornferry.com/institute/the-korn-ferry-market-cap-100-governance-
     changes-at-the-top-100-us-companies-by-market-capitalization.

Nutt, P. C. 1986. Decision styles and strategic decisions of top executives. Technological
        Forecasting and Social Change 30: 39–62.

Pearce, J. A. II, and S. A. Zahra. 1992. Board composition from a strategic contingency
        perspective. Journal of Management Studies 29: 411–39.

Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1972. Size and composition of corporate boards of directors: The organization
         and environment. Administrative Science Quarterly 17 (2): 218–29.




                                                                                                                 ISSUE 39   19
                                                                                                  Private Sector Opinion
                                                           Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1973. Size, composition and function of hospital boards
                                                                    of directors: A study of organization-environment linkage.
                                                                    Administrative Science Quarterly 18: 349–64.

                                                           Pfeffer, Jeffrey, and Gerald R. Salancik. 1978. The External Control of
                                                                    Organizations: A Resource Dependence Perspective. New York: Harper
                                                                    & Row.

                                                           Pick, Katharina, and Kenneth A. Merchant. 2010. Blind Spots, Biases, and
                                                                  Other Pathologies in the Boardroom. New York: Business Expert Press.

                                                           Rindova, V. P. 1999. What corporate boards have to do with strategy: A
                                                                 cognitive perspective. Journal of Management Studies 36 (7): 953–75.

                                                           Torchia, Mariateresa, Andrea Calabrò, and Michèle Morner. 2015. Board
                                                                  of directors’ diversity, creativity, and cognitive conflict: The role of
                                                                  board members’ interaction. International Studies of Management &
                                                                  Organization 45 (1): 6–24.

                                                           Vafeas, Nikos. 1999. Board meeting frequency and firm performance. Journal
                                                                   of Financial Economics 53 (1): 113–42.

© Copyright 2017. All rights reserved.                     Zald, M. N. 1969. The power and functions of boards of directors: A
International Finance Corporation
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW,
                                                                  theoretical synthesis. American Journal of Sociology 74: 97–111.
Washington, DC 20433
The findings, interpretations and conclusions
expressed in this publication should not be
attributed in any manner to the International
Finance Corporation, to its affiliated organizations,
or to members of its board of Executive Directors
or the countries they represent. The International
Finance Corporation does not guarantee the
accuracy of the data included in this publication
and accepts no responsibility for any consequence
of their use.
The material in this work is protected by copyright.
Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this
work may be a violation of applicable law. The
International Finance Corporation encourages
dissemination of its work and hereby grants
permission to users of this work to copy portions
for their personal, noncommercial use, without
any right to resell, redistribute or create derivative
works there from. Any other copying or use of
this work requires the express written permission
of the International Finance Corporation. For
permission to photocopy or reprint, please send a
request with complete information to:
The International Finance Corporation c/o the
World Bank Permissions Desk,
Office of the Publisher, 1818 H Street, NW,              OUR DONOR PARTNER
Washington, DC, 20433
All queries on rights and licenses including
subsidiary rights should be addressed to:
The International Finance Corporation c/o the
Office of the Publisher, World Bank, 1818 H Street,
NW, Washington DC, 20433; fax (202) 522-2422.




                                                         2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW   Telephone:	+1 (202) 458 8097    cgsecretariat@ifc.org
                                                         Washington, DC 20433 U.S.A.    Facsimile:	 +1 (202) 974 4800   www.ifc.org/corporategovernance
