EVENT REPORT - June 2017
                                             Acknowledgements
We would like to extend our utmost gratitude to the Government of Kenya, particularly Cabinet Secretary Dr. Fred
Matiang’i, his technical advisor Dr. Florah Karimi, and their team for co-hosting the PASET Forum. We appreciate
their support and warm hospitality throughout the planning and organization of the event. We would also like to
express our thanks to the participating Ministers and delegations from Burkina Faso, Ethiopia, Ghana, Guinea,
Mauritania, Nigeria, and Rwanda, as well as representatives from Benin, Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Democratic
Republic of Congo, The Gambia, Mali, Mozambique, Senegal, Tanzania, Togo, and Zambia. We are also grateful to
our colleagues in the World Bank office in Nairobi for their tireless efforts in supporting the organization of this
Forum and making it a success; members of the PASET Consultative Advisory Group for facilitating and moderating
discussions during the Forum; and the Ministry of Strategy and Finance of Korea, Korea Development Institute,
and the Ministry of Finance of China for financing the logistical expenses of the conference through the Korea
Trust Fund and the China Trust Fund.

We would also like to extend our sincerest appreciation to all the speakers, particularly those from PASET’s partner
countries including Korea, China, India, Brazil and Malaysia, and other international institutions for sharing their
knowledge and experiences with us, and to the exhibitors who displayed their innovations during the conference.
And last but not least, we are grateful to all the participants who took the time to attend the conference, and
added tremendous value to the Forum.
                                      List of Acronyms


AAS       African Academy of Sciences
AAU       Association of African Universities
ACE       Africa Center of Excellence
ASET      Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology
CAAP      Country ASET Action Plan
ICT       Information, Communication and Technology
KDI       Korea Development Institute
KPI       Key Performance Indicators
KSP       Knowledge Sharing Program
NSDS      National Skills Development Strategy
PASET     Partnership for skills in Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology
R&D       Research and Development
RSIF      Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund
SDG       Sustainable Development Goal
SSA       Sub-Saharan Africa
STI       Science, Technology and Innovation
TVET      Technical and Vocational Education and Training
UoN-STP   University of Nairobi – Science and Technology Park
                                                                         Table of Contents
1.         Introduction ........................................................................................................................................................1
2.         Objectives of the Forum .....................................................................................................................................1
3.         Forum Participants .............................................................................................................................................1
4.         Format of the Program .......................................................................................................................................1
5.         Key Takeaways from the Forum .........................................................................................................................1
EVENT PROCEEDINGS.................................................................................................................................................4
     I.       Day 1 – PASET Regional Level Activities and Partnerships .....................................................................4
           Session 1 – PASET Overview and Progress .........................................................................................................4
           Session 2 – Opening Ceremony ..........................................................................................................................5
           Session 3 – PASET as a Pan-African Platform .....................................................................................................6
           Session 4 – PASET and Private Sector Collaboration ..........................................................................................7
           Session 5 – Voices from Youth on Skills Development and Jobs ........................................................................7
           Session 6 – Country Highlights on Skills Demand and Supply ............................................................................9
           Session 7 – International Perspectives on Innovative Policy in ASET Skills Development (Session 1) ............ 10
           Welcome Dinner .............................................................................................................................................. 11
     II.      Day 2 – Innovations in ASET Skills Development Policy and Practice ................................................... 13
           Session 8 – Future of Skills .............................................................................................................................. 13
           Session 9 – International Perspectives on Innovative Policy in ASET Skills Development (Session 2) ............ 13
           Session 10 - Innovation in ASET Skills Development ....................................................................................... 14
           Session 11 – Exhibitor Presentations .............................................................................................................. 15
           Session 12 – Parallel Sessions .......................................................................................................................... 17
           Ministers Meeting ........................................................................................................................................... 19
     III. Day 3 – Way Forward ........................................................................................................................ 21
           Session 13 – Presentation on Country ASET Action Plans ............................................................................... 21
           Session 14 – Way Forward............................................................................................................................... 21
           Session 15 – Closing Remarks .......................................................................................................................... 22
ANNEX 1: PASET Forum Agenda ............................................................................................................................. 24
ANNEX 2: PARTICIPANT LIST................................................................................................................................... 28
ANNEX 3: Exhibitors ................................................................................................................................................ 37
    1. Introduction
On April 5-7, 2017, the 4th PASET Forum on “Partnership and Innovation for Skills Development in Africa” was
jointly hosted by the Government of Kenya and the World Bank in Nairobi, Kenya, to share experiences, knowledge
and strategies on skills development in Africa. A knowledge exchange initiative by the Partnership for skills in
Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (PASET), the Forum convened governments from Sub-Saharan
Africa, international policy makers, academia, and the private sector to promote dialogue and an exchange of
ideas. The event was inaugurated by the Deputy President of Kenya, His Excellency William Ruto, and included
participation at the highest level including education ministries from eight African countries and the Vice President
of Human Development from the World Bank, Mr. Keith Hansen. The conference built upon the interest generated
in PASET’s pan-African platform for education in Applied Sciences, Engineering and Technology (ASET) fields since
its first Forum in Dakar, Senegal in 2014.

    2. Objectives of the Forum
The 4th PASET Forum focused on building partnerships between diverse stakeholders and promoting innovation
in skills development in Africa. In particular, the objectives of the event were to: (i) mobilize support amongst
African countries, private sector, new and traditional donors for PASET objectives and regional initiatives, (ii) share
experience from SSA countries and Partner countries in approaches/strategies/plans to developing technical-
scientific capability specifically on technical-vocational education, and (iii) share innovations in improving the
quality of ASET programs for the technical-vocational level.

    3. Forum Participants
Approximately 240 delegates representing a variety of sectors participated in the Forum. This included
government delegates from 19 Sub-Saharan African countries, including Ministers of Educations from eight
countries, high-level officials from partner countries such as Korea, China, India, Brazil and Malaysia, and
representatives from the private sector, research organizations, foundations, universities and TVET institutions.
PASET’s Board, Executive Committee and Consultative Advisory Group members as well as the World Bank
education specialists also participated and led several sessions at the Forum.

    4. Format of the Program
The Forum was held over 2.5 days with sessions and panels on diverse topics in the main plenary room. Over the
course of the Forum, participants also had an opportunity to view an exhibition on examples of commercialization
of research and innovation from African companies and universities, displaying new technologies for the 4th global
industrial revolution and innovative skills development programs in Africa.

    5. Key Takeaways from the Forum
Some of the key takeaways from the sessions, panels and discussions at the Forum included:

(i) African governments are interested in leveraging PASET for their countries’ technical-scientific skills
     development.
(ii) African governments have a keen interest in learning from other countries’ experiences in technological
     innovation and development, and the Forum was instrumental in providing such opportunities. Fast-
     developing economies such as Korea, India, China, Malaysia and Brazil are also willing to share their
     experiences and support African countries in this knowledge-exchange.


                                                          1
(iii) Lack of data on TVET and ASET skills development areas is a major challenge for African governments. Further
      support in this area is needed immediately to enable governments to develop evidence-based policy and
      strategy.
(iv) The global private sector is keenly interested in investing in skills development, innovation and
      entrepreneurship areas in Africa.
(v) Africa-based research and development (R&D) is still at a nascent stage. There is a need to prepare the talent
      base and university system in this area for further economic growth of the continent.




                                                        2
3
EVENT PROCEEDINGS
    I.      Day 1 – PASET Regional Level Activities and Partnerships
Session 1 – PASET Overview and Progress
The opening session of the 4th PASET Forum introduced PASET as a pan-African platform, its goals, and key
initiatives.




   PASET Overview and Progress: Prof. Aminata Sall Diallo, Executive Director of PASET Executive Committee
       o Africa is encountering a challenge where its qualified human capital is lower than its development
           needs. There is a need to produce a critical mass of skilled professionals in ASET fields in Africa.
       o PASET is an Africa-led regional initiative that builds technical and scientific capacity on the continent
           as a way to foster sustainable development and prosperity in Africa. It focuses on a full continuum of
           skills, from post-basic to tertiary and higher education in key sectors that are vital for growth.
       o Certain key principles guide PASET – its ownership by African governments and the private sector; its
           prioritization of high quality, transparency in operations, and efficiency in implementation; and focus
           on gender equality.
       o PASET focuses on three main areas of work – knowledge sharing, technical assistance to countries,
           and mobilization of financing – and fosters partnerships across all three areas with partner countries,
           especially from the global south, private sectors and partner institutions.

   Getting Korea Ready for 21st Economy: Dr. Joon-Kyung Kim, President of Korea Development Institute, PASET
    Board Member
       o Korea’s growth and development in the last century has been driven by policies that are export-
            oriented, market friendly, and focused on innovation in science and technical education.
       o Korea is at the forefront of the 4th Industrial Revolution, but it must promote a more agile economy
            and reinvest in human capital development to prepare for the technological challenges ahead. Human
            capital development is key to its economic future. STEM education is critical with investments into
            research capacity and skills in critical thinking, creativity, collaboration, and communications.
       o Korea Development Institute (KDI), the top think tank in Asia and globally for international
            development, has partnered with PASET since 2013 and supports a Knowledge Sharing Program (KSP)
            with the initiative’s member countries, as well as assisting them with planning, implementation and
            monitoring of policy reforms through cooperation programs in the future.




                                                        4
Session 2 – Opening Ceremony
The PASET Forum was declared open by the Deputy President of Kenya William Samoei Arap Ruto, who was
representing the President of Kenya. The World Bank Vice President, Keith Hansen also delivered opening
remarks.




   Mr. Keith Hansen, Vice President, Human Development Unit, The World Bank
        o Human capital is integral to ending poverty. To strengthen human capital in Africa, it is important to
            achieve the right skills mix.
        o PASET is an excellent framework to achieve scientific and technological advancement in key growth
            sectors in Africa as it is Africa-led, and brings together four elements: people, ideas, programs and
            resources.
        o Partnership with the private sector are key for higher education and skills development investments.
            The private sector can support Africa with both resources and technology and links between
            education and industry are crucial.
        o The World Bank is committed to supporting high quality skills training and is developing a new regional
            initiative called the Africa Regional Skills Development Project, beginning with East Africa.
   Dr. Fred Matiang’i, Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Education, Kenya
        o Achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) relies greatly on quality higher education
            which through teaching, innovation, research, community service and inter-generational transmission
            of knowledge can create a skilled human resource base.
        o Investment in higher education, specifically towards increasing student enrollment levels, can reduce
            the poverty levels in the SSA region. In addition, investments in Science, Technology, Engineering and
            Mathematics (STEM) areas in higher education as well as Technical Vocational Education and Training
            (TVET) will determine the development direction of the region.
   H.E. William Ruto, Deputy President of Kenya
        o Kenya, and Africa at large, have been hindered in their road to sustainable development due to
            insufficient skilled Kenyans and Africans to move up the value chain, and a mismatch in opportunities
            for those who do have skills. Education institutions must be more sensitive to the needs of the market
            and efforts must be made to gather data to help countries make informed decisions on the types of
            graduates needed in the market.
        o It is important to prioritize technical and vocational training. Kenya is making efforts in this direction
            having developed a competency-based education and training approach, investing in infrastructure
            and training equipment in TVET institutions, and integrating ICT and technology into TVET.



                                                         5
        o   Kenya is deeply engaged in developing higher education and TVET. It has partnered with the World
            Bank on the Africa Centers of Excellence project. It is also committed to PASET and will contribute $2
            million towards the Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund.

Session 3 – PASET as a Pan-African Platform
Ministers and representatives from three PASET member countries – Senegal, Rwanda and Ethiopia – highlighted
the role of science and technology in their countries’ development, the importance of regional approaches, and
PASET’s role as a regional initiative.




   Rwanda: Hon. Minister Papias Malimba Musafiri, Minister of Education
       o Rwanda approved a National Policy on Science Technology in 2005 to strengthen STEM education at
          all levels. This includes focusing on a competence-based system and technical and vocation training.
       o There is a great need to strengthen regional and international cooperation in science, technology and
          innovation (STI) between all countries so that policies and strategies for global sustainable
          development are influenced by the best practices and reliable data.
       o PASET can help Rwanda leverage south-south partnerships with countries like China, Korea and India
          as well as private sector support. Its initiatives like RSIF and the Regional TVET Centers of Excellence
          will help Rwanda develop a workforce with skills for priority sectors like agriculture, manufacturing,
          energy, ICT, health, transportation and tourism.
   Ethiopia: Hon. Minister Samuel Kifle Kidane, State Minister for Education
        o About 80 percent of graduates in Ethiopia are oriented towards humanities. They must be provided
            skills in the fields of science and technology to support development.
        o Africa’s population is growing and it has considerable natural resources that remain unexploited.
            Cooperation in the region through regional initiatives such as PASET can increase the continent’s
            prosperity.
   Senegal: Mr. Malick Sow, Secretary-General, Ministry of Higher Education and Research
       o Recognizing the importance of STI for economic growth, Senegal took several actions including the
           creation of a second university in Dakar for STEM education, Higher Institutes of Professional
           Education (ISEP) and construction of new scientific laboratories.
       o Senegal benefits from a platform such as PASET, through partnerships with countries like Korea with
           which it collaborates on the Knowledge Sharing Partnership, the scholarship fund, as well as initiatives
           like benchmarking.




                                                        6
Session 4 – PASET and Private Sector Collaboration
This session focused on how the private sector can benefit and contribute to PASET. The discussion focused on
the experience of the panel members’ return on investment, R&D, and the future perspective of their own
industry in Africa.




   Mr. Patrick M Karanja, Program Associate, The Rockefeller Foundation
        o Through the Rockefeller Foundation’s Digital Jobs Africa initiative, the Rockefeller Foundation has
            been conducting research on the youth employment training model in Africa, microwork initiative,
            and impact sourcing.
        o The foundation has set up and operated other such large-scale programs and has seen a positive
            impact. They are customized for and aim to innovate for the local environment.
   Dr. Katherine Getao, ICT Secretary, Government of Kenya
        o The Government of Kenya is trying to establish a R&D enabled environment in Kenya by investing in
            research. Government investments in research are significant and include funding of research for the
            private sector.
        o The Government is open for research and will continue to grow its R&D investment.
   Dr. Evelyn Gitau, Program Manager, Grand Challenges Africa, African Academy of Sciences (AAS)
        o AAS supports scientists through providing research grants, training masters students, publishing
            research from African scientists, and organizing Young Scientists Conferences every year.
        o AAS is taking a leading role in driving forward funding of African science, from Africa.
   Dr. Eddine Sarroukh, Head, Philips Research
        o Philips has a lab in Africa to conduct R&D.
        o Philips will contribute a scholarship for 1 student for RSIF.
        o Philips employs 18 Kenyan scientists at their Nairobi Lab. They focus on primary care/health care.

Session 5 – Voices from Youth on Skills Development and Jobs
This session included five students selected from the Africa Centers of Excellence (ACEs) who spoke about their
current education pursuits and research, their motivations for pursuing ASET education, implications of their work
for Africa’s future in skills development, and their ambitions and goals for the future.




                                                        7
   Mr. Wallace Thoya Baya, Masters student, agricultural applied economics, Egerton University, Kenya
        o There is a gender imbalance bachelor’s and master’s programs focusing on agricultural policy.
        o Labor mobility between countries is an issue and must be recognized. Fluid mobility of professionals
           across the different countries is important for technology to spread more easily.
   Mr. Ghafi Kondi Akara, PhD student of Climate System and Renewable Energy, University of Felix Houphouet-
    Boigny, Cote d’Ivoire
        o The future of jobs and skills in Africa lies in research and engineering for sectors like energy, industry
            and transport, and environmental public health. Financing for the energy sector must increase to
            support the work that is integral for development and to encourage youth to study renewable energy.
        o Girls should be motivated to work in technology fields, especially at the secondary school level.
   Mr. Ekemini Bassey Ituen, Doctoral Fellow, Institute of Petroleum Studies, University of Port Harcourt, Nigeria
        o Africa has a large number of early career researchers who can fast-track PASET’s objectives for
           development of ASET in Africa. However, they lack a functional research ecosystem and facilities
           which limit their output. African governments should create a functional research ecosystem that can
           support Africa’s sustainable development.
        o Global south-south partnerships should be encouraged. Ekemini’s fellowship at the China University
           of Petroleum was immensely helpful, exposing him to state-of-the-art equipment he was unfamiliar
           with and new approaches.
   Ms. Marlise Montcho, Telecom Engineer and PhD Student, University of Abomey
        o One of Africa’s biggest weaknesses is the lack of data. The advent of mobile networks has introduced
            large amounts of information now that can be used to make forecasts in various fields although rural
            areas continue to be sparsely covered by mobile phones.
        o Africa’s strength is its young and growing population who can be its change makers. This active force
            must be supported in terms of education, training, and access to employment and entrepreneurship
            to transform the continent’s economic dynamics.
        o Effort must be made to strengthen the network between researchers at university centers and partner
            universities to support knowledge exchange.
   Mr. Dickson Otieno, Masters student, Agri-Enterprise and Development, Egerton University, Kenya
        o It is important to provide students with opportunities to put their research to use to productively
            support skills development.
        o In order to become job creators, youth need to be aggressive and innovative. Youth-led consultancies
            can provide training on business plans, agribusiness clinics, baseline surveys, entrepreneurship, etc.
        o To keep pace with global agribusiness trends, it is critical to expand production systems, increase
            information flow, build greater coordination along the value chain, and recognize food safety, product
            origins and animal welfare.


                                                         8
Session 6 – Country Highlights on Skills Demand and Supply
Ministers of Education and country representatives from seven SSA countries shared their perspectives on their
priority industries, main challenges in skills development, their innovative and effective initiative on skills
development and their vision and next steps for skills development in the next five years.




   Nigeria: Hon. Minister Anthony Gozie Anwukah, Minister of State for Education
        o The Government of Nigeria introduced entrepreneurship training, and about 20 years ago developed
            specialized universities for vocational education.
        o Partnerships must extend beyond the relocation of international companies and sharing of
            international experiences.
   Mauritania: Hon. Minister Sidi Salem Mohamed El Abd, Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research
       o It is challenging to reach a critical mass of skilled personnel if the primary school completion rate is
           only 50 percent. It is also difficult to mobilize funding for research and innovation.
       o Seventy percent of students in Mauritania are pursuing humanities. Reforms need to focus around
           promoting STEM education with the help of preparatory classes.
   Ghana: Hon. Minister Matthew Opoku-Prempeh, Minister of Education
       o Ghana faces a high dropout rate at the primary education level and gender disparity. There is also a
           lack of standardization in trainings, particularly an absence of certification.
       o More attention should be given to technical and vocational training with an effort to engage
           employers.
       o The country should also support professional training to move from agriculture to agri-business.
           Korea’s experience over the last few decades can serve as an inspiration for emerging economies.
   Guinea: Hon. Minister Abdoulaye Yero Balde, Minister of Higher Education and Scientific Research
       o Guinea encounters challenges with respect to training and sustaining its human capital. Universities
           need to be strengthened and there is need for greater alignment between training and employment.
       o Good governance can improve the quality of education and training.
   Burkina Faso: Hon. Minister Alkassoum Maiga, Minister of Higher Education, Scientific Research and
    Innovation
        o Challenges in skills development include strengthening vocational training to meet the economy’s
            needs and improving skills of the informal sector which constitutes over 70 percent of the Burkina
            Faso’s urban working population.
        o Passion for science must be instilled at an early age. Secondary school students should be encouraged
            to pursue TVET and receive applied training in the industry in priority sectors such as agriculture,
            mining, energy, health, infrastructure and tourism.
                                                       9
        o   The goal is for Burkina Faso to have better quality higher education and training in line with market
            needs, more research and innovation to support structural transformation of the economy, and
            employment and social protection for all, especially youth and women.
   Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC): Prof. Andre Shikayi, Director of Cabinet, Ministry of Vocational Training,
    Trades and Crafts (representing Hon. Minister Guy Mikulu Pombo)
        o DRC needs a labor force that is trained to work in Africa. Students in elementary school are not getting
            a quality education and secondary schools do not provide sufficient skills. In addition, graduates
            continue to be unemployed. The system also needs better governance and funding for ASET
            education.
        o Quality assurance in education and a national qualification and certification framework can help
            address challenges in skills development.

Session 7 – International Perspectives on Innovative Policy in ASET Skills Development (Session 1)
During this session, representatives from India, Brazil and China shared their experiences and policies for ASET
Skills development and implementation.




   India: Dr. Sunita Chhibba, Senior Adviser & Director General, Ministry of Skill Development and
    Entrepreneurship, Government of India
        o India’s national skills qualification framework is a nationally-integrated competency-based framework
            that organizes qualifications in 10 levels for knowledge, skills and aptitude. Qualifications are
            benchmarked to Australia and UK standards.
        o “Skill India Mission” aims to train 400 million youth by 2022. It complements the “Digital India
            Mission” which targets a digitally empowered society and the “Make in India Mission” which enhances
            manufacturing through investments and innovation.
        o India’s National Labor Market Information System looks to generate critical analytics and trends for
            the skills development ecosystem in the country.
        o India has knowledge sharing initiatives with Bhutan, Bangladesh, Malawi, Tanzania and Iran so far.
   Brazil: Ms. Tatiana Farah de Mello, International Relations Unit, SENAI – The Brazilian National Service for
    industrial Training
        o Brazil decided early on that TVET is a bridge to the market. Enrollments in TVET at the high-school
             level have increased 106.5% between 2008 and 2015, and 10.1% from 2014 to 2015.
        o Innovation Institutes of SENAI, a private TVET provider, serve as a link between national universities,
             startups, industry, government, and international institutions. $15 million is invested each year to
             deliver the best product.
        o SENAI works in over 40 countries, promoting south-south cooperation through customized solutions.

                                                        10
   China: Dr. Yan Wang, Senior Specialist, National Institute of Educational Sciences, China
        o There are four types of vocational education institutions in China – primary vocational, secondary
            vocational, tertiary vocational and universities of applied sciences. Seventy-five percent of TVET
            financing is from governments while the rest comes from fees, other incomes and contributions.
        o The central government sets the direction for TVET, policy goals, and targets while the local and
            provincial governments can adjust targets accordingly but are responsible for financing and
            implementation.
        o China is yet to develop its national qualifications guidelines for TVET, though there do exist pathways
            between academic and TVET tracks and between secondary and tertiary TVET.
        o Some recent innovative experiments have taken place including the transformation of college into
            University of Applied Sciences.

Welcome Dinner
Day 1 concluded with a welcome dinner and cultural show hosted by the Government of Kenya. The Hon. Cabinet
Secretary for Education of Kenya, Dr. Fred Matiang’i and the World Bank Vice President, Keith Hansen addressed
the PASET Forum participants and encouraged them to use the dinner and Forum as an opportunity to interact
with each other and form valuable networks.




                                                       11
12
    II.     Day 2 – Innovations in ASET Skills Development Policy and Practice
Session 8 – Future of Skills
Mr. Charles Leadbeater, an acclaimed author, made a thought-provoking presentation on the future of skills,
focusing on the theme of “more, better, different.”




   Mr. Charles Leadbeater, Author
        o We need children to be in school longer. More learning from better teachers, in better schools is also
           needed. We need that “more” first and before “better.” Yet this takes a long time and requires a lot
           of resources. Quantity over quality also leads to demotivation, wastage, failure and drop out.
        o In this world, children need to learn how to find, frame, and solve problems and not just to follow
           instructions. Doing things differently can help achieve more and better at the same time.
        o The four main ingredients for learning to solve problems are: (i) the ability to acquire, use, blend, test
           knowledge based on strong basic skills, (ii) agency to form a sense of purpose, make a plan and then
           make a difference to the world, (iii) Personal growth to learn persistence and resilience, and (iv)
           collaboration to work with others to create better solutions.

Session 9 – International Perspectives on Innovative Policy in ASET Skills Development (Session 2)
During this second session on international perspectives, representatives from Malaysia and China shared their
knowledge, experience and policies for ASET Skills development and implementation.




   Malaysia: Dr. Mohd Gazali Abas, Director, National Institute of Public Administration
       o The Eleventh Malaysia Plan looks to transform TVET to meet industry demand. Sixty percent of the
           1.5 million jobs to be created during the 11th Plan will require TVET-related skills and TVET will be a
           catalyst for producing high-skilled workers.

                                                        13
        o   The government plays an active role in TVET and allocates at least $400 million annually in
            government funding to 450 public TVET institutes.
        o   The Malaysian Qualification Agency was established in 2007 to develop and regulate the Malaysian
            Qualification Framework.
        o   In order to address current and future industry needs, it is important to select the right key
            performance indicators (KPIs) to incentivize public institutions, have quality data, promote more
            outcome-based funding, and produce quality graduates.
   China: Prof. Huibo Zhang, President, Ningbo Polytechnic
        o TVET is an important pillar for social and economic development, a driving force to boost the socio-
            economic level and a key cornerstone for industry upgrading and structure optimization.
        o Ningbo Polytechnic uses an integrated approach in TVET operations by collaborating with government,
            industry, trade unions, and municipality.
        o To support multi-dimensional practices, Ningbo Polytechnic has a multi-layered platform that
            supports industry-education collaboration, vocational education research, and training through China
            Aid.

Session 10 - Innovation in ASET Skills Development
Presenters from the private sector, education institutions and organizations shared their experiences on
integrating creativity and new technologies into traditional ASET Skills development. They discussed Digital
Fabrication and Design Thinking, Individualized Learning for programming skills development, university-industry
partnerships through innovation centers, and entrepreneurship skills development.




   Dr. Kamau Gachigi, Executive Director, Gearbox
        o For hardware entrepreneurs in Kenya, it is hard to make polished prototypes to attract investment
           and build companies. In order to tackle this challenge and unleash local talent, Gearbox provides a
           space with digital fabrication machines such as 3D printers, CNC milling machines, electronic boards
           and laser cutter for enabling low cost manufacturing for anyone who wants to be hardware
           entrepreneurs or wants to develop products.
        o From Gearbox, various companies and projects have emerged, including the Kenyan-manufactured
           CNC machine for making furniture, and Strauss energy, a company which makes solar panels
           embedded in roofing tiles.
   Mr. Lutz Ziob, Dean of 4Afrika Academy, Microsoft
        o With the 4th industrial revolution currently happening, the importance of digital skills is increasing.
            More than 50% of today’s job requires some technological skills and the percentage is expected to
            increase to 77% in less than a decade.

                                                       14
        o   Although it is hard to transform traditional education systems, alternative learning solutions are
            available. The issue is how to fill this gap and help scale up the alternative solutions or collaborate
            with alternative learning solutions. Microsoft also provides out-of-school solutions through virtual
            academy, providing certification programs for Microsoft products, mobile app development training
            and competition, and digital literacy, STEM and coding education.
   Ms. Wambui Kinya, Chief Strategy Officer, Andela
        o Andela goes through a highly competitive selection process to recruit talented engineers from across
          the African continent. During the first 6 months, they learn computer programming and soft skills
          through a highly individualized learning program while being paid. After the training, Andela matches
          the trainees to their network of employers such as Facebook and Google to work as a distributed
          network of workers as a full-time. After these on-the-job trainings, Andela developers graduate from
          a 4-year program.
        o Andela’s learning program uses 1,000 data points to ensure that the curriculum is matched at the
          level of learners and requirement of the employers.
   Prof. Joseph Sevilla, Director, iLabAfrica, Strathmore University
        o Strathmore university is a private university founded in 1961. iLab, an IT center of excellence was
             established in 2011 and it currently runs as a self-funded lab with a strong industry partnership. The
             center bridges between industry and academia and conducts ICT and ICT policy research and IT
             business development and outsourcing, and supports entrepreneurship and incubation.
        o Strathmore university and iLab work with industry and government to provide an environment to
             promote technological innovation. For instance, academic program collaborates with ICT companies,
             including Safaricom, IBM, SAP, Microsoft and Oracle. There are more than 15 companies incubated
             from this lab. The lab also connects the entrepreneurs with a network of investors.
   Mr. Xiaochen Zhang, President, FinTech4Good
        o “Accelerating Africa Initiative” was introduced as a platform to empower African youth to have access
            to services, education and training, technologies (e.g. clean energy, mobile, block chain, AI),
            innovation ecosystem and capital to create their enterprise.
        o As an example, leveraging the same methodology, China Social Entrepreneurship Foundation was
            created, which supported 161 non-profit organizations and social enterprises in 10 years.

Session 11 – Exhibitor Presentations
Exhibitors from Kenyan universities, TVET institutes, and companies presented their innovations and factors
contributing to the success of their initiatives. They also highlighted the role their initiatives can play in equipping
Africa with skills in the ASET areas.




                                                          15
   Ms. Savannah Kunovsky, Chief Technology Officer, Moringa School
        o Moringa school transforms education through data and outcome-driven learning. It focuses on
            teaching computer programming using a hands-on, blended learning approach. It has achieved a 95%
            placement rate after training at Kenyan companies, and works closely with the industry.
   Dr. Richard Ayah, Director, Science and Technology Park, University of Nairobi
        o University of Nairobi, Science and Technology Park (UoN-STP) aims to enhance the development,
            transfer and commercialization of research, technology and university know-how by promoting a
            culture of innovation. Its Maker project, developed under the Make Space/Fab Lab initiative of the
            UoN-STP, is a successful example of university-industry collaboration and local manufacturing.
        o The goal of the Maker project is to create low-cost, high-quality and locally designed/produced
            alternatives to medical equipment for maternal and newborn health care delivery. It has prototyped
            a phototherapy unit and a suction machine so far.
        o This success demonstrates that it is possible to locally manufacture at 40% less cost compared to
            imported machines, and universities can work with industry and across disciplines. It also
            demonstrated that students can work with end-users to develop locally appropriate solutions using
            applied engineering. The product has already attracted multiple investments.
   Mr. Ronald Simon, Executive Chairman and owner of Devotra BV
        o Devotra presented its work with the Ministry of Higher Education on implementation of smart
            classroom with TVET institutions in Kenya. The objectives of the smart classroom are improving access,
            relevance and quality of TVET education through the integration of ICT based learning resources,
            introduction of new technologies, combined with practical hands-on education.
        o A smart classroom consists of digital lessons, student investigation, on-screen simulations, virtual
            experiments, assessment and tests, reporting, and project and group work. These activities enhance
            teachers’ performance and delivery, attractiveness of TVET, interdisciplinary work, self-paced learning,
            and teamwork. The courses are already mapped for primary, secondary and higher education
            curricula.
   Mr. Adam Lane, Senior Director, Huawei Southern Africa
        o Huawei presented its approach to address the current challenges in TVET and employment through
            providing ICT skills development training using data center, video conferencing, ICT rooms and labs
            and community centers.
        o Digital skills training focuses more on network and some software design and development. It
            provides training for e-management systems, e-learning systems, and e-class systems. Skills
            development training focuses more on hardware provision, and includes provision of ICT equipment,
            teacher training, and content provision.
   Mr. Kevin Rotich, Project Coordinator, Centurion Systems
        o Centurion Systems has created a public-private partnership Center of Excellence model to test with
            10 TVET centers in Africa. The initiative includes industries to upskill existing employee technicians,
            create a pool of talent by training students from TVET institutions, provide modular training and
            competency-based education, and training and apprenticeship.
        o The project has collaborated with the bottling industry and academic institutions. In the Center of
            Excellence, the second batch of apprentices is fully funded by the industry and the involvement of the
            private sector significantly reduces the cost of such a project through their contributions.
        o The project has also contributed to development of occupational standards and curriculum in Welding,
            Heavy and Light Machinery, Instrumentation and Control and Mechanical fields under LIWA’s Sector
            Skills Advisory Committee.
                                                        16
Session 12 – Parallel Sessions
    a. Workshop on Country ASET Action Plan Development for Government Officials
Government officials from the SSA countries participated in a workshop to develop their Country ASET Action
Plans (CAAPs). Dr. Nobuyuki Tanaka, an economist at the World Bank, first introduced the CAAP to the participants
and provided guidance to work on the plan. The workshop also included presentations from Tanzania on the
development of their National Skills Strategy, from Korea on their assistance to Africa to develop their skills plans,
and an overview of the TVET sector in Africa. Following these presentations, government delegations worked on
their CAAP in country groups with facilitation by representatives from the international partner countries and
other resource persons at the Forum.




   Korea: Dr. Song Chang Hong, Director of Planning and Evaluation, Center for International Development, Korea
    Development Institute
       o KDI’s Knowledge Sharing Program (KSP) uses a comprehensive approach that enhances the problem
            solving capacity of partner countries, emphasizes mutual learning, and is not attached to any
            conditionality.
       o Since 2004, KDI has worked in 55 partner countries globally providing consultation on 861 policy topics,
            especially in the areas of industrial policy, macro-economic policy, science and technology and
            financial policy. Under PASET KSP, KDI works with Senegal, Ethiopia and Rwanda.
       o The program emphasizes a practical approach to help deliver actual reforms through guidance for
            planning, implementing and monitoring policy and utilizing a variety of funding sources.
   Tanzania: Dr. Jonathan Mbwambo, Assistant Director, Department of Higher Education, Ministry of Education
    and Vocational Training, Tanzania
       o Tanzania aims to become a middle income country by 2025 but the population is poorly skilled. Eighty
           percent of the population has a low level of skills. To achieve middle income status, a target of at least
           12 percent of a country’s population must be highly skilled.
       o The National Skills Development Strategy (NSDS) rests on pillars such as sustainable and inclusive
           financing, equitable access for all, quality and relevance, and having a governance structure that
           supports synergetic and impactful results.
       o The NSDS aims to strengthen institutional capacity for skills development through greater
           coordination of policies, public-private sector cooperation and operationalizing the national
           qualifications framework. This strategy also promotes the expansion and quality of labor-market
           driven skills in specific economic sectors through more efficient service delivery and new funding
           mechanisms, such as a Skills Development Fund and a Trainee Voucher Scheme.



                                                         17
   TVET Overview in Africa: Dr. Xiaoyan Liang, Lead Education Specialist, The World Bank
       o By 2040, Africa will have the world’s largest labor force with an estimated 1 billion people of working
           age. Currently, about 80 percent of the labor force is part of the informal sector.
       o Over 27 percent of production workers in SSA are rated unskilled by enterprises in the region. This
           increases the cost of hiring qualified labor for employers who also rate lack of work experience and
           job readiness as significant obstacles.
       o While there is limited data available about TVET qualifications, they are seen as leading to improved
           future streams of income. As of 2014, only 12 percent of upper secondary enrollments in SSA were in
           TVET, and TVET’s share of the education budget ranged between 2-6 percent.
       o Skills strategies or ASET Actions Plans should be more evidence-based; demand-driven with strong
           linkages to the private sector; promote institutional capacity building, leadership management and
           accountability; and have the financial support of governments and other stakeholders.




    b. RSIF Session with Non-Government Partners
Private sector, development partners, and research funding agencies participated in a side session to learn more
details about the RSIF, including the fundraising strategy and areas where support is needed. Participants
expressed interest in supporting and collaborating with PASET on RSIF as well as the skills agenda.




   c. RSIF Session with Host and Partner Universities
Representatives from the four RSIF host universities and three partner universities from Korea, UK and
Netherlands participated in discussions on their collaboration for a sandwich program with facilitation by PASET
and Association of African Universities (AAU) representatives. Following a presentation on the vision for and key
                                                       18
features of successful academic partnerships, universities received further clarity on the program through a
question and answer session. Subsequently, RSIF host universities held bilateral meetings with their respective
partner universities to discuss details of their partnership agreements.

Ministers Meeting
The PASET Board and Executive Committee members met with the Ministers of Education or their representatives
to provide more detailed information on PASET’s objectives, governance, and key initiatives. The Ministers
clarified their queries and also expressed their interest and potential commitment to PASET. The Korea
Development Institute (KDI) President and Director of the Center for International Development also participated
in this session.




                                                      19
20
    III.    Day 3 – Way Forward
Session 13 – Presentation on Country ASET Action Plans
Nineteen SSA countries presented their Country ASET Action Plans to the Forum.




   Most countries identified agriculture, manufacturing, energy, and infrastructure/construction as their priority
    sectors.
   Lack of data, relevant strategy, and mismatch between skills demand and supply were common key challenges
    that SSA countries face. Basic data collection and analysis are critical to develop evidence-based policies and
    strategies to address skill shortages.
   Countries aim to address the skills gaps and improve their skills strategies through improved and regular data
    collection, stronger linkages with the private sector, aligning education and training curriculum with market
    needs, and introducing quality assurance mechanisms.

Session 14 – Way Forward
PASET Executive Committee Members summarized the proceedings of the 4th PASET Forum and identified key
actions for the way forward.




    Dr. Florah Karimi, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Kenya
        o The 4th PASET Forum gave rise to new commitments at several levels, especially via development of
             partnerships and formation of networks that will support member countries’ skills agendas.

                                                        21
           o   Kenya committed US$2 million towards RSIF and will provide support at the post-graduate level
               through the Africa Centers of Excellence II (ACE II) project, and at the skills development level through
               engagement in the Regional TVET Centers of Excellence project. Kenya will also receive support on
               institutional governance and skills development from India, and on university benchmarking support
               from the World Bank.
          o Each delegation was urged to follow up with their governments on their commitments to PASET, and
               all participants to share their knowledge of PASET’s initiatives among their networks.
      Dr. Sajitha Bashir, Education Practice Manager, The World Bank
          o Important next steps for PASET include:
                     Follow-up with African countries that expressed concrete interest in PASET and intend to
                        make commitments.
                     Follow-up with partner countries such as India and China that made concrete suggestions on
                        knowledge sharing activities, technical assistance and mobilization of finances. Study visits to
                        India and China will be organized.
                     Continued dialogues with private sector organizations and foundations that are interested in
                        contributing to PASET and RSIF.
                     Continued facilitation of discussions between RSIF host universities and partner universities
                        to finalize partnership arrangements.
                     Facilitation of knowledge sharing on skills development/TVET (models, approaches,
                        innovations) in the future.
          o Moving forward, PASET will liaise with a focal point in each country for regular communications. The
               PASET CAG will provide technical advice; knowledge sharing between governments and partners will
               continue; and governance and implementation of initiatives will be strengthened.
                                          Summary of Future PASET Activities

    PASET Activities                          Higher Education                                    TVET-Skills

    Knowledge Sharing        Visit to China                                      Visit to India (Ministry of Skills
                                                                                 Development)
                                                                                 Visit to China

                             China-Africa Forum (Dakar, September 2017)
    Technical Assistance     University Benchmarking (Country Specific)          Follow up to India/China visits
                             Country ASET Action Plan (CAAP)
    Mobilizing Financing     Regional Scholarship and Innovation Fund (RSIF)     Regional Skills Development Centers
                             for PhD training and research in Africa             of Excellence
                             Regional Africa Centers of Excellence (Phase 3)


Session 15 – Closing Remarks
Dr. Dinah Mwinzi, the Principal Secretary of Technical and Vocational Education for Kenya’s Ministry of Education,
Science and Technology, and Dr. Samuel Kifle Kidane, Ethiopia’s State Minister of Education thanked all
participants and provided the closing remarks for the 4th PASET Forum.


                                                           22
   Dr. Dinah Mwinzi, the Principal Secretary of Technical and Vocational Education, Ministry of Education,
    Science and Technology, Kenya
       o Kenya is intensifying efforts to build capacity in ASET fields as this is a key platform to achieve the
            country’s development agenda as envisioned in its Vision 2030.
       o The continent has a wealth of talent and innovation that should be patented and commercialized for
            economic benefit.
       o Through greater commitments from more SSA countries, private sector, innovators and development
            partners and enhanced regional engagement in ASET programs, PASET will be able to leave a larger
            impact on the socio-economic outcomes for the continent.
   Dr. Samuel Kifle Kidane, State Minister of Education, Ethiopia
        o In a closely connected global economy, it is important to share knowledge and learn from each other’s
           rich experiences.
        o Smart investments in human capital can determine the trajectories of African nations, especially with
           a large and growing youth population that offers significant potential.
        o Investments in ASET areas are critical to build a skilled African workforce. Partnerships such as PASET
           are important to achieve the collective goal of Africa’s socio-economic transformation.




                                                       23
                                          ANNEX 1: PASET Forum Agenda
                           Day 1: PASET Regional Level Activities and Partnerships
Time               Agenda                                  Speakers/Moderators
8:00-8:30am        Accreditation & Registration (at Chairman’s Lounge)
What is PASET?
8:30-10:00am       Overview and Progress of PASET          Moderator
                   Speakers share the goals and             Dr. Sajitha Bashir, Practice Manager, Education Global Practice,
                   programs of the PASET and introduce       The World Bank
                   some initiatives, including Regional    Speakers
                   Scholarship and Innovation Fund,         Prof. Aminata Sall Diallo, Executive Director of PASET Executive
                   TVET Centers of Excellence, and           Committee
                   Knowledge Sharing Program                Dr. Joon-Kyung Kim, President, Korea Development Institute (KDI)
                   supported by KDI
Ministerial Panel
10:00-11:30am     PASET as Pan-African Platform            Moderator
                  Ministers from the PASET related          Prof. Goolam Mohamedbhai, Chair of the Consultative Advisory
                  countries will share their experience      Group of PASET
                  with the PASET and how they have         Speakers
                  benefited from the PASET and how          Dr. Papias Musafiri Malimba, Minister of Education, Rwanda
                  they can contribute to the PASET.         Dr. Samuel Kifle Kidane, State Minister for Education, Ethiopia
                                                            Mr. Malick Sow, Secretary-General, Ministry of Higher Education
                                                             and Research, Senegal
Opening Ceremony
11:30-12:30pm Welcome Remarks                              Speaker
                                                            Mr. Keith Hansen, Vice President of Human Development, The
                                                             World Bank
                   Introductory Remarks                    Speaker
                                                            Dr. Fred Matiang'i, Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Education,
                                                             Science and Technology, Kenya
                   Opening Remarks                         Speaker
                                                            Hon. Deputy President William Ruto
PASET and Private Sector
12:30-1:15pm      PASET and Private Sector                 Moderator
                  Collaboration                             Mr. Arun Sharma, Founder and MD, Infinite Potentials Consulting
                  Speakers will talk about how private     Speakers
                  sector can benefit and contribute to      Dr. Evelyn Gitau, Programme Manager, Grand Challenges Africa,
                  the PASET. The discussion focuses          African Academy of Sciences
                  around their experience on return on      Dr. Eddine Sarroukh, Head of Research, Philips East Africa Ltd.
                  investment, R&D and future                Mr. Patrick Karanja, Program Associate, Rockefeller Foundation
                  perspective of their own industry in      Dr. Katherine Getao, ICT Secretary, Ministry of Information and
                  Africa.                                    Communications, Kenya
1:15-2:30pm       LUNCH (at Nyamachoma)
Voices from Youth on Skills Development and Jobs
2:30-3:30pm       Youth Panel                              Moderator
                  Selected students from Africa Centers     Dr. Kamau Gachigi, Consultative Advisory Group, PASET
                  of Excellence will talk about how they   Speakers
                                                              24
Time               Agenda                                   Speakers/Moderators
                   got into what they are doing now,         Students from Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence
                   what they are studying and                Mr. Wallace Thoya Baya, Egerton University, Kenya
                   researching, what they think about        Mr. Ghafi Kondi Akara, Felix Houphouet-Boigny, Cote d’Ivoire
                   their education, and what they want       Mr. Ekemini Bassey Ituen, University of Port Harcourt, Nigeria
                   to do in the future                       Mr. Marlise Montcho, Université d'Abomey – Calavi, Bénin
                                                             Mr. Dickson Otieno, Egerton University, Kenya
Ministerial Panel
3:30-4:45pm       Ministerial Panel – Country highlights  Moderator
                  on skills supply and demand              Dr. Halil Dundar, Practice Manager, The World Bank
                  African Ministers of Education will     Speakers
                  share their perspectives on their        Prof. Alkassoum Maiga, Minister of Higher Education, Scientific
                  priority industries, main challenges in   Research and Innovation, Burkina Faso
                  skills development, their innovative     Dr. Matthew Opoku-Prempeh, Minister of Education, Ghana
                  and effective initiative on skills       Mr. Abdoulaye Yero Balde, Minister of Higher Education and
                  development and their vision and          Scientific Research, Guinea
                  next steps for skills development in     Dr. Sidi Salem Mohamed El Abd, Minister of Higher Education and
                  the next 5 years                          Scientific Research, Mauritania
                                                           Prof. Anthony Gozie Anwukah, Minister of State for Education,
                                                            Nigeria
                                                           Prof. Andre Shikayi, Ministry of Vocational Training, Trades and
                                                            Crafts, Democratic Republic of Congo (rep. Minister)
                                                           Prof. Bakary Cisse, Ministry of Higher Education and Scientific
                                                            Research, Mali (rep. Minister)
4:45-5:00pm        COFFEE BREAK (at Foyer Next to JAMBO)
International Perspectives
5:00-6:30pm        International Perspectives on          Moderator
                   Innovative Policy in ASET Skills        Mrs. Diarietou Gaye, Country Director of Kenya, The World Bank
                   Development                            Speakers
                   (Session 1)                             Dr. Sunita Chhibba, Senior Adviser & Director General, Ministry of
                   Representatives from India, Brazil       Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Government of India
                   and China will share their ASET Skills  Ms. Tatiana Farah de Mello, International Relations Unit, SENAI,
                   development policy and                   Brazil
                   implementation.                         Dr. Yan Wang, Senior Specialist, National Institute of Educational
                                                            Sciences, China
Dinner and Cultural Show hosted by the Government of Kenya (at Nyamachoma)
6:30-8:30pm        Dinner
7:00pm             Speech                                 Speakers
                                                           Dr. Fred Matiang'i, Cabinet Secretary, Ministry of Education,
                                                            Science and Technology, Kenya
                                                           Mr. Keith Hansen, Vice President of Human Development, The
                                                            World Bank
7:30pm             Cultural Show




                                                               25
                    Day 2: Innovations in ASET Skills Development Policy and Practices
Time               Agenda                                      Speakers/Moderators
7:30-8:00am        Accreditation & Registration (at Chairman’s Lounge)
                   Tea & Coffee (at Foyer Next to JAMBO)
Future of Skills
8:00-8:30am       Future of Skills                            Moderator
                  The speaker will deliver a provocative       Dr. Halil Dundar, Practice Manager, The World Bank
                  speech to make us re-think about the
                  future of skills demand and skills          Speaker
                  development.                                Mr. Charles Leadbeater, Author
Recap from Day 1
8:30-8:45am       What we learned yesterday                   Speaker
                  Recap from Day 1 and expectation for        Dr. Sajitha Bashir, Practice Manager, Education Global
                  Day 2                                       Practice, The World Bank
International Perspectives
8:45-9:45am       International Perspectives on Innovative    Moderator
                  Policy in ASET Skills Development            Dr. Xiaoyan Liang, Lead Education Specialist, The World
                  (Session 2)                                   Bank
                  Representatives from China and Malaysia     Speakers
                  will share their ASET Skills development     Dr. Huibo Zhang, President of Ningbo Polytechnic, China
                  policy and implementation.                   Dr. Mohd Gazali Bin Abas, Director of National Institute of
                                                                Public Administration (INTAN)
9:45-10:00am COFFEE BREAK (at Foyer Next to JAMBO)
Innovation in Teaching-Learning for ASET Skills Development
10:00-1:30am Innovation in ASET Skills Development             Moderator
                 Presenters share their experience on how  Dr. Erika Kraemer-Mbula, Consultative Advisory Group of
                 we can integrate creativity, new                the PASET
                 technologies into traditional ASET Skills     Speakers
                 development. The topic includes Digital        Dr. Kamau Gachigi, Executive Director, Gearbox
                 Fabrication and Design Thinking,               Ms. Wambui Kinya, Chief Strategy Officer, Andela
                 Individualized Learning for programming  Prof. Joseph Sevilla, Director, iLabAfrica, Strathmore
                 skills development, University-Industry         University
                 Partnership through innovation center,         Mr. Xiaochen Zhang, President, FinTech4Good
                 and entrepreneurship skills development.  Mr. Lutz Ziob, Dean of 4Afrika Academy, Microsoft
11:30am-         Short Presentation from Exhibitors            Moderator
12:30pm          Selected exhibitors will present their         Prof. Chacha Nyagotti, Chairperson, Commission for
                 innovation and success factors for their        University Education
                 initiatives. They will also talk about how    Speakers
                 their initiatives can help skill up Africa on  Ms. Savannah Kunovsky, Chief Technology Officer,
                 the ASET areas. Most of the exhibitors          Moringa School
                 are from Kenyan universities, TVETs, and  Dr. Richard Ayah, Director, Science and Technology Park,
                 companies.                                      University of Nairobi
                                                                Mr. Ronald Simon, Executive Chairman and owner of
                                                                 Devotra BV
                                                                Mr. Adam Lane, Senior Director, Huawei Southern Africa
                                                             26
Time             Agenda                                       Speakers/Moderators
                                                               Mr. Kevin Rotich, Project Coordinator, Centurion Systems
12:30-2:00pm LUNCH (at Nyamachoma)
Parallel Sessions
2:00-6:30pm       Workshop on Country ASET Action Plan        RSIF Session with    RSIF Session with   Networking with
                  Development for Government Officials        Non-Government       Host and Partner    Exhibitors
                   (at Plenary Room)                          Partners             Universities        (at JAMBO Foyer)
                  2-3:30pm                                    (at Bogoria)         (at Mt. Kenya B)    Forum Participants
                  Part I. Introduction and Panel Discussion   Provide              Targeted session    will have
                   Objectives and overview of CAAP           information on       between host and    opportunities to
                   Presentation on countries’ experience     RSIF, discuss RSIF   partner             interact with
                    -Tanzania, Korea                          operation and        universities for    exhibitors and
                  3:30-6:30pm                                 explore              RSIF                other participants
                  Part II. Group Work                         collaboration
                  Moderator                                   opportunities
                  Prof. Crispus Makau Kiamba, Consultative    with partners
                  Advisory Group of the PASET
Reception
6:30-8:30pm       Ministers Meeting (at Plenary Room)         Networking Reception (at Mamta Poolside)
                  Participants: Ministers of Education        Participants
8:30-9:30pm      Ministers Dinner (at Kumbaya)                All other delegates

                                                 Day 3: Way Forward
Time             Agenda                           Speakers/Moderators
8:00-8:30am      Accreditation & Registration
Recap from Day 2
8:30-8:40am      What we learned yesterday        Speaker
                 Recap from Day 2 and              Dr. Halil Dundar, Practice Manager, Education Global Practice, The
                 expectation for Day 3              World Bank
Country ASET Action Plan Presentation
8:40-10:40am     Presentation on Country ASET     Moderator
                 Action Plan                       Prof. Crispus Makau Kiamba, Consultative Advisory Group of the
                 Workshop participants present      PASET
                 their preliminary Country ASET  Speakers
                 Action Plan                       Participating Ministers
10:40-11:00am COFFEE BREAK (at Foyer Next to JAMBO)
Way Forward
11:00-12:00pm Way forward                         Speakers
                 Summarize the PASET Forum         Dr. Florah Karimi, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology,
                 and present the next steps         Kenya
                                                   Dr. Sajitha Bashir, Practice Manager, Education Global Practice,
                                                    The World Bank
12:00-12:30pm Closing Remarks                     Speakers
                                                   Dr. Dinah Mwinzi, Principal Secretary, Technical and Vocational
                                                    Education, Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Kenya
                                                   Dr. Samuel Kifle Kidane, State Minister of Education, Ethiopia
                                                         27
                                 ANNEX 2: PARTICIPANT LIST

No   Organization              Participants                       Title
     African Academy of
1                              Dr. Evelyn Gitau                   Program Manager, Grand Challenges Africa
     Sciences
     African University of
                               Prof Kingston Nyamapfene (AUST
2    Science and Technology,                                      President, AUST
                               President)
     Nigeria
     African University of
3    Science and Technology,   Dr. Shola Odusanya                 Co-Center Leader (PAMI)
     Nigeria
     African University of
4    Science and Technology,   Dr. O. Akin-Ojo                    Center Leader (PAMI)
     Nigeria
5    Andela                    Ms. Wambui Kinya                   Chief Strategy officer
6    Andela                    Ms. Percila Njira                  Learning Facilitator
7    Andela                    Ms. Mbithe Nzomo                   Software Developer
8    Andela                    Mr. Ngibuini Mwaura                Learning Manager
9    Andela                    Ms. Loice Andia                    Software Developer
10   Andela                    Mr. Brian Kimokoti                 Software Developer
11   Andela                    Mr. Kimani Ndegwa                  Software Developer
     Association of African                                       Director of Knowledge Management and
12                             Ms. Nodumo Dhlamini
     Universities                                                 ICT Services
13   Author                    Mr. Charles Leadbeater             Author
                                                                  Assistant Professor, Polytechnic School,
14   Benin Delegation          Ms. Élisabeth Allognon
                                                                  University of Abomey- Calavi
                                                                  Professor, Polytechnic School, University of
15   Benin Delegation          Prof. Defodji Adolphe Tchehouali
                                                                  Abomey- Calavi
                                                                  Professor, Institute of Mathematics and
16   Benin Delegation          Prof. Aboubacar Marcos             Physical Sciences, University of Abomey-
                                                                  Calavi

                                                                  General Secretary, Ministry of Secondary,
17   Benin Delegation          Mr. Coffi André Adanyossi
                                                                  Technical and Vocational Education

                                                                  Educational Inspector, Technical Advisor to
18   Benin Delegation          Mr. Bienvenu Yessoufou Issiakou
                                                                  the Minister
                                                                  Minister of HIgher Education, Scientific
19   Burkina Faso Delegation   Minister Alkassoum Maiga
                                                                  Research and Innovation
20   Burkina Faso Delegation   Mrs. Bintou Sessouma               Director General, Higher Education
                                                                  University Polytechnic Center of Fada
21   Burkina Faso Delegation   Prof. Martin Lompo
                                                                  N'Gourma
22   Burkina Faso Delegation   Eng. Abdourazakou Sanoussi         Deputy Project Coordinator, 2iE
23   Cadena                    Mrs. Patricia de Bruijn , MD       Managing Director
                               Prof. Georges Bertrand Tamokwe     Technical Advisor, Ministry of Higher
24   Cameroon Delegation
                               Piaptie                            Education


                                                     28
No   Organization                Participants                     Title

                                                                  Sub-Director, Information System Division,
25   Cameroon Delegation         Prof. Serge Guy Nana Engo
                                                                  Ministry of Higher Education


26   Centurion Systems           Mr. Kevin Rotich                 Projects Coordinator

27   Centurion Systems           Ms. Juddy W. Nyaga               SCADA Trainer
28   Centurion Systems           Mr. Ramadhani Tsuma Kazungu      SCADA Trainer
     China Electric Power
29                               Mr. Zhu Lei Wei                  General Manager of First Business Division
     Equipment & Technology
     China Electric Power                                         Chief Representative in Tanzania and
30                               Dr. Zhang Xiang
     Equipment & Technology                                       Kenya
     China Social Entrepreneur
31   Foundation/ New             Mr. Xiaochen Zhang               Chief Investment Advisor
     Development Ventures
     Chinese Academy of
32                               Mr. Wang Liu
     Sciences
33   CIRAD                       Dr. Pierre Grard                 Regional Director, East Africa
34   CNRS North America          Dr. Jean Josue Albergel
     Concern Worldwide                                            Senior Manager, Health and Nutrition,
35                               Dr. Edwin Mbugua Maina
     (Kenya)                                                      Kenya

                                                                  Director, Higher Education, Ministry of
36   Cote d'Ivoire Delegation    Prof. Aka Fulgence Nindjin
                                                                  Higher Education and Scientific Research

     DAAD (German Academic
37                               Mr. Stefan Beinfeld              Head of Division
     Exchange Service)
     Democratic Republic of                                       Minister of Vocation Training, Trade and
38                               Hon. Minister Guy Mikulu Pombo
     Congo Delegation                                             Crafts
     Democratic Republic of
39                               Prof. Andre Shikayi              Cabinet Director, MFPMA
     Congo Delegation
     Democratic Republic of
40                               Mr. Abdulu Ngongo                Director of Studies and Planning, MFPMA
     Congo Delegation
     Democratic Republic of
41                               Mr. Casmir Nzinga Kovungo        Director of Learning & Partnership
     Congo Delegation
     Democratic Republic of                                       Director of Studies and Planning at Ministry
42                               Mr. Dominique Kabuya wa Kabuya
     Congo Delegation                                             of ESU
     Democratic Republic of                                       Advisor to Ministry of Primary, Seconday &
43                               Mr. Jean-Roger Moloko Temele
     Congo Delegation                                             Vocational Education
     Deutsche
     Forschungsgemeinschaft
44                               Dr. Marcus Wilms
     (DFG - German Research
     Foundation)
45   Devotra                     Mr. Ronald Simon                 Executive Chairman
                                                                  Technical Manager, Murishi Ltd. (Devotra -
46   Devotra                     Eng. Zack Wanambwa
                                                                  Cadena)


                                                       29
No   Organization                Participants                        Title

47   Devotra                     Patti van de Werff                  Managing Director

                                                                     Commissioner for Education, Sciences and
48   ECOWAS                      Prof. Hamidou Boly
                                                                     Culture
49   Egerton University          Prof. George Owuor                  Center Leader

50   Egerton University          Prof. Rose Mwonya                   Vice Chancellor

                                                                     Masters student, agri-enterprise and
51   Egerton University, Kenya   Mr. Dickson Ouma Otieno
                                                                     development
                                                                     Masters student, agricultural applied
52   Egerton University, Kenya   Mr. Wallace Thoya Baya, Student
                                                                     economics
                                                                     Engineering Education Capacity Building
53   Ethiopia Delegation         Mr. Zewdu Kassa Gage
                                                                     Prog
     Ethiopia Delegation/
54   PASET Executive             Dr. Samuel Kifle                    State Minister of Education
     Committee
55   Gearbox Ltd                 Mr. Simon Wachira Muthike           Head of Engineering
56   Gearbox Ltd                 Mr. Edwin Ngugi Kang'ethe, Intern   Intern
57   Gearbox Ltd                 Ms. Brendah Livoi                   Mechanical Lead
58   Gearbox Ltd                 Mr. Franklin Ochola
59   Gearbox Ltd                 Mr. Apollo Sande
                                 Hon. Minister Matthew Opoku-
60   Ghana Delegation                                                Minister of Education
                                 Prempeh

                                                                     Executive Director of Council for Technical
61   Ghana Delegation            Dr. Fred Kyei Asamoah
                                                                     Vocational Education and Training

62   Ghana Delegation            Mr. Sampson Damptey                 Director for Competency, COTVET
                                                                     President/Group Chief Executive,
63   Ghana Delegation            Mr. James Asare Adjei
                                                                     Association of Ghana Industries
                                                                     African Union Office, Support to Pan-
64   GIZ                         Ms. Kate Hach
                                                                     African University
65   Government of Kenya         Hon. Dr. Fred Matiang'I             Cabinet Secretary for Education
                                                                     Principal Secretary, University Education,
66   Government of Kenya         Prof. Collette Suda
                                                                     Ministry of Education
                                                                     Principal Secretary, Technical & Vocational
67   Government of Kenya         Dr. Dinah Mwinza
                                                                     Education
68   Government of Kenya         Dr. Ahmed Kibet Ferej               Director, TVET Authority
69   Government of Kenya         Dr. Hazel Gachunga                  Director, TVET Authority
                                                                     Chairperson, Commission for University
70   Government of Kenya         Dr. Chacha Nyagoti Chacha
                                                                     Education
                                                                     Chairman, Kenya National Qualification
71   Government of Kenya         Prof. Wanjala Kerre
                                                                     Framework
72   Government of Kenya         Prof. Charles M. Ondieki            Chairman, TVET CDACC
                                                                     Director of TVET, State Department of
73   Government of Kenya         Mr. Bashir Mursal
                                                                     Vocational and Technical Training


                                                       30
No    Organization          Participants                         Title
                                                                 Director of TVET, State Department of
74    Government of Kenya   Dr. Meshack Opwara
                                                                 Vocational and Technical Training
75    Government of Kenya   Dr. Willy Tonui                      CEO, National Biosafety Authority
76    Government of Kenya   Mr. Kennedy Buhere                   Communications Officer, MoEST
                                                                 Ministry of Interior & Coodination of
77    Government of Kenya   Ms. Leah Kosgey
                                                                 National Government
78    Government of Kenya   Mrs. Jacinta Kapiyo                  Director, University Education
                                                                 CEO, National Commission of Science and
79    Government of Kenya   Dr. Moses Rugutt
                                                                 Tech
80    Government of Kenya   Dr. Kipkirui Langat                  Director General, TVET Authority
81    Government of Kenya   Prof. Oyawa                          Commission for University Education
82    Government of Kenya   Mr. Boniface Wanyama                 NACOSTI
83    Government of Kenya   Dr. Salome Guchu                     Kenya National Innnovation Agency
84    Government of Kenya   Mr. Gideon Kivengea                  Kenya National Innnovation Agency
85    Government of Kenya   Ms. Rose Nyanga                      Kenya National Innnovation Agency
86    Government of Kenya   Mr. Samuel E. Voto                   National Intellegence Service
87    Government of Kenya   Mr. Hannington K. Mukira             National Police Service
88    Government of Kenya   Amb. Simon Nabukwesi                 Ministry of Foreign Affairs
89    Government of Kenya   Mr. James Muchiri                    Directorate of University Education
90    Government of Kenya   Mr. Paul Peter Mungai                Directorate of University Education
91    Government of Kenya   Mrs. Mary Chumbe                     Directorate of University Education
92    Government of Kenya   Ms. Susan Karimi Njagi               TVET Authority
93    Government of Kenya   Mr. Joel Sande
94    Government of Kenya   Dr. William Otta Osawa               Directorate of Research and Policy
95    Government of Kenya   Dr. Dorcas M. Omukhulu               Commission for University Education
96    Government of Kenya   Consolata Okomba Osolo               Ministry of Foreign Affairs
97    Government of Kenya   Mr. Byron Esere Kamidi               Ministry of Foreign Affairs
98    Government of Kenya   Mr. Silvan Obuya Odidi               Ministry of Foreign Affairs
99    Government of Kenya   Ms. Caroline Barongo Okemwa          Ministry of Foreign Affairs
                                                                 National Commission for Science,
100   Government of Kenya   Ms. Jane N. Boniface
                                                                 Technology and Innovation
101   Government of Kenya   Ms. Olivia Lorna Anyango
                                                                 Minister of Higher Education and Scientific
102   Guinea Delegation     Hon. Minister Abdoulaye Yero Baldé
                                                                 Research
103   Guinea Delegation     Mrs. Zeinab Camara                   Chief of Cabinet
                                                                 Director, Institute of Higher Education for
104   Guinea Delegation     Mr. Mamadou Saliou Diallo
                                                                 Distance Education
                                                                 Project Manager, Boosting Skills for Youth
105   Guinea Delegation     Mr. Thierno Iliassa Baldé
                                                                 Employability Project
                                                                 National Director, Vocational and Technical
106   Guinea Delegation     Dr. Baba Diané
                                                                 Training
107   Huawei                Mr. Dean Yu                          CEO for Kenya
108   Huawei                Mr. Adam Lane                        Senior Director
109   Huawei                Mr. Kai Wen                          Deputy Director, China
110   Huawei                Mr. Stephen Kimani                   Channel Manager - Enterprise
111   Intel                 Mr. Roy Allela                       Engineer

                                                   31
No    Organization                 Participants                        Title
112   IRD                          Dr. David Williamson
113   IUCEA                        Dr. Eugene Mutimura                 Project Coordinator, ACE II
      Japanese International
114                                Mr. Kazuhiro Tambara                Sr. Representative
      Cooperation Agency

      Kenya Delegation/ PASET                                          Technical Advisor for University Education,
115                                Dr. Florah Karimi
      Executive Committee                                              Office of Cabinet Secretary

      Korea Development
116                                Dr. Joon-Kyung Kim                  President
      Institute

      Korea Development                                                Director of Planning and Evaluation, Center
117                                Dr. Song Chang Hong
      Institute                                                        for International Development

      Korea Development                                                Research Associate, Center for
118                                Ms. Bora Nam
      Institute                                                        International Development
      Korea Institute of Science
119                                Dr. Hye Won Lim                     Director
      and Technology
      Korea Institute of Science                                       Manager, Department of International
120                                Mr. Chang Geun Lee
      and Technology                                                   Cooperation
                                                                       Professor Strategic Optimization and Data
121   Maastricht University        Dr. Frank Thuijsman
                                                                       Science
122   Malaysia Embassy             His Excellency, Ismail Bihn Salam   Ambassador of Malaysia to Kenya
123   Mali Delegation              Prof Bakary Cisse                   Project Coordinator, PADES
124   Mali Delegation              Mr. Oumar Kamara                    Director, IUT

125   Mali Delegation              Prof. Mamadou Wele                  Director, IUT

                                                                       Minister of Higher Education and Scientific
126   Mauritania Delegation        Hon. Minister Sidi Ould Salem
                                                                       Research
                                                                       President, University of Nouakchott Al
127   Mauritania Delegation        Pr. Ahmedou Haouba
                                                                       Assriya
                                   Pr. Ali Ould Mohamed Salem O.
128   Mauritania Delegation                                            Director, Scientific Research at MESRS
                                   Boukhary
129   Microsoft                    Mr. Lutz Ziob                       Dean, 4 Afrika Initiative

130   Microsoft                    Ms. Teresa Mbagaya                  Education Lead, East & Southern Africa

      Ministry of Skills
131   Development and              Dr. Sunita Chhibba                  Senior Adviser & Director General
      Entrepreneurship, India
132   Moi University               Prof. Ambrose Kipchumba Kiprop      Center Leader
133   Moi University               Prof. Laban Peter Ayiro             Vice Chancellor
134   Moringa School               Ms. Savannah Kunovsky               Chief Technology Officer
135   Moringa School               Mr. Boluwaji Oyewumi
136   Moringa School               Mr. Moses O.Okemwa                  Instructor
                                                                       Chairman, National Authority of
137   Mozambique Delegation        Eng. Gilberto Botas
                                                                       Professional Education
138   Mozambique Delegation        Eng. Edmundo Jossefa                Director General, ANEP

                                                          32
No    Organization                  Participants                       Title

139   Mozambique Delegation         Mr. Lourino Chemane                Advisor to the Minister for ICT

      National Institute of
140                                 Dr. Yan Wang                       Director of International Cooperation
      Educational Sciences

141   Nigeria Delegation            Hon. Anthony Gozie Anwukah         Minister of State for Education

                                                                       Director, Special Duties and Protocol
142   Nigeria Delegation            Mr. Christopher Jilbreel Maiyaki
                                                                       Affairs, National Universities Commission

                                                                       Deputy Director, National Universities
143   Nigeria Delegation            Mr. Aminu Abba
                                                                       Commission

                                                                       Deputy Director, National Universities
144   Nigeria Delegation            Dr. Joshua A Atah
                                                                       Commission and ACE Coordinator

                                                                       Director, Technology and Science
145   Nigeria Delegation            Mr. Joel Samuel Ojo
                                                                       Education

146   Nigeria Delegation            Dr. Masau'du A. Kazaure            Executive Secretary, NBTE
147   Nigeria Delegation            Mrs. Fatima Jiddum Ahmad           Director, Tertiary Education
148   Ningbo Polytechnic            Mr. Huibo Zhang                    President of Ningbo Polytechnic

149   Ningbo Polytechnic            Ms. Yuying Zhu                     Assistant Director of Foreign Affairs Office

                                                                       Teacher of Higher Education Research
150   Ningbo Polytechnic            Ms. Lei Zhu
                                                                       Institute
                                                                       Teacher & Translator of Foreign Aid
151   Ningbo Polytechnic            Mr. Xiaoming Zhuang
                                                                       Training Institute
                                                                       PASET CAG Chair; Former Secretary
      PASET Consultative
152                                 Prof. Goolam Mohamedbhai           General of Association of African
      Advisory Group
                                                                       Universities
      PASET Consultative                                               Dean of Engineering, Worcester
153                                 Prof. Winston Wole Soboyejo
      Advisory Group                                                   Polytechnic Institute

      PASET Consultative                                               Faculty, School of the Built Environment,
154                                 Prof. Crispus Kiamba
      Advisory Group                                                   College of Architecture and Engineering

      PASET Consultative                                               Technical and vocational skills
155                                 Dr. Ayele Adubra
      Advisory Group                                                   development specialist
      PASET Consultative
156                                 Dr. Kamau Gachigi                  Founding Executive Director, Gearbox
      Advisory Group
                                                                       Senior Lecturer and Research Fellow,
      PASET Consultative
157                                 Dr. Erika Kraemer-Mbula            Institute for Economic Research on
      Advisory Group
                                                                       Innovation
      PASET Consultative
                                                                       Director, Higher Institute for Vocational
158   Advisory Group/ Senegal       Prof. Fadel Niang
                                                                       Training
      Delegation
                                                                       Director, National Institute of Public
159   PERMANDU, Malaysia            Dr. Mohd Gazali bin Abas
                                                                       Administration
160   Philips East Africa Limited   Dr. Eddine Sarroukh                Head, Philips Research
                                                           33
No    Organization                Participants                    Title
      The Rockefeller
161   Foundation, Africa          Mr. Patrick M Karanja           Program Associate
      Regional Office
      Royal Veterinary College,                                   Professor of Wildlife Health and Emerging
162                               Prof. Richard Anthony Kock
      UK                                                          Diseases
163   Rwanda Delegation           Hon. Minister Papias Musafiri   Minister of Education
                                                                  Principal of the College of Science and
164   Rwanda Delegation           Dr. Ignace Gatare
                                                                  Technology
      Rwanda Delegation/PASET                                     Senior Technical Advisor Science and
165                               Mr. Michael Hughes
      Executive Committee                                         Technology to Minister of Education
166   SENAI                       Ms. Tatiana Farah de Mello      International Relations Unit
                                                                  Secretary-General, Ministry of Higher
167   Senegal Delegation          Mr. Malick Sow
                                                                  Education and Research

      Senegal Delegation/                                         Senior Technical Advisor to Minister of
168   PASET Executive             Prof. Aminata Sall Diallo       Higher Education and Research; PASET
      Committee                                                   Executive Committee Executive Director

      Sokoine University,
169                               Prof. Gerald Misinzo            Center Leader (SACIDS)
      Tanzania

      Sokoine University,
170                               Prof. Mark Rweyemamu            Executive Director (SACIDS)
      Tanzania
171   Strathmore Univeristy       Dr. Joseph Sevilla              Director, iLabAfrica
172   Strathmore Univeristy       Mr. Nelson Mutua                Project Coordinator
173   Strathmore Univeristy       Ms. Philomena Mwangi            Digital Learning Coodinator

                                                                  Deputy Permanent Secretary, Ministry of
174   Tanzania Delegation         Mr. Simon Msanjila
                                                                  Education, Science and Technology

                                                                  Assistant Director, Department of Higher
175   Tanzania Delegation         Mr. Jonathan S. Mbwambo
                                                                  Education
176   Tanzania Delegation         Prof. Tolly Mbwette             University of Dar es Salaam
                                                                  Head of TVET Unit, Ministry of Basic and
177   The Gambia Delegation       Mr. Bai Ndure
                                                                  Secondary Education
                                                                  Director, Tertiary and Higher Education,
178   The Gambia Delegation       Mr. Anthony Mendy               Ministry of Higher Education, Research,
                                                                  Science and Technology
                                                                  Deputy Director of National Higher School
179   Togo Delegation             Mr. Salami Adekunle Akim
                                                                  of Engineers
                                                                  Secretary General of the Ministry
180   Togo Delegation             Mr. Gnamine Mgueta S. Agarem    delegated to Techical and Vocational
                                                                  Education
181   Togo Delegation             Dr. Komi Agboka
                                  Mrs. Essogbaré Adam Tsar epse
182   Togo Delegation                                             Director of technical secondary education
                                  Alaba
183   University of Abomey        Ms. Marlise Montcho             Telecom Engineer and PhD Student



                                                         34
No    Organization              Participants                    Title
      University of Felix
                                                                PhD student of Climate System and
184   Houphouet-Boigny, Cote    Ms. Ghafi Kondi Akara
                                                                Renewable Energy
      d’Ivoire
      University of Felix
185   Houphouet-Boigny, Cote    Prof. Daouda Kone               Center Leader (CCBAD)
      d’Ivoire
      University of Felix
186   Houphouet-Boigny, Cote    Dr. Fatou Scherazade Ouattara   Lecturer (CCBAD)
      d’Ivoire
      University of Gaston-                                     Computer Science Doctoral Training
187                             Prof. Cheikh Talibouya Diop
      Berger, Senegal                                           Coordinator (MITIC)
      University of Gaston-                                     Student Development
188                             Mr. Taib Fall
      Berger, Senegal                                           and Partnership Officer (MITIC)
      University of Nairobi -
189   Science and Technology    Mr. Kamano John Paul Kahoro
      Park
      University of Nairobi
190   Science and Technology    Mr. Derrick Mugasia             Assistant Project Manager
      Park (Fab Lab)
      University of Nairobi
191   Science and Technology    Dr. Richard Ayah                Director
      Park (Fab Lab)
      University of Port                                        Doctoral Fellow, Institute of Petroleum
192                             Mr. Ekemini Bassey Ituen
      Harcourt, Nigeria                                         Studies
                                                                Dean, School of ICT; Center Leader, ACE
193   University of Rwanda      Prof. Santi Kumaran
                                                                Internet of Things

194   Wiley                     Mr. Matthew Santaspirt          Sales & Market Development Director

195   World Bank                Keith Hansen                    Vice President, Human Development

196   World Bank                Veronica Grigera                Special Assistant, Vice President HD Office

197   World Bank                Kavitha Phyllis Watsa           Senior Communications Officer
198   World Bank                Nadege L Thadey                 Senior Executive Assistant
199   World Bank                Diarietou Gaye                  Country Director
200   World Bank                Gandham N.V. Ramana             Program Leader
201   World Bank                Sajitha Bashir                  Practice Manager, East Africa
                                                                Practice Manager, Central and Southern
202   World Bank                Halil Dundar
                                                                Africa

203   World Bank                Xiaoyan Lang                    Lead Education Specialist

204   World Bank                Nobuyuki Tanaka                 Economist
205   World Bank                Ekua Bentil                     Education Specialist
206   World Bank                Saori Imaizumi                  Education Specialist
207   World Bank                Dharini Natarajan               Operations Analyst
208   World Bank                Zena John                       Events Consultant
209   World Bank                Madiha Qureshi                  Communications Consultant
210   World Bank                Huma Kidwai                     Education Consultant
                                                      35
No    Organization        Participants                      Title
211   World Bank          Meaza Demissie                    Education Consultant

212   World Bank          Ruth Wanga                        Team Assistant - Conferencing and Events
213   World Bank          Keziah Muthembwa                  Communications Officer
214   World Bank          Vera Rosauer                      Communications Officer
215   World Bank          Faith Katile Masengz              Communications Intern
                                                            Consultant; Founder and MD, Infinite
216   World Bank          Arun Sharma
                                                            Potentials Consulting
217   World Bank          Louise Mengue Mvono               Sr. Education Specialist
218   World Bank          Girma Woldetsadik                 Sr. Education Specialist
219   World Bank          Anna Olefir                       Education Specialist
220   World Bank          Moustapha Lo                      Education Specialist

221   World Bank          Patrick Philippe Ramanantoanina   Sr. Education Specialist
222   World Bank          Cornelia Jesse                    Sr. Education Specialist
223   World Bank          Aisha Garba Mohammed              Education Specialist
224   World Bank          Assane Dieng                      Education Specialist
225   World Bank          Nalin Jena                        Sr. Education Specialist
226   World Bank          Ruth Charo                        Sr. Education Specialist
227   World Bank          Ousman Abdulahi Ali               Economist
228   World Bank          Boubakar Lompo                    Sr. Education Specialist
229   World Bank          Mohamed Tolba                     Sr. Education Specialist
230   World Bank          Yacinthe Gbaye                    Sr. Economist
231   World Bank          Eunice Yaa Brimfah Ackwerh        Sr. Education Specialist
232   World Bank          Zacharie Ngueng                   Education Consultant
233   World Bank          Shabnam Sinha                     Lead Education Specialist
234   World Bank          Liping Xiao                       Sr. Education Specialist

235   Zambia Delegation   Mr. Alex Simumba                  Director TVET

236   Zambia Delegation   Ms. Kondwani Mutelekesha          Senior Planner




                                                 36
                       ANNEX 3: Exhibitors

Exhibitors   About the Exhibitors                                Exhibition
             Andela was founded on a simple truth: Brilliance    Andela is excited for the opportunity
             is evenly distributed, but opportunity is not.      to introduce our learning approach
                                                                 demonstrated to have contributed
             We are developing a corps of high-quality           to over 5000 learners.
             technology talent across the African continent
             that will drive the current and future phases of    Our learning philosophy is simple:
             tech-enabled growth around the world. With the      “you own your own learning”. We
             fastest growing population and highest youth        implement this through an
             population in the world, we believe Africa is one   elaborate curriculum and curated
             of the greatest untapped markets for talent         learning programs built on learning
             development. Andela’s offers a new model that       science principles.
             connects ICT education to employment. Instead
             of charging tuition, we select the most             We have built a robust curriculum
             promising applicants and pay them to learn as       that outlines a path to multiple roles
             part of a 4-year fellowship. After 6 months and     in the technology world and
             for the duration of the four years, Andela          technology leadership e.g
             Developers are placed as embedded full-time         Developer, Mid-level Developer,
             members with global companies including             Senior Developer, Technical Team
             Facebook, Google and IBM without leaving their      Lead, and Product Lead. We have
             countries. At 2.5 years old, Andela has 200+        also built learning programs to
             developers in Lagos and 150+ developers in          facilitate learning on every point in
             Nairobi. Andela recently launched our               that path.
             Distributed Learning Community making Andela
             learning available to 5000+ learners.
             Centurion Systems Limited (CSL) is a technology     Centurion Systems Ltd is showcasing
             skills transfer organization registered in Kenya    its structure of training that
             since 1989, striving to develop and manage a        promotes quality and relevance of
             center of excellence in enhancing productivity,     training to industrial needs. We use
             efficiency, and innovation in industrial            the System’s Approach to training to
             processes. The company provides technical           equip the trainee with knowledge
             engineering solutions to various industrial         about the complexities of the
             sectors inform of skills development, research      system in a holistic fashion and
             and development, systems integration and            further enhance their capacity to
             equipment Repairs & Maintenance. This has           transfer that knowledge and its
             enabled CSL to understand the dynamism of the       application to another system. CSL
             private sector in balancing productivity,           will showcase this using a modern
             efficiency and innovation with the profitability    training kit developed for SCADA
             and return of investment.                           systems, to demonstrate how the
                                                                 training is conducted.
             CSL is also engaged in the skills and capacity
             development of TVET and university trainers and     Centurion will further showcase a
             students through technical training, support in     unique initiative aimed at Skills
                                                                 Development among youths
                                   37
Exhibitors   About the Exhibitors                                 Exhibition
             applied research and linking them to industry        through an Apprenticeship model
             through attachment, internships                      championed by the private sector –
             and apprenticeship with the aim of enhancing         managed under The Center of
             relevance of training and increasing student’s       Excellence in Food and Beverage
             chances of meaningful employment,                    Industry. This apprentice model is a
             entrepreneurial capacity hence livelihood            collaborative model between
             improvement.                                         training institution (CSL) and
                                                                  industry players (Krones East Africa
                                                                  and Nairobi Bottlers Ltd) and is
                                                                  successful in producing highly skilled
                                                                  and employable youths with skills
                                                                  applicable across various industrial
                                                                  setups. Centurion would like to
                                                                  upscale this model in other
                                                                  industrial sectors including the
                                                                  extractives sector (Cement
                                                                  companies) and steel & metal
                                                                  sector.
             Devotra offers turn-key solutions for education      Devotra will exhibit the Smart
             projects. Devotra has more than 30 years of          Classroom Concept by live
             practical experience in implementing education       demonstration of the digital library,
             and training projects in developing countries        including hardware training units,
             and upcoming markets, by designing and               simulations and exercises, on topics
             supplying complete workshop equipment (such          amongst others hydraulics, hybrid
             as automotive and mechanical engineering) for        car engine, green energy.
             any kind of course, training teachers and
             technicians, matching and modifying curricula,
             and etc.

             In Kenya, Devotra designed the 6 years project:
             “Rehabilitation and Upgrading of KTTC and nine
             regional centers of excellence” for the Ministry
             of Education, and supplied the technical
             assistance and provision of all traditional
             workshop equipment to 8 different courses per
             institute. As a next phase of this project, we
             have introduced the Smart Classroom to all 10
             institutes, which is an unique ICT based teaching
             and learning concept with a digital library,
             simulations and hands-on education.

             Currently, Devotra is working on a ”National roll-
             out of Smart Classrooms for TVET and STEM”
             and “Introduction of the seamless integration of
             Smart Classrooms for Primary-, Secondary-
             Higher Education and TVET.
                                    38
Exhibitors   About the Exhibitors                                 Exhibition
             Gearbox is a new initiative to support               Gearbox will have on display
             innovative, hardware-based solutions to local        examples of digital fabrication
             problems. Many of Africa's greatest challenges --    machines that represent future
             providing clean energy to all, solving the           manufacturing methods and items
             sanitation crisis, building affordable housing, or   made by its members, both Makers
             achieving lasting food security -- require           and Engineers.
             hardware-based solutions. We offer low-cost
             access to modern and conventional tools and
             offer training in design, prototyping and
             manufacturing. Our members are both
             engineers and makers (those who are trained in
             the functional application of modern tools but
             without formal engineering education). We also
             have initiated a programme which enables
             university Engineering and Science Faculty to the
             market their innovations. We are connecting
             African hardware entrepreneurs to Industry 4.0.
             Huawei is a leading global provider of end-to-       Huawei is a leading global provider
             end solutions in telecom and enterprise              of end-to-end solutions in telecom
             networks, devices, and cloud computing. Our ICT      and enterprise networks, devices,
             solutions, products, and services are used in        and cloud computing. Our ICT
             more than 170 countries and regions, serving         solutions, products, and services are
             over one-third of the world's population.            used in more than 170 countries and
             Huawei has been active in Africa for 20 years.       regions, serving over one-third of
             We work closely with governments helping them        the world's population. Huawei has
             provide more efficient public services,              been active in Africa for 20 years.
             communications infrastructure, stronger ICT          We work closely with governments
             industries, and ICT skills.                          helping them provide more efficient
                                                                  public services, communications
                                                                  infrastructure, stronger ICT
                                                                  industries, and ICT skills.
             Moringa School is transforming education in          Moringa School is creating the most
             Africa by increasing opportunities for talented      effective higher education of today
             individuals through outcomes- and data-driven        through a world-class learning
             learning, starting with computer science. Its goal   experience and unheard of student
             is to build human capacity by training people in     outcomes. All of the courses are
             a holistic way; It focuses on both technical         created in collaboration with
             proficiency and personal growth, meaning that        employers to ensure that its
             graduates are effective learners and                 classroom content matches market
             contributors, and well-rounded employees and         demand. Learn about Moringa
             leaders. Moringa school currently has a 95% job      School’s modern, skills-based
             placement rating post-Moringa with a 350%            teaching methodology or become a
             average salary increase from before to after         hiring partner to tap into our pool of
             graduation.                                          hundreds of highly-skilled software
                                                                  engineers.

                                    39
Exhibitors   About the Exhibitors                               Exhibition
             @iLabAfrica is a Centre of Excellence in ICT       @iLabAfrica will showcase
             Innovation and Development set up in January       CountyPro which is a holistic e-
             2011. It is an independent entity in the Faculty   Governance Integrated System for
             of Information Technology at Strathmore            County Operations Management,
             University. It was established to address the      Workflow Automation, Document
             Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and to         Management, Electronic Citizen
             contribute toward Kenya’s Vision 2030. The         Services Delivery, Business
             research centre is involved in interdisciplinary   Intelligence and Electronic Payment
             research, students’ engagement, collaboration      Systems.
             with government, industry and other funding
             agencies.                                          @iLabAfrica will also present on the
                                                                Digischools Project which focuses on
                                                                provision of educational content
                                                                through a content distribution
                                                                service which hosts educational
                                                                content.

             The mandate of the University of Nairobi,          The Maker Project is a project under
             Science and Technology Park (UoN-STP) is to        the Maker Space/FABLAB part of
             enhance the development, transfer and              UoN-STP. The project aim is creation
             commercialization of research, technology and      of low-cost, high-quality locally
             university know-how by promoting a culture of      designed and produced alternatives
             innovation.                                        to medical equipment for maternal
                                                                and newborn health care delivery.
                                                                The Maker project has successfully
                                                                locally designed, fabricated and
                                                                prototyped 2 machines
                                                                (a phototherapy unit, suction
                                                                machine)




                                    40
