The Sudan Interim
Poverty Reduction
 Strategy Paper
  Status Report
A Joint World Bank Group and Sudan’s Ministry
of Finance and Economic Planning Assessment
                 (2012–2014)




              November, 2016
Abbreviations and Acronyms




Currency Equivalents
US$1.00 = 5.98 Sudanese Pounds


Fiscal Year
January 1–December 31


Weights and Measures
Metric System


AfDB	      African Development Bank
CBOS	      Central Bank of Sudan
CPA	       Comprehensive Peace Agreement
DDPD	      Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
ESPA	      Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement
EU	        European Union
GDP	       Gross Domestic Product
GOS	       Government of Sudan
HIPC	      Highly Indebted Poor Countries
IDPs	      Internally Displaced Persons
IMF	       International Monetary Fund
INC	       Interim National Constitution
IPRSP	     Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
MENA	      Middle East and North Africa
MOFEP	     Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
MOGE	      Ministry of General Education
MOWSS	     Ministry of Welfare & Social Security
PDOs	      Policy Development Objectives
PFM	       Public Financial Management
PPG	       Public and Publicly Guaranteed Debt
PRSP	      Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper
SDG	       Sudanese Pound
SMP	       Staff-monitored Program (IMF)
SSA	       Sub-Saharan African
VAT	       Value Added Tax
WTO	       World Trade Organization

ii
Contents




Abbreviations and Acronyms	                                                           ii
Preface and Acknowledgements	                                                         vi
Summary of Findings and Way Forward	                                                 vii


1	Background	                                                                         1
  1.1	Approach	                                                                       3

2	 Country Context	                                                                   5
   2.1	Overview	                                                                      5
   2.2	 Political and Security Development and Their Impacts on Poverty	              5
        2.2.1	 Agreements with South Sudan on Post Secession Issues	                  5
        2.2.2	 South Kordofan, Blue Nile States and Abyei Area	                       6
        2.2.3	 Implementation of the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement	                   7
        2.2.4	 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur	                                     7
        2.2.5	 The Internal Political Dialogue	                                       8
   2.3	 Adverse Conditions Facing Sudan Affecting the Ability of the Government
        to Reduce Poverty	                                                            8
        2.3.1	 Impact of South Sudan Secession on the Development Agenda of Sudan	    8
        2.3.2	 External Debt Burden	                                                  9
        2.3.3	 US Sanctions	                                                         10

3	 IPRSP Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (2013–2015)	                            13
   3.1	 Government Macroeconomic Performance	                                        13
   3.2	 IMF Program	                                                                 16


4	 Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures	                                                   19
   4.1	 Defining Pro-Poor Expenditures—Sudan Experience	                             19
   4.2	 Defining Pro-Poor Expenditures—Sub-Saharan African Experience	               21
   4.3	 Trends of Pro-Poor Budgeting and Expenditures in Sudan	                      24
   4.4	 Composition of Pro-Poor Budgeting and Expenditures in Sudan	                 26


5	 Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	            31
   5.1	Overall	                                                                      31
   5.2	 Growth and Development with Employment Creation: Agriculture
        and Agriculture Related Infrastructure	                                      32




                                                                                     iii
iv	                                                                                Contents﻿



      5.3	 Basic Service Delivery: Education, Health and Water and Sanitation	           45
           5.3.1	Education	                                                              45
           5.3.2	Health	                                                                 52
           5.3.3	 Water and Sanitation	                                                  56
      5.4	 Social Welfare, Security and Protection	                                      58
      5.5	Governance	                                                                    70
           5.5.1	 Human Rights	                                                          70
           5.5.2	 Public Financial Management	                                           72
           5.5.3	Decentralization	                                                       73


6	Conclusions	                                                                           79


Annexes
Annex 1	      IPRSP Policy Matrix	                                                       87
Annex 2	      Explanatory Note on Pro-Poor Data	                                         95


Tables
Table 3.1	    Sudan’s IPRSP Macroeconomic Objectives for 2013–15 and Actual Performance	 14
Table 3.2	    World Bank Doing Business—Paying Taxes: Sudan and Comparator African
              Countries	15
Table 4.1	    Components of Pro-Poor Expenditures for Sub-Saharan African Countries	     22
Table 4.2	    Zambia—Percentage Public Expenditure Allocations in Pro-Poor Sectors
              (2008–2012)	23
Table 4.3	    Overall Pro-Poor Expenditures (% of GDP)	                                  25
Table 5.1	    Pro-Poor Expenditures by Sector (Billion SDG)	                             31
Table 5.2	    Agriculture and Infrastructure Public Expenditures (2012–2014)	            34
Table 5.3	    Public Agriculture Expenditures as Percentage of Total Expenditures—
              Sudan and Comparators	                                                     35
Table 5.4	    Sudan: Public Agriculture Loans by Source in US$	                          35
Table 5.5	    Sudan: Grants Covering Public Agriculture Expenditures Classified
              by Development Partners—US$	                                               36
Table 5.6	    Sudan: Federal and States Agriculture and Infrastructure Expenditures
              as a Share of Total Agriculture and Infrastructure Expenditures	           37
Table 5.7	    Agriculture and Livestock Research Public Expenditures, 2012–2014	         41
Table 5.8	    Sudan Yields for Some Crops Compared to Selected Countries	                42
Table 5.9	    Total (Federal and State) Public Education Expenditures, 2012–2014	        46
Table 5.10	    Public Education Expenditures: Regional Comparison	                       47
Table 5.11	   Trends in Student Enrollments by Level of Education, 2005/06–2013/14	      48
Table 5.12	   Federal and State Health Expenditures, 2012–2014	                          53
Table 5.13	   Public Health Expenditures: Regional Comparison	                           55
Table 5.14	   Water and Sanitation Federal Expenditures, 2012–2014	                      57
Table 5.15	   Social Protection Public Expenditures—Budgetary and Non-Budgetary	         60
Table 5.16	   Sudan’s National Health Insurance Coverage by State, 2014	                 62
Table 5.17	   Microfinance Indicators (SDG million)	                                     64
Table 5.18	   The Social Insurance Fund	                                                 65
Table 5.19	   Safety Nets Expenditures	                                                  66
﻿Contents	                                                                                 v



Table 5.20	 Spending on Social Safety Nets (% of GDP) in 21 Sub-Saharan African
            Countries	67
Table 5.21	 Social Protection Programs Beneficiaries (Number of Beneficiaries)	          68
Table 5.22	 Basic Schools Seating and Textbooks Availability for Selected States (2014)	 75
Table 5.23	 Selected Socioeconomic Indicators by State	                                  76


Figures
Figure 1	    Mozambique—Public Expenditures Directed at Priority Sectors
             (% of total budget)	23
Figure 2	    Pro-Poor Expenditures as Percent of GDP	                                      24
Figure 3	    Total Public Expenditures as Percent of GDP (1997–2013)	                      26
Figure 4	    Budgeted versus Actual Share of Pro-Poor Public Expenditures as Percent
             of GDP, 2012–2014	                                                            26
Figure 5	    Current versus Development Pro-Poor Expenditures at Federal and State Levels	 27
Figure 6	    Current versus Development Pro-Poor Expenditures at State Level	              27
Figure 7	    Composition of Agriculture Development Expenditures by Category	              34
Figure 8	    Public Agriculture Expenditures by Source of Financing	                       35
Figure 9	    Recurrent and Development Agriculture Expenditures Shares	                    36
Figure 10	   Budgeted versus Actual Agriculture Expenditures at Federal and State Levels	  37
Figure 11	   Bank Financing to Agriculture	                                                37
Figure 12	   Agriculture Production and Yields for Selected Crops and Agriculture Exports	 39
Figure 13	   Roads Lengths and Density	                                                    41
Figure 14	   Student Enrollments by Level of Education and Public Education Expenditures
             2013/2014	49
Figure 15	   Basic Education Enrollment Rate (GER %) by State and Gender, 2013/14	         50
Figure 16	   Secondary Education Enrollment (GER %) by State and Gender, 2013/14	          50
Figure 17	   Primary School Enrollment (% gross of age group) Sudan
             and Sub-Saharan Africa	                                                       51
Figure 18	   Public Health Expenditures at the Federal and State Levels, 2012–2014	        54
Figure 19	   Expenditures for Health for Federal and States in Millions SDG	               54
Figure 20	   Trends in Under-Five Infant Mortality Rates	                                  55
Figure 21	   Poverty Rate and Cash Transfer Distribution by State (%)	                     69
Figure 22	   Relative Shares of Revenues and Expenditures between Federal and States	      74
Figure 23	   Transfers to States as Percent of Government Revenues	                        74
Figure 24	   Wages and Salaries Increase in States	                                        74
Preface and Acknowledgements




Sudan’s National Assembly approved the Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP) in
July 2012. The document was then endorsed by the Boards of the World Bank Group and the
IMF in October 2013. This Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Status Report assesses the
status of implementation of the IPRSP; examines progress towards poverty reduction in Sudan;
and draws lessons learned to inform the preparation of the full-fledged Poverty Reduction Strat-
egy Paper (PRSP) that the Government of Sudan is currently preparing. The status report is an
effective instrument for guiding the PRSP, providing an analytical product, and establishing an
indispensable dialogue platform for development partners through which to coordinate with the
Government of Sudan.

The Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper Status Report was jointly prepared by the Minis-
try of Finance and Economic Planning Consultant, El-Fatih Ali Siddig, and World Bank Group
Consultant, Fareed M. A. Hassan. The status report benefited from the guidance and support
of the Minister of Finance and Economic Planning, H. E. Badr El-Din Mahmoud Abbas, and
the World Bank Group Country Representative for Sudan, Xavier Furtado, in addition to close
consultations with a variety of national and international stakeholders as well as ministries staff
at the federal and state levels. Earlier drafts of this report’s main findings were presented at meet-
ings of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper High-Level Working Group under the leadership of
H. E. State Minister Magdi Yassin. Feedback from these meetings has been incorporated.

The report concludes that public resources allocated to the IPRSP pillars, with the view of tar-
geting the poor, have grown since 2012. The growth in pro-poor spending is a commendable
achievement as it has occurred in the context of a difficult economic situation, including declin-
ing revenues and expenditures, following South Sudan’s secession, Sudan’s limited access to
concessional development financing due to the external debt, and challenges of the sanctions.
However, the report also notes several areas where the policy, planning and execution functions
of the Government could be strengthened thereby making more effective use of Sudan’s own
resources as well as the limited concessional financing available. Going forward, it will be impor-
tant to learn from these lessons while also protecting and raising the levels as well as improving
the effectiveness of pro-poor spending in the budget. The formation of Sudan’s national poverty
reduction strategy should help in this regard.

The reporting team hereby expresses their gratitude to all whose support and active participation
made possible the development of this important product.




vi
Summary of Findings and Way Forward




This status report assesses the progress made in implementing Sudan’s IPRSP. The report examines
the context within which the IPRSP was implemented, tracks pro-poor expenditures, evaluates
progress made under IPRSP pillars/sectors, identifies constraints and shortcomings, and is meant
to inform the development of Sudan’s full national poverty reduction strategy.

Sudan has suffered from prolonged years of conflict, volatile security situations, political transi-
tions, an unsustainable debt burden, economic and financial sanctions and fragile relations with
the international community, all of which have constrained the country’s broad-based growth
prospects and poverty reduction efforts. Sudan’s poverty rate is estimated at 46 percent, indicat-
ing that some 15 million people are poor. The poverty rate is significantly higher in rural areas
(58 percent) than in urban areas (26 percent), and varies markedly across states, from 26 percent
in Khartoum state to nearly 60 percent in conflict-affected states such as North Darfur, South
Kordofan. Other social indictors exhibit the same pattern.

In 2012, Sudan adopted an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy that seeks to reduce poverty through
rapid and sustainable shared economic growth. The strategy is clustered around four broad pillars:
(i) promote economic growth and employment creation, focusing on agriculture and infrastruc-
ture; (ii) develop human resources, emphasizing education, health and social protection; (iii)
reintegrate IDPs and other displaced populations; and (iv) strengthen governance and institu-
tional capacity of the public sector, focusing on human rights, peace and security, decentraliza-
tion and public financial management. These pillars along with the rest of Sudan’s IPRSP were
endorsed by the Executive Boards of the World Bank and the IMF in October 2013.

Public resources allocated to the IPRS pillars with the view of targeting the poor have grown since
2012, signaling the Government’s commitment to poverty reduction. Public resources, allocated to
the IPRS pillars of agriculture and infrastructure, human resources, governance, and integration
of IDPs, increased from 4.2 percent of GDP to 5.0 percent of GDP in 2014. These percentages do
not include subsidies and non-budgetary expenditures such as zakat (Islamic charity) and micro-
finance. If these resources were included, pro-poor expenditures would increase from 7.2 percent
of GDP in 2012 to 8.4 percent of GDP in 2014. The growth in pro-poor spending has occurred
despite the decline in total expenditures and the difficult economic situation following South
Sudan’s secession, limited access to external financing for development due to Sudan’s external
debt, and challenges of the sanctions. It will be important to protect and strengthen pro-poor
spending as a policy reflected in the budget, especially during resource envelope shortfalls. The
formulation of a national poverty reduction strategy (PRSP) should help in this regard.

The need for improving the mechanisms for prioritizing pro-poor expenditures during the budget
preparation and execution processes is vital for effective implementation of PRSP. The pro-poor
budget execution rate averaged only 80 percent of planned amount during the IPRSP implemen-
tation period. The low budget credibility is largely explained by the shortfall on development pro-
poor spending, reflecting strict priority for release of funds to the recurrent activities—such as
wages and salaries—compared to development projects during resource envelope shortfalls. This
highlights the need for improving the mechanisms for further prioritizing development expendi-
tures during the budget preparation and execution processes, especially at subnational levels.

                                                                                                  vii
viii	                                                            Summary of Findings and Way Forward﻿



The PRSP should lead to a measurable definition of pro-poor spending that effectively captures
expenditures directed to the poor, and enables monitoring of Government efforts. While identify-
ing pro-poor spending is the first step, applying a measurable/working definition is vital towards
formalizing monitoring in budget planning, implementation and execution, and reporting. The
set of policies and priorities developed in the IPRSP anchored a definition of poverty-reducing
expenditures that has been utilized by this report. Further improvements are expected during the
process of the full PRSP preparation, including better monitoring of the actual use of the funds
classified as pro-poor. Identification of pro-poor expenditures is highly context-dependent,
and is most useful as a means to help guide and track Government efforts when the conceptual
framework is developed through a wide participatory discussion and is country-owned, under-
scoring the desirability for the PRSP to provide the framework. This report and the experience of
some Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) countries in applying the pro-poor expenditures definition can
also provide guidance.



Creating an Enabling Political Environment
Creating a conducive political environment is essential for reducing poverty. Essential steps include:
(i) bringing a lasting political settlement through the ongoing political dialogue initiated by the
Government to its intended aim; (ii) reaching a lasting peace for the conflict in Darfur and in the
two states of Blue Nile and South Kordofan; (iii) finding practical ways to implement the Septem-
ber 2012 agreements with South Sudan; (iv) addressing delays and/or ineffective implementation
of the Doha Document for Peace in Darfur (DDPD) and Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement (EPA);
(v) ending the vicious inter-tribal fighting in Darfur; (vi) resolving the issue of settlement of the
Sudanese returnees from South Sudan; (vii) finalizing the mechanisms initiated by the Govern-
ment for combating corruption; and (viii) addressing the remaining pending issues of concern to
the UN Human Rights Council, building on efforts taken by the Government in these areas.



Creating an Enabling Economic Environment
Economic stability is essential for economic growth, the single most important factor in poverty
reduction. In consultation with the IMF the Government of Sudan should determine the macro-
economic targets (growth rate, inflation, budget deficit, exchange rate regime, and international
reserves) and pursue prudent fiscal and monetary policies with the objective of attaining macro-
economic stability.

The current fiscal constraints in Sudan, following the loss of oil revenues underscore the impor-
tance of increasing revenue resources and achieve expenditure efficiency and effective use of scare
resources. Increasing fiscal space (like reducing tax exemptions, increasing the tax base) is essen-
tial for the noninflationary finance of the pro-poor expenditures.

Redirecting the substantial resources allocated for subsidies to targeted pro-poor expenditures greatly
contributes to efficient use of the limited resources. Sudan runs an extremely expensive general
subsidies system that is not better targeted towards the poor. The issues of subsidies removal
needs to be seriously looked into. Lifting of subsidies could be sequenced to minimize impacts
on the poor such as starting with items that are less important to poorer households as recom-
mended by the IMF and World Bank Group and utilizing the subsidy resources for well-targeted
compensation programs.

It will be extremely difficult for Sudan to effectively address poverty reduction without assistance
from the international community. Major steps required include lifting the US sanctions, resolv-
ing Sudan’s external debt and arrears, and increasing concessional development funding.
﻿
Summary of Findings and Way Forward	                                                                ix



Along with macroeconomic stability and sustainable economic growth, improvements are needed in
the quality of growth to ensure broader participation along with poverty targeting programs:

      (i)	 encourage a diversified pattern of growth that promotes the productive use of labor—
           the most abundant resource of the poor, particularly in rural areas where nearly 60
           percent of poor households live and depend on agriculture as the main source of
           livelihood—through policies that address constraints facing the rural/agriculture
           sector;
     (ii)	 invest in human development to build and enhance the capabilities of the poor through
           better education and health, and address interstate disparities in accessing basic
           services; and
    (iii)	 improve the targeting of transfers and safety nets to support those living in remote and
           resource poor states or groups directly affected by internal conflicts, displacement,
           harsh climate conditions, droughts, erratic and low rainfall, unemployment and
           frequent economic adjustments with direct consequences on the poor.

A detailed analysis is provided below with the view of informing the preparation of the full national
poverty reduction strategy.



Agriculture as an Engine of Growth
The IPRSP recognized the importance of agriculture, but the sector remains extremely underfunded.
Public resources allocated to agriculture remain small compared to the ambitious objectives of
increasing agricultural productivity and expanding exports. Sudan’s agriculture and agriculture
related sectors represent around 1 percent of GDP, whereas if agriculture related sectors were
excluded, the share of public spending on agriculture to GDP would be around 0.3 percent, less
than the average of the developing countries of 1 percent–2 percent and well short of agreed
Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Program (CAADP) targets.

In terms of policy priorities, the Government is according high priority to agriculture related infra-
structure. Irrigation dams and paved roads account for more than 80 percent of total agriculture
expenditures. The remaining balance is largely absorbed by irrigated agriculture, leaving other
sectors such as livestock, rain fed agriculture (which accounts for approximately 80 percent of the
sector), research and agricultural service support with meager resources.

In addition to the large investments in irrigation and roads, efforts were made to develop livestock
and crop production. Liberalization policies and investments in the Gum Arabic and oilseeds
led to increased production and exports of those commodities. Investments in technologi-
cal improvement (i.e., genetically modified cotton) contributed to the recovery of cotton. The
livestock sector, which accounts for half of total agricultural GDP, also witnessed a remark-
able recovery. Livestock exports increased almost tenfold over the period 2008–2013 led by the
increase of sheep exports, primarily to Arab countries. Vaccination and veterinary inspection of
livestock for exports as well as investment in quarantines contributed to the recovery of live ani-
mal’s export.

However, the development of the sector has lagged behind its potential. Agricultural productivity
for most crops lags well behind those seen in neighboring countries and have stagnated or even
declined. Dependence on cereal imports, especially wheat, has grown considerably over the past
decade and food security remains a concern. The livestock sector, where production is strong,
rising and generates large export earnings, is facing important risks to sustainability.
x	                                                               Summary of Findings and Way Forward﻿



The PRSP will be an opportunity to address agricultural constraints, mostly being of a medium- to
long-term nature. The recovery of production in certain crops as well as the livestock exports
over the past three years have helped to compensate for the loss of oil; nonetheless, the main
constraints faced by agriculture are still prevailing. Besides improving the macroeconomic envi-
ronment for agriculture growth, Sudan has to make strategic choices to address the constraints
facing agriculture, particularly the structural issues as detailed below.

Transforming Sudan’s subsistence agriculture to an economically viable sector will require policy
choices that must be reflected in the full PRSP. The transformation will entail certain policy
choices and trade-offs. The transformation is linked to the change in land rights and access to
services such as modern and innovative technology, extension, improved seeds, rural credit, and
development of infrastructure. The current level of investment and the institutional arrange-
ments in agriculture will not achieve these objectives.

Sustainable production in rain fed agriculture is critically dependent on resolving land issues. How-
ever, land reform in Sudan is difficult to manage and if not carefully designed could result in
massive conflicts and social disintegration. Nevertheless, strategic choices are required to address
the dichotomy between the statutory and customary land laws and the dichotomy between tribal
management of land and civil administration of land. The challenge is how to initiate a gradual
approach to reform the land rights issue with the least disruptions to the social system and with-
out fueling further conflicts.

Revitalizing irrigated agriculture is a strategic choice. Rainfall in Sudan is erratic and varies from
one location to the other. Drought episodes occur from time to time. Dependence on rain fed
agriculture may pose great risks and increase vulnerability of the poor and puts the economy
under volatility pressures. The pressures posed by climate change only exacerbate the situation.
Actions to reduce volatility in the rain fed areas like use of water harvesting, drought resistance
seeds, and other measures will be needed. Revitalization of the irrigated sector remains a strate-
gic choice despite the substantial investments it requires. The challenge will be how to develop
the irrigated sector which is located in the center and northern parts of Sudan, without neglect-
ing the rain fed sector in which the majority of the poor live and in such a way as not to turn the
rest of the country into resource poor areas.

Fundamental issues related to the nomadic livestock sector need to be addressed. On one hand,
livestock shows remarkable performance in terms of production and resilience in response to
climate change. On the other hand, it is facing serious challenges that threaten its existence. The
mobile system of nomadic livestock production often leads to conflicts among parties competing
for grazing, water and space. Pastoralists are being driven into more remote areas through the
gradual expansion of agriculture, minerals explorations—including artisanal gold mining—and
the situation is exacerbated by land degradation. The secession of the South resulted in loss of
pastures and grazing space. While the livestock population fell by only 28 percent due to seces-
sion, the natural rangeland resources upon which they depend fell by 40 percent. The normal
wetland areas in South Sudan in which grazing was practised by northern Sudan tribes for cen-
turies are now considered trespassing by the South Sudanese authorities. Moreover, the inher-
ent volatility of the sector, being exposed to frequent drought and diseases, is apparent. Issues
of quality are also a concern that affects commercialization and competitiveness of the livestock
sector. Live sheep exports which dominate the livestock exports in Sudan have limited markets,
which are risky. The future demand for livestock products is based on consumers’ concern about
food quality, including food safety and animal welfare, while modern systems of production
greatly benefit from genetic improvement in grass and animals that are both difficult to meet
in traditional production systems. Therefore, the future is for the modern livestock production
rather than the traditional production system. Although the change seems inevitable, the last
thing the current volatile livestock sector in Sudan needs is an abrupt change. Meanwhile, the
﻿
Summary of Findings and Way Forward	                                                                xi



sector has to be provided with the required services of water, veterinary, rangeland rehabilitation
and stock route demarcation.

Agro industrialization and diversification are vital for economic growth and poverty reduction.
Sudan cannot afford to continue relying on exports of agriculture raw material from mainly tra-
ditional and subsistence economies. Industrialization and modernization of agriculture are inevi-
table for sustaining poverty reduction and economic development. But Sudan has a long way to
go to reach this goal. Many of the large scale agro-processing factories in the Sudan are operating
far below capacity. The constraints inhibiting the growth of agro industry include: weak integra-
tion between agriculture, manufacturing and trade, irregular supply of raw materials, outdated
technology, high electricity rates and interrupted power supply, unskilled manpower, and limited
access to finance and unstable supply of foreign exchange to buy inputs. Nevertheless, initial
steps have to start to achieve this medium- to long-term goal. Meanwhile, reform and actions to
increase production and growth from the existing systems have to continue. Industrialization of
agriculture raw materials issues should be looked into as medium- to long-term solutions. Mean-
while, diversification of exports is essential in the short run.

Poor transport infrastructure is the main cause of high transport costs that adversely affect the com-
petitiveness of Sudanese agriculture. The poor quality of roads as a result of lack of maintenance in
Sudan significantly lowers the efficiency of transport services. Poor maintenance reduces the life
span of the existing stock of infrastructure and will result in higher operating costs.



Human Resources
Developing human resources is an IPRSP pillar. The IPRSP recognizes the role of investment in
human development to build and enhance the population capabilities through education and
better health. The emphasis is on bridging the gap in enrollment between the states and between
boys and girls; increasing the quality of education including teachers training; reducing illiteracy;
and achieving full coverage of schools with textbooks and seating. On health, water supply and
sanitation, the IPRSP emphasized improving access, equity and coverage.

However, major efforts are needed to strengthen states’ capacity to deliver basic services. The capac-
ity for data collection and information management within the decentralized framework of
service delivery remains weak. The weak capacity leads to incomplete reporting/monitoring of
expenditure and inadequate evaluation of related results at these levels (i.e., inadequate M&E).
This challenges evidence base planning and targeting service delivery.



Education
Public education spending and student enrollment has grown sharply since 2012, signaling the Gov-
ernment of Sudan’s commitment to expand and improve education opportunities. Enrollment has
increased at all levels of the education system, but basic education is the level that accounts for
the largest absolute increase in enrollments.

Increasing levels of education expenditures are encouraging, but improved service delivery to the
poor requires an appropriate balance between current and development expenditures. Education
expenditure performance continued to reflect strict priority for release of funds to wages and
salaries compared to development expenditures which exhibit the lowest execution rate. Low
level development expenditure has serious repercussions for effective implementation of state’s
pro-poor programs and development efforts more generally. Improved service delivery to states
and local areas requires large development expenditures, given the poor infrastructure and low
level of socioeconomic development in these areas. This urges actions that aim at improving
xii	                                                            Summary of Findings and Way Forward﻿



resource allocation, given that the primary responsibility for basic services delivery lies with the
state governments.

Despite progress made, basic school enrollment is falling short of achieving universal access. Only
three out of four children of basic school age are receiving a formal education and about three
million are out of school. The secondary school gross enrollment rate is about 34 percent or less
than half the basic level. However, these average enrollment rates mask wide variation across
states and gender.

Education performance varies considerably by state and gender, necessitating further effort to con-
solidate and improve progress. While the increase in education spending and fiscal decentraliza-
tion are expected to redistribute resources to match public service delivery responsibilities, and
hence improve interstate equity, education performance disparities across gender and states have
not yet been fully addressed. This necessitates further effort to consolidate and improve progress.

Given the increased enrollment in basic education, demand for secondary education is expected to
rise. The Government will need to address the allocation and efficiency of education subsectors
to accommodate growing demand for post-basic education in the medium- to-long term.

Whereas the policy of the Government is free basic education, household out-of-pocket spending is
significant and poses a barrier to education, especially for poor households. Available data suggests
that households pay for the running of schools in addition to other costs for uniforms, textbooks
and meals for their children. For poorest households, out-of-pocket basic education spending
poses a real barrier to education, and even more so when a family has many children, with impli-
cations for student attendance and dropouts.



Health
Sudan is committed to supporting decentralization in health, and state level spending share for
health is increasing. This is consistent with delegating the primary responsibility for basic service
delivery to state governments. Public Health spending at the state level has increased since 2012
and almost all of total public health spending now takes place at the state level.

The composition of health spending is broadly similar to education. The increase in health expendi-
ture since 2012 has been largely directed to current spending. The high level of current spending
raises concerns as improving service delivery in the sector requires investment in health facilities,
medical equipment, staff training and capacity building.

Some progress was made in the health indicators, but Sudan is not meeting the health Millennium
Development Goal (MDG) targets. Child and maternal mortality rates improved during the
review period, but they remain high. The maternal mortality ratio is high (well above the 2015
MDG target of 180) and the under five mortality rate also exceeds the MDG target.

Health outcome disparities across states have not yet been fully addressed, necessitating further
effort to consolidate and improve progress. These disparities reflect the large differences in the
allocation of resources across states as well as states’ ability to track and monitor budgetary
allocations, including evaluating expenditure outcomes. Fiscal decentralization is expected to
help address these state disparities by redistributing resources to match public service delivery
responsibilities, and thus improve equity, responsiveness in public services to local level demand,
subnational autonomy and accountability and state development more generally. In addition to
resource allocation, improving the efficiency in applying these resources is important for effec-
tive service delivery.
﻿
Summary of Findings and Way Forward	                                                                   xiii



Water and Sanitation
Despite the commitments and targets defined in the IPRSP and related water and sanitation sector
plans, the sector performance is still far from reaching the MDGs targets. The percentage of house-
hold members using improved sources of drinking water reached 68 percent in 2014 while the
percent of household members using improved sanitation facilities only reached 33 percent in
2014, indicating considerable efforts are required to achieve these targets. Around 50 percent of
the existing basic schools don’t have access to improved drinking water and sanitation facilities.
The large number of internally displaced people adds to this challenge.

There is a large variation in access to water and sanitation among states. Water and sanitation
access in West Kordofan State, for example, stands at 60 percent and 23 percent respectively,
which are below national average of 68 percent and 33 percent.

Water and sanitation sector has to be given adequate funding commensurate with its important role
in the livelihood of the population. Adequate funding is required to improve overall quality and
access as well as address states’ disparities.

Attention has to be given to the information of the water sector as a separate sector, particularly at
state and locality levels to allow for better planning. Lack of monitoring reflects poor quality of
available data concerning actual coverage of water supply and sanitation. The water and sanita-
tion sector should be supported with better capacity and training particularly at the state level.

Efforts are required to integrate water, sanitation and hygiene within other sectors—mainly educa-
tion, nutrition and health. Schools, health and nutrition centers are useful entry points for such
interventions. Specific attention is to be given for water quality.

Institutional reform for sustainability of water facilities is a concern that needs to be addressed.
There should be clarity in defining the roles and responsibilities between the federal, state and
locality levels and communities, in terms of managing and operating projects, and ensuring
sustainability.

Meeting the multiple demands for water for domestic, farming and livestock, in an integrated man-
ner, is crucial for maintaining local economic development within a peaceful and stable society.
Moreover, the resources in the sector have to be used efficiently so that the service is delivered at
an affordable price for the poor.



Social Welfare, Security and Protection
Social protection is included under the IPRSP pillar of developing human resources. Aware of the
social problems created by vulnerability factors (e.g., environmental, economic, and conflict
and displacement), the Government of Sudan has set a fairly extensive social protection system,
involving several institutions.

Significant increase in coverage for most of the social protection programs has been made but there
is room for further improvements. Despite the increased coverage, Sudan has a long way to go to
reach adequate coverage in certain programs like health insurance due to the magnitude of vul-
nerability and widespread poverty as well as the low base from which these programs started.

The coverage of social protection needs to be expanded and the performance of outlets that provide
treatment services for health insurance need to be improved. Many remote areas in which poverty
is higher are not well served with health services outlets. The health facilities providing services
to the health insurance in rural areas suffer from the shortages of the medical staff and there are
xiv	                                                            Summary of Findings and Way Forward﻿



weaknesses in the availability of all the packages covered by the health insurance in the health
centers. A strong monitoring is needed as there is an emerging black market trade in the freely
distributed medicines including for children less than five years.

Due to Sudan’s widespread poverty and vulnerability, social protection cannot reach all the poor,
necessitating further improvements in targeting mechanisms. There is a need to focus on the poor-
est and most vulnerable to ensure maximum influence and affordability. Targeting mechanisms
for the cash transfers need further improvements and have to be supported by a transparent
data base and a monitoring system. This should be based on a rigorous evaluation of the current
experience.

There should be more equity considerations in delivering social protection programs. A large varia-
tion in the coverage among states is clear with some poorest states getting the least benefit.
Improving social protection and welfare mechanisms, particularly for most vulnerable and at-
risk populations including women, youth, and internally displaced persons will be a key priority
to reduce situations of acute vulnerability among these groups. This will also help to promote
stability and social cohesion in areas affected by conflict.

Several institutions are responsible for the social protection network and coordination needs further
improvements. Reviewing of the existing institutional setup is particularly crucial to enhance the
coordination aspects. Several ministries and non-government institutions are responsible for
social protection safety net activities with overlapping mandates and little coordination among
them. The fragmentation of social programs and involvement of multiple ministries and insti-
tutions creates inefficiencies and confusion about the roles and responsibilities of the actors
involved. There is a need to review the institutional architecture for effective and efficient social
protection policy design and program implementation.

The Government’s social protection system is supported by donor community and informal net-
works including substantial remittances transferred by Sudanese migrants abroad. However, U.S.
economic sanctions and ‘over-compliance’ by non-U.S. commercial banks severely affects remit-
tances to Sudan. The social protection system is also supported by the donor community with an
extensive program targeting IDPs and other vulnerable populations.



Governance
Fiscal federal transfers have not yet succeeded in narrowing service delivery disparities among the
states that necessitate a review of the formula for distributing federal resources among states. There
is an urgent need to review formulas and consider other transfer options such as blocked and
specific purpose grants to address the disparities in certain critical areas like education. However,
this should be accompanied by strict adherence to prudent financial management by the states.
Allocation of resources between wages, running expenses and development is a concern.

There is an urgent need to direct resources to development at the state level, where responsibility
for basic service delivery has been devolved. The low level of development expenditures at the
state level is a cause for concern, and there is a need to direct resources to development at the
state level, where it will directly benefit the poor. Improving service delivery to the poor requires
investment in schools, clinics, roads and so on. The relative emphasis on current spending also
leaves meager resources devoted to running expenses with the consequent result of poor sustain-
ability and maintenance of development projects.

Making development planning more effective through better coordination between federal and
state levels. Better coordination involves information sharing (e.g., budget and execution data);
developing guidelines for more streamlined procedures; and strengthening capacity in budget
﻿
Summary of Findings and Way Forward	                                                                 xv



planning, prioritizing and execution at the state level. As more pro-poor expenditures occur at
the subnational level, it is imperative to gather information at the state/locality level on the use of
funds to ensure effective utilization of resources.

Capacities in all financial management aspects are weak invariably in all states, requiring a com-
prehensive capacity building program funded and supervised by the federal Government. The
weakness of staff capacities is a major reason for the poor public financial management (PFM).
States lack electronic networking systems linking all departments, let alone localities. None of the
states have an electronic archiving system in place. States do not prepare their budgets within a
medium-term expenditures framework, but rather formulate incremental budgeting. Localities
budgets are not fully integrated into the states budgets. The Auditor General indicated in his last
report that retention and extra budgetary practices still exist in the states, but there are improve-
ments in 2013 compared to 2012. Internal auditing in the states suffers from lack of uniform leg-
islation between the federal Government and the states and weak capacities (e.g., there are rarely
certified auditors in states). Procurement staff in most of the states is unqualified.



Other Issues
The informal sector in Sudan seems to have significant contribution to employment. However, the
information about the sector is insufficient to allow for analysing its impact on the poor. For
example, artisanal gold mining is becoming a major economic activity that employs a significant
number of people. Estimates show that about one million persons are directly engaged in direct
mining activities and around 3 million are indirectly depending on this sector through the provi-
sion of goods and services. The artisanal gold mining extends over 10 states. The PRSP should
give special consideration to this emerging sector in terms of its impact on poverty reduction.

Adequate material related to the private sector and its role in growth, employment and poverty
reduction exists. The PRSP needs to synthesize the role to be played by the private sector.
Chapter 1


Background




S
       udan adopted an interim poverty reduction strategy to be implemented during the period
       2012–2014. Preparation of the IPRSP featured extensive consultations with Government,
       non-government organizations, civil society organizations as well as members of the inter-
national community. The IPRSP was approved by the Council of Ministers and Parliament in
July 2012. The Government has stated that priorities in the IPRSP informed the 2012 budget as
much as possible.

The IPRSP was based on the 2009 National Baseline Household Survey (NBHS) that provided the
base for a first comprehensive assessment of living conditions in Sudan since 1978. The household
survey data provided a rare opportunity for analyzing poverty and inequality profile of the coun-
try, establishing a sound benchmark for poverty monitoring, and evaluating the welfare impacts
of policies and programs.

According to the IPRSP, poverty is high and largely a rural phenomenon. Based on the 2009
National Baseline Household Survey (NBHS) the poverty incidence was estimated at 46.5 per-
cent. About one in two Sudanese, close to 14 million people, lived in poverty in 2009. The con-
sumption of the poor was, on average, SDG 74 per capita, or 65 percent of the national poverty
line set at SDG 114 per month per capita. The figure signals that poverty is deep in Sudan with
most of the poor relatively far below the national poverty line. The poverty rate is significantly
higher in rural areas (58 percent) than in urban areas (26 percent), highlighting the inverse rela-
tionship between poverty and urbanization in Sudan. While rural areas account for about two-
thirds (64.4 percent) of the population, they account for almost 80 percent of Sudan’s poor.

Poverty varies markedly across states. The poverty rate varies from 26 percent in Khartoum state;
to above 60 percent in some states such as North Darfur. Poverty also varies markedly across
localities/Mahalyias. For example, in Darfur, where the largest poverty rates are recorded, there
are still better off Mahalyias: El Geneina (19 percent), Nyala (24 percent), and Azoom (33 per-
cent). Similarly, in parts of the country where poverty rates are quite low at the state level, such
as River Nile, and Northern and Kassala, we find Mahaliyas which witness high levels of poverty:
El Damar (40 percent), Algolid (46 percent), Aldaba (52 percent), Talkook (63 percent), and
Hamashkoreeb (79 percent).

Several lessons were drawn in the IPRSP regarding correlates of poverty. Agriculture is the main
source of livelihood for the Sudanese poor. More than 60 percent of households in the poorest
quintile rely on agriculture as their main livelihood in contrast to only 20 percent of households

                                                                                                      1
2	                                                                           CHAPTER 1 Background


in the wealthiest quintile. Poverty rates also correlate highly with education levels. Poverty rates
are highest for those living in households whose head has no education and are also high for
those whose heads have only some primary education and those who report that khalwa (pre-
school) is their highest level of education completed. Besides direct linkages with poverty, educa-
tion outcomes are closely linked with employment outcomes. The 2009 NBHS data shows that
individuals who attain higher education are significantly more likely to be employed than indi-
viduals who have attained primary or secondary education. Employment is essential for reducing
poverty. Lack of vibrant private sector is one of the main contributing factors to scarcity of jobs.

Many poor households lack adequate access to some basic health services as well as infrastructure
and utilities. The NBHS data suggest that many poor Sudanese households lack adequate access
to public utilities and infrastructure. Access to improved water, electricity and mobile phone by
the poorest 20 percent of the population is limited at 20 percent. Even for the richest 20 percent,
accessibility is below 50 percent. Most of the Sudanese households rely exclusively on firewood
for cooking and heating. Moreover, the poorest 20 percent spend almost 8 percent of their total
consumption on utilities, compared to less than 5 percent for the richest 20 percent.

There is no appreciable difference in poverty by gender. The incidence of poverty is not statisti-
cally different between men and women and female-headed and male-headed households. This
finding makes Sudan unique and different from many developing countries where women and
female-headed households are more vulnerable to poverty. However, this finding is based on
income poverty and does not take into account many other important dimensions of poverty and
gender disparities in Sudan.

Based on the analysis of the poverty situation as outlined above, the IPRSP suggested rapid and
sustainable shared economic growth to reduce poverty. It focuses on actions to build the founda-
tion for rapid broad-based economic growth, structural transformation, and diversification of
the economy over the medium and long term. The actions include establishing a capable state,
with good governance and capacity for effective public actions; stabilizing the population and
communities destabilized by conflicts; building human resources as an important pillar of the
foundation for development; and provide an enabling environment for rapid and sustainable eco-
nomic growth. The strategy is clustered under four broad pillars: (i) promote economic growth
and employment creation; (ii) develop human resources; (iii) reintegrate IDPs and other dis-
placed populations; and (iv) strengthen governance and institutional capacity of the public sector
(Box 1.1).

Although the IPRS design called for four pillars, the scope of the IPRSP program was ambitious in
relations to allocated time, resources, and available capacity. The IPRSP program focus was fairly
broad, covering 19 objectives/sectors (e.g. agriculture, education, health infrastructure water
safety net, natural resources, business environment, PFM, property rights, human rights, decen-
tralization, and conflict resolution) each with several sub-objectives. This in turn led to prolifera-
tion of objectives and policy measures. The IPRSP Policy Matrix included some 30 objectives
and sub-objectives as well as about 100 policy measures (Annex 1, IPRSP Policy Matrix). This
ambitious program is expected to be implemented within a three year period (2012–2014), with
limited domestic resources, following the loss of oil and uncertain international community sup-
port as well as weak implementation capacity.

More than three years have passed since the inception of the IPRSP and several changes took place.
National, state, and sub-state level poverty estimates based on 2008 Census and 2009 (NBHS)
need to be updated to reflect recent developments. While these estimates are useful for subse-
quent poverty analysis, they do not convey a valid picture of the country in 2015. Many devel-
opments have taken place since 2011, when Sudan’s economic fortunes have changed with the
secession of South Sudan and the loss of a larger share of the oil revenues that fueled Sudan’s
economic growth during the 2000s. The conflict in Darfur, Blue Nile and South Kordofan has
CHAPTER 1 Background	                                                                               3



  Box 1.1: IPRSP Pillars

  I. Promotion of Economic Growth and Employment Creation: The emphasis is on growth in
  agriculture and livestock, manufacturing and services, and the role of the private sector.
  Building on the key pillars of governance, reintegration and human resources, the IPRSP
  discusses its strategy for employment creation growth under four sub-pillars: enabling
  macroeconomic environment for growth; enabling environment for private sector growth;
  enhancing productivity and growth in agriculture; strengthening economic services for
  recovery and growth; and protection of natural resources and the environment.

  II. Developing Human Resources: The focus is on the role of investment in human develop-
  ment to build and enhance the population capabilities through education and better health,
  emphasis on closing the disparities in access to opportunities for self-improvement for
  women and the very poor, and reducing the inequality in human development outcomes
  between states and regions.

  III. Reintegration of IDPs and Other Displaced Populations: Support systematic approach to
  end the dependent status of these displaced populations by providing permanent access
  to shelter and sustainable livelihoods, to economic and social opportunities such as land,
  credit, market places, schools and health facilities, and participation in civic activities and
  decision-making in the communities.

  IV. Strengthening Governance and Institutional Capacity: Priority on building a strong, inclu-
  sive, transparent and effective state and the institutional capacity to govern and deliver
  public services to the population. Important elements of this good governance include effec-
  tive public financial management and decentralization, peace and security, fighting corrup-
  tion, promoting human rights, and improving justice and law enforcement.



interrupted development efforts, aggravated service delivery function, and affected main sources
of livelihood. All of these factors have adversely affected the poverty situation and necessitated
updating poverty estimates.

The Government in its continuous endeavor to address the poverty in the country is moving toward
updating the NBHS and preparing a PRSP. Work has already started in conducting a new house-
hold survey with assistance from the AfDB. In line with the National Statistical Development
Strategy, Central Bureau of Statistics, the new household survey was designed in 2012. The sur-
vey started after a good preparation and statistical capacity building. The survey covers all the
states and planned to be completed by February 2015. However, it has faced several constraints
that have delayed its completion.

Prior to embarking on the PRSP, the Government in collaboration with developing partners decided
to assess the status of implementation of the IPRSP and the progress towards poverty reduction dur-
ing the implementation period of the IPRSP (2012–2014) with a focus on all levels of the results
chain. The IPRSP status report which is expected to cover achievements and obstacles towards
poverty reduction will draw lessons learned to inform the preparation of the PRSP.



1.1	    Approach
This Study is carried out in fulfillment of the above objectives. It assesses the context within which
IPRSP was implemented, tracks the pro-poor expenditures and assesses the performance and
outcomes for sectors/pillars against the objectives set, identifying constraints and shortcomings to
inform the PRSP preparation. The time period of the evaluation is confined to the years 2012–2014.
4	                                                                           CHAPTER 1 Background


The study assesses the macroeconomic context within which IPRSP was implemented, as growth
is considered the single most important factor in poverty reduction. The study also reviews the
political environment that supports governance during the IPRSP period. The performance of
the pro-poor sectors/pillars and pro-poor expenditures including agriculture, human develop-
ment, social protection and welfare, and governance were then assessed. Outcomes for sectors/
pillars against set objectives were established, and constraints and shortcomings to inform the
PRSP preparation were identified.

The study adopted a specific definition for pro-poor expenditures building on the IPRSP policies
for priority actions for growth and poverty reduction (see Box 4.1). Attention was also given for
comprehensiveness of the definition by adding non budgetary public expenditures from Zakat
Fund and microfinance. Comparison is also made with other pro-poor expenditure definitions
in other studies like the last Sudan’s Public Expenditure Review (PER-World Bank 2007) as well
as with Sub Saharan African countries.

Pro-poor expenditures data comprised federal and state level public expenditures. Comprehensive
pro-poor expenditure data was compiled from MoFEP budgeted and actual expenditures of the
spending units at federal level. Budgeted and actual expenditures of the states and localities were
compiled from the states yearly closed accounts. Data for social protection institutions was com-
piled from the annual reports of Zakat Fund, Social Insurance Fund, National Pension Fund and
National Health Insurance for the period 2012 to 2014.

There are severe data problems in Sudan which constitutes a limitation to the analysis of certain
aspects of poverty. Future efforts should be exerted to improve the data collection (Annex 2).

The status report approach involves:

       (i)	 a desk review of available documentation on country-level strategies and analytical
            work including the IPRSP, Education Sector Strategic Plan (2012–2016), Status of
            Education Sector (2012), Darfur Development Strategy (2013), Social Initiative
            Program, and so on;
      (ii)	 consultations with: (a) Government team for IPRSP and PRSP staff ; (b) key world Bank
            Group staff involved in the consultation process of the IPRSP; and (c) development
            partners;
     (iii)	 presentation of earlier drafts of this report to ministries staff at the federal and state
            levels as well as at the meeting of the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper High-Level
            Working Group held on December 13th, 2015, based on the preliminary assessment of
            topics developed during the desk review, with the view to test preliminary assumptions/
            hypotheses, and deepen our joint understanding of key issues.

The remainder of the status report is structured as follows. Following the background of the
IPRSP and the rationale and objective of the report, the second chapter describes the political
and external environment setting within which the IPRSP was implemented. Chapter 3 assesses
the macroeconomic framework performance of the IPRSP. Chapter 4 defines and tracks pro-
poor expenditures. Chapter 5 analyses challenges and opportunities of the pro-poor sectors. The
last chapter presents conclusions and implications for the PRSP considerations.
Chapter 2


Country Context




2.1	    Overview
Sudan has suffered from prolonged years of conflict, volatile security situation, political transition,
unsustainable debt burden, economic and financial sanctions and fragile relations with the inter-
national community, all of which have severely constrained the country’s broad-based growth pros-
pects and poverty reduction efforts. In spite of Sudan rising to lower middle income status in the
last decade due to oil wealth, the country has high poverty and inequality.

Yet, Sudan holds tremendous potentials, much of it unrealized. Some of this potential was realized
in earlier decades, including in early industrialization, in large scale irrigation in support of food
and export crop agriculture, and in investments from recent natural resources discoveries (e.g.,
oil and gold). Sudan is still a large country, being now the second largest country in Africa, even
in its diminished state after having lost 33 percent of its territory, 23 percent of its population,
and 70 percent of its recent oil-driven revenues due to secession of South Sudan. Sudan holds
the potential to be an economic powerhouse. Sudan is located at the crossroads of Sub-Saharan
Africa and the Middle East, with fertile lands, abundant livestock, large mineral reserves and
manufacturing that make it the third largest economy in North Africa (after Egypt and Morocco)
and the largest economy in the greater eastern Africa region.



2.2	 Political and Security Development and Their Impacts
on Poverty
2.2.1	 Agreements with South Sudan and Post Secession Issues
Sudan ended the longest civil war in Africa. Conflict in Southern Sudan started in 1955, one
year before Sudan achieved independence. Sudan has signed on the 9th of January 2005 the
Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA), ending Africa’s longest civil war that lasted for more
than 50 years. The agreement was described by many as a bold and courageous step. Sudan has
accepted giving South Sudan the right of self-determination, an unprecedented achievement in
the history of Sudanese politics. A Referendum was held in January 2011, resulting in the seces-
sion of South Sudan. The Government of Sudan, accepted the will of the Southern Sudanese
population, adhered to the results of the referendum, allowing for a peaceful secession despite
the political, economic and social implications. Furthermore, Sudan became the first state in the
world to recognize South Sudan when the Republic of South Sudan was formed on July 9, 2011.

                                                                                                      5
6	                                                                                  CHAPTER 2  Country Context


Although the referendum and secession were achieved peacefully, the CPA-mandated process
nevertheless left many contentious post secession issues unresolved. These include an agreed
boundary demarcation of the 2,000 km border between Sudan and South Sudan, the determi-
nation of oil transit fees to be paid by South Sudan for using the 3,000 kilometers long Sudan’s
oil pipelines,1 and status of Abyie. Negotiations on post secession issues brokered by an AUHIP
chaired by former President Thabo Mbeki were successful in brokering an agreement in late Sep-
tember 2012.

On 27 September 2012, Sudan and South Sudan successfully signed nine agreements on a range
of pending issues that they have been negotiating since 2010, initially in accordance with the post-­
referendum agreement negotiations. The agreements covered the following. The Agreement on
Security Issues in which the two states agree to immediately operationalize the Safe Demilita-
rized Border Zone (SDBZ) in accordance with the administrative and security map, presented
to them by the AUHIP in November 2011. The Agreement on Border Issues (including demar-
cation) which specified managing the borders with the “soft borders” and “integrated border
management approach” principles including ways of dealing with nomadic movements. The
Agreement on Economic Certain Matters (division of assets and liabilities) where the two states
agreed that Sudan would retain all external debts and assets (“The Zero Option”) on condition
that Sudan obtains debt relief, within two years, through the highly indebted poor countries
initiative (HIPC). The Framework Agreement to Facilitate Payment of Post-Service Benefit.
The Agreement on Trade and Trade-Related Issues where the parties have agreed, that they will
cooperate but each state shall pursue an independent trade policy. The Framework Agreement
on Nationality which gives nationals of each State the right to enjoy “the four freedoms” of:
residence, movement, undertake economic activity and to acquire and dispose of property. The
agreements also included Oil Agreement where South Sudan will pay oil transit fees and Tran-
sitional Financial Assistance (TFA) to Sudan over a period of 3 1/2 years to cover one third of
Sudan’s financial gap resulting from the loss of South Sudan’s oil.

The conflict in South Sudan, which erupted in December 2013, has affected the implementation
progress of the agreements with Sudan and forced many South Sudanese to seek refuge in Sudan.
Sudan has granted unrestricted access to its territory to refugees from South Sudan and has
received more than 196,000 of them by mid-2015.


2.2.2	 South Kordofan, Blue Nile States and Abyei Area
Although the referendum and South Sudan secession were achieved peacefully, not all conflict has
been arrested. Renewed conflict in ‘the Three Protocol Areas: Blue Nile and South Kordofan
states and Abyei area’ is disruptive. Protocols for all three areas have not yet been fully imple-
mented. Abyei final borders position is not yet settled. Although the CPA stipulates a referendum
for this contested area, this has yet to be conducted. Negotiations between the two governments
in Addis Ababa and Juba led to an agreement in December 2011. This agreement allowed UN-
mandated Ethiopian peacekeepers into the region to oversee the withdrawal of both the Sudan
Armed Forces (SAF) and armed groups aligned with, or part of, South Sudan’s SPLA. Sudan
Armed Forces withdrew from the region in adherence to UNSC Resolution 2046 on Sudan and
South Sudan in May 2012.

Popular consultations in the States of South Kordofan and Blue Nile, as set forth in the CPA, have
not been finalized. Armed conflicts erupted in both States between the Government of Sudan and
the SPLM-North. Tensions in both areas have heightened following the creation in November

1  Thetwo main pipelines are the longest in Africa, extending from the production centres in the South to the Northern
coast around Port Sudan. The “Greater Nile Oil Pipeline” is 1,610 Km long and serves Nile blend crude; the “Petrodar
Oil Pipeline” is 1,400 km long and transports Dar crude.
CHAPTER 2  Country Context	                                                                         7


2011 of the Sudan Revolutionary Front—an armed coalition against the Government compris-
ing SPLM Northern Sector and all Darfur rebel movements that advocates for the removal of the
Government. Several attempts to negotiate a peace agreement have failed so far. A new round of
talks is expected to resume.


2.2.3	 Implementation of the Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement
Eastern Sudan Peace Agreement (ESPA) between the Government of Sudan (GoS) and the Eastern
Sudan Front in 2006 has created a positive environment for returning to the path of development.
Eastern Sudan remains one of the poorest regions among the northern States of Sudan. East
Sudan is also a “host community” to refugees from Ethiopia and Eretria. The ESPA was politi-
cally supported by the donor community and “The International Donors and Investors Confer-
ence for East Sudan” was held in Kuwait, 1–2 December 2010. Out of the total pledges of US$3.5
billion few development partners pledged significant amounts. Sudan Government pledged
US$1.5 billion, and Kuwait Government pledged US$500. A Special Fund for Rehabilitation and
Development of Eastern Sudan was created as an implementation mechanism. Several projects
were implemented since then including Setiet and Upper Atbara Dam (total cost of around US$2
billion funded by loans from the Arab Funds), rehabilitation of Toker Delta Irrigation Projects,
rehabilitation of New Halfa Irrigation Scheme, schools, hospitals and water supply projects. Most
of these projects were funded by the Government.


2.2.4	 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur
Another important peace agreement signaling Government’s willingness to resolve conflict and per-
mit development to re-start is the 2011 Doha Document for Peace in Darfur. A credible window of
opportunity for sustainable peace has opened in Darfur since the signing of the Doha Document
for Peace in Darfur (DDPD). The establishment of the Darfur Regional Authority (DRA), the
start of voluntary returns, and the engagement of the Government of Sudan in implementing the
DDPD present an important opportunity to the international community to support recovery
and development efforts. For the first time in a decade, these developments offer opportunities
to transition away from the current humanitarian strategy (which costs about US$10 billion over
the last 10 years), which development partners now recognize to be unsustainable and cost-
ineffective, towards engagement in early recovery and development. This can positively impact
the lives of millions of people in dire poverty and enhance chances for sustainability by building
institutional capacity.

More than 150 countries, international financial institutions (IFIs), development organizations and
INGOs attended the Doha Conference. Pledges towards the Darfur Development Strategy mainly
came from Qatar contributing US$500 million and the Government of Sudan’s commitment of
US$2.6 billion (as part of the DDPD agreement) to be disbursed over a six year period.

Darfur Development Strategy is being slowly implemented as the security situation is volatile. The
slow start in the implementation of the DDPD agreement has prompted the President of Sudan
to extend the life of DRA for a year effective July 15, 2015 to complete the processes stipulated in
the DDPD. The security situation in certain parts of Darfur is volatile, mainly due to recent inter-
tribal fighting over land that is posing a serious threat to the security and stability in the region.

A study of conflict drivers that threaten stability in Sudan was commissioned by the World Bank to
help deepen understanding of conflict factors. The main conclusion of the study is that inequalities
in allocation of public resources and in access to natural resources are the main drivers of con-
flict, and they feed into ethnic divide.
8	                                                                        CHAPTER 2  Country Context


2.2.5	 The Internal Political Dialogue
In January 2014, the President of Sudan initiated an internal “National Dialogue” to address issues
of war, peace, national identity and the economic and political situation. The dialogue was initiated
as an inclusive process for all political parties and all rebel groups. A group of “7+7 Committee”
consisting of government ruling parties and opposition parties was formed and has set a road
map for the procedures and modalities of the dialogue. The elections which took place during
April 2015 interrupted the process. The dialogue resumed in October 2015 and the Government
declared its intention that all the process will be inside the country. A two-month ceasefire was
unilaterally declared by the Government, and was reciprocated by the rebel movements; amnesty
was also given for arms bearers who will join the process and the Government offered guaran-
tees to rebel delegations during the national conference to allow them to leave the country if no
agreement is reached. The major rebel movements and some of the political parties boycotted
the dialogue but a committee from the participating political parties was formed to convince the
holdout political forces to join the process.



2.3	 Adverse Conditions Facing Sudan Affecting the Ability
of the Government to Reduce Poverty
Several adverse conditions face Sudan. The country is facing the combined difficulties of the
economic shock created by the oil revenues loss as a result of the secession of South Sudan, the
absence of debt relief and consequently low level concessional financing, and the economic sanc-
tions. These constraints have had adverse impact on the economic stability; trade; banking and
business climate; private sector economic activity and employment; and poverty reduction.


2.3.1	 Impact of South Sudan Secession on the Development Agenda of Sudan
The South’s secession and the loss of the oil revenues has had fundamental repercussions on Sudan
as evidenced by significant stresses in the macrofiscal situation, the structure of the economy, and the
political economy. Between 2010 and 2012, annual oil production dropped from 168 million bar-
rels to 38 million barrels, budgetary oil revenues from 11.5 percent of GDP to 1.5 percent of GDP,
and oil exports from US$11 billion to US$2 billion (IMF Article IV Consultation, Dec. 2014).
These losses affected all sectors of the economy and resulted in slower growth, inflation rising to
high double digits, and deteriorating fiscal and current account balances. The shock led to the
economy contracting by 0.3 percent in 2011 (compared to positive growth of 7.1 in 2010) and
by a further 2.2 percent in 2012. The productive sectors of the economy, mainly agriculture and
industry, after a decade of neglect and unfavorable exchange rate, were not able to offset the fall
in oil production. Gold production and export almost tripled, but only partially compensating for
the loss of oil. The trade balance deteriorated, going from a substantial surplus to a large deficit of
US$700 million in the first quarter of 2012. The current account balance also recorded a deficit
of US$900 million in the same period. The market exchange rate dropped first from 3 SDG/US$
to around SDG 5 and then later to SDG 7.1, following the official exchange rate devaluation (of
about 66 percent) in June 2012. Prices skyrocketed, inflation reaching an annual average of 37 per-
cent in 2013 (three-fold the pre-secession rate of inflation of 13 percent in 2010).

The Government of Sudan asked for assistance to bridge the financial gap created by the loss of the
oil. The Government of Sudan and South Sudan with assistance from the African Union High
Implementation Panel (AUHIP) in their effort for the joint outreach to the international com-
munity asked the assistance of the IMF to determine the financial gap for Sudan resulting from
the loss of oil revenues. The IMF estimated that the oil loss will result in a fiscal gap for Sudan
amounting to almost US$8 billion over five years, and a balance of payments gap of US$16 bil-
lion. In the spirit of establishing two viable States living in mutual peace and prosperity, the
Government of Sudan and South Sudan agreed on transitional financial arrangements, whereby:
a) Sudan would implement policy measures to fill at least one-third of the gap; b) South Sudan
CHAPTER 2  Country Context	                                                                          9


would contribute just over US$3.028 billion over three and a half years to cover another one-
third of the gap through TFA; and c) The two countries would make a joint request to the inter-
national community for approximately US$3 billion in resources to cover the remainder of the
gap. The Government has implemented economic measures that filled the one third of the gap,
and South Sudan started to actually transfer the amounts due in fulfilment of the TFA. However,
there was no positive response from the international community.

Before fully adjusting to South Sudan secession implications, Sudan confronted another shock of
reduction in the oil fees from South Sudan. The decline of the oil revenues from South Sudan were
the result of the decline in production due to the conflict in the South and decline in interna-
tional oil prices. South Sudanese conflict erupted in December 2013 affecting the oil sector. Oil
flow from the South through Sudan’s pipelines declined to about 165,000 barrels per day com-
pared to 245,000 barrels per day before the conflict. The situation was aggregated further by the
sharp drop in international oil prices. The fairly stable oil prices during 2010 until mid-2014 at
US$110/b started to decline until it reached its current low level of US$48/b (early August 2015).
Consequently the transfers of oil fees and the TFA dropped and revenues payments by South
Sudan amounted to only US$900 million by mid-2015 compared to a target of US$3.0 billion.


2.3.2	 External Debt Burden
The external debt burden remains a contentious issue. Sudan is highly indebted country that has
accumulated sizable arrears and the external debt burden weighs heavily on Sudan’s develop-
ment. As of end-2014, its public and publicly-guaranteed debt stood at US$45 billion of which
about 85 percent was in arrears. The structure of external debt has not changed over the last
decade. Sudan’s creditors include multilateral institutions (15 percent), Paris Club (37 percent),
non-Paris Club (36 percent), and private creditors (14 percent). Arrears with IDA amounted to
US$700 million whereas arrears with IMF reached US$2 billion. According to the IMF report
(Debt Sustainability Analysis 2013) Sudan remains in debt distress, all external debt ratios were
well above the indicative thresholds with the Net Present Value of debt to GDP of 166 percent
(compared to a threshold of 36 percent), and debt service to exports of 36 percent (compared to
a threshold of 15 percent). The 2013 DSA showed deterioration in all indicators following a sig-
nificant decline in GDP, exports and government revenue, underscoring the need for debt relief
beyond traditional mechanisms.

As part of fulfilling the technical requirements for the HIPC, Sudan has demonstrated a commit-
ment to economic reforms and poverty reduction. Sudan had successfully implemented 14 IMF
Staff Monitored Programs (SMPs) since 1997. These programs greatly helped in designing and
implementing reforms in monetary policy operations, tax policy, and public financial manage-
ment. The Government of Sudan also articulated a poverty strategy (IPRSP) to address poverty
and equality issues. The agreement signed between Sudan and South Sudan on September 27,
2012 included the zero option whereby Sudan will retain all external debt liabilities if the two
countries committed to a joint outreach strategy to secure from international creditors a firm
commitment to provide comprehensive debt relief of Sudan’s external debt, resulting in reach-
ing the HIPC decision point within two years of signing (i.e. September 2014), or a later date as
agreed by the two countries. As progress in resolving the debt issue fell short of expectations, the
two countries agreed to extend the “zero option” by two years.

In 2010, some leading creditors asked the World Bank and IMF to co-lead a Technical Working
Group. The Group would help to clarify the understanding on the extent and composition of
Sudan’s external debt, and on the technical requirements for Sudan to benefit under the HIPC
and MDRI debt relief processes. That group has met five times, and does not seem to have
much to offer now, where the matter of the debt relief will be decided upon on political grounds,
including direct engagement with all major creditors.
10	                                                                             CHAPTER 2  Country Context


Despite all these efforts more substantive progress towards debt relief did not come through. Resolv-
ing Sudan’s unsustainable external debt is of paramount importance for the successful adjustment
to the impact of South Sudan’s secession, implementation of the Government’s poverty reduction
policies, and for supporting inclusive growth and reducing poverty.


2.3.3	 US Sanctions
American sanctions on Sudan began in 1997 when President Clinton issued Executive Order 1306
that imposed a comprehensive trade embargo on Sudan and blocked assets of the Government of
Sudan. Comprehensive and far reaching as it is, the sanctions regime harmed, and continued
to harm, Sudan dearly. Moreover, the sanctions regime started to intensify by the year as pres-
sure from the US Office of Foreign Assets Control (OFAC) on countries, business entities, and
international financial institutions to comply with the American embargo. Many governments
and business entities would rather abandon doing business with Sudan, even for goods that are
exempted under the sanctions regime like food and medicine, rather than risk being scrutinized
by the American Treasury, or face the danger of financial transactional blockage or even confis-
cation. This created what has been referred to as “reputational sanctions” meaning that business
with Sudan is attached to bad fame and should be avoided even if it is allowed under the sanc-
tions regime.

Sanctions affected Sudan’s access to debt relief and consequently access to concessional loans needed
for infrastructure, basic services such as health, education, and food security. Sanctions affected
foreign direct investments, which contribute to growth and employment opportunities. Remit-
tances of Sudanese abroad to their families’ which are fundamental informal safety net mecha-
nisms in Sudan were also affected. The Sudanese Government’s ability to monitor illicit flows
directed to finance terrorism, drug trade, money laundry and human trafficking is increasingly
hampered by the sanctions of commercial corresponding banks leading most Sudanese to move
money in cash.

A recent devastating development for the Sudanese economy as a result of the sanctions was the
breakdown of the relations with correspondent foreign banks. As observed by the IMF, this was
a result of the prosecution by the U.S. of BNP Paribas in early 2014 for breaking U.S. sanction
against Sudan and other countries under sanctions and was fined US$8.9 billion by the U.S.
authorities.

As a result, trade and foreign exchange situation deteriorated in Sudan. Furthermore, importers
are unable to obtain trade financing or transfer payments and the impacts are sweeping. This
situation will devastate the economy where; as noted by the IMF: “(i) growth will be affected
because exports and imports will decline. The lower imports of foodstuffs, intermediate goods,
and raw materials will result in lower domestic consumption and production; (ii) inflation will
rise as a result of shrinkage of supplies and higher cost of imports; and (iii) shortage of foreign
exchange will contribute to depreciation of the exchange rate on the parallel market, thereby fuel-
ing inflation and undermining macroeconomic stability. These adverse developments will impact
the poor and the most vulnerable segments of the population and will most likely increase pov-
erty rates in Sudan.2 Further studies are required to improve the understanding of the devastat-
ing impacts of sanctions on the Sudanese.




2  Sudan;
        IMF Staff Report for the 2014 Article IV Consultation and Second Review under the SMP, November 21, 2014,
Box 1, page 6.
CHAPTER 2  Country Context	                                                                       11


Implications for PRSP
The importance of reaching a lasting peace for the conflict in Darfur and in the two states of Blue
Nile and South Kordofan is inevitable for poverty reduction and should not be overlooked. Mean-
while, to sustain peace, the role of implementation of the peace agreements is to be considered.
The role of Sudan in the peace process of South Sudan and the implementation of the September
2012 agreements is vital in achieving peace and stability in the country. These are prerequisite for
improving economic performance and reducing poverty. Community based peace initiatives are
to be encouraged by the Government.

The study of conflict drivers carried by the World Bank recommends four main focus areas: The
areas are: (i) the operational mechanism of transfers of funds between central and state govern-
ments; (ii) opportunities and modalities of equitable exploitation of economic opportunities at
the local levels; (iii) assessment of priority needs and concerns about service delivery at the local
level; and (iv) key barriers to, and opportunities for building peace and social cohesion in high
risk areas. The study proposes risk mitigation measures including: (i) balancing the needs for
macroeconomic adjustment with poverty reduction and meeting demand for social protection;
(ii) improving governance i.e. build more capable, transparent, accountable and inclusive govern-
ment institutions; and (iii) addressing demand for power and/or wealth sharing and delays and/
or ineffective implementation of peace agreements.
chapter 3


IPRSP Medium-Term
Macroeconomic Framework
(2013–2015)




T
       he IPRSP is built on a medium-term framework that emphasizes the importance of appropri-
       ate policies in favor of macroeconomic stability, sustained growth and poverty reduction. The
       macroeconomic objectives for the 2013–15 period set in the IPRSP aim at: (i) sustaining
an average growth rate of about 4 percent; (ii) bringing down inflation to 10 percent; (iii) reduc-
ing the overall budget deficit to 3 percent; and (iv) containing the current account deficit to
3.1 percent of GDP.



3.1	    Government Macroeconomic Performance
Sudan made remarkable progress toward recovering from the shock created by the secession of South
Sudan. This was achieved despite the lack of access to external financing for development; chal-
lenges of the sanctions; breakdown of relations with corresponding banks; the burden of external
debt; the drop in oil production in both Sudan and South Sudan; and the drop in transit fees and
transitional financial arrangement (TFA) payments by South Sudan.

The Government formulated a three year emergency recovery program, the “Salvation Economic
Program” (2012–2014), to address these challenges. The Government implemented austerity
measures in June 2012 and September 2013. In June 2012 the Government adopted painful but
necessary policy reform measures, marking a pronounced change in policy direction. The June
2012 reform program included an exchange rate devaluation of about 66 percent, tax increases,
a reduction in fuel subsidies, cuts in non-priority public expenditures, and a strengthening of
social safety nets to cushion the impact of these reforms.

In September 2013 the Government implemented further difficult reform/austerity measures to
overcome challenges facing the 2013 budget. Key among these measures is the amendment of the
2013 budget that realized a deficit of SDG3.96 billion (33 percent of total revenue) in the first
half of 2013. The corrective measures entailed a sharp reduction in fuel subsidies, a unification
of all official exchange rates, and exchange rate devaluation. The adoption of these measures
was facilitated by improved relations with South Sudan and the resumption of oil production in
mid-2013. The fuel subsidy reductions resulted in almost doubling prices of fuel and cooking gas
(i.e., 68 percent petrol increase and a gallon of petrol cost the equivalent of US$3; a 65 percent
increase in gasoline and a 67 percent increase in cooking gas). These price adjustments are sub-
stantial in both magnitude and speed. For example, the September 2013 adjustments exceeded


                                                                                                  13
14	                               CHAPTER 3  IPRSP Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (2013–2015)


Table 3:1  Sudan’s IPRSP Macroeconomic Objectives for 2013–15 and Actual Performance
                                                                                        2015    IPRSP targets
                                                   2011     2012     2013        2014   proj.     (average)
 GDP growth                                       –0.3        1.2      3.5        3.7    3.7         4.0
 Inflation (end of period)                         18.9     44.4      41.9       28.7   15.5        10
 Public finance (in percent of GDP)
 Total government revenue                          18.0      9.8       9.9       11.4   12.0
   w/o tax revenue                                  6.4      6.1       6.1        6.1    6.6
   w/o grants                                       0.3      0.4       0.7        0.5    0.7
 Government expenditure and net lending            17.8     13.5      12.1       12.4   13.3
   Current expenditure                             16.3      11.7     12.0       11.6   10.5
    w/o wages and salaries                          5.4      4.8       4.3        3.7    3.5
    w/o interest                                                       1.4        0.9
   Capital expenditure                              1.7       1.6      1.1        1.1    1.2
   Net lending
 Primary fiscal balance, incl. grants               1.3     –2.2      –1.8       –0.3   –1.1
 Overall fiscal balance, incl. grants               0.2     –3.7     –2.3        –1.0   –1.2       –3.0
  Domestic                                                             1.9        0.9
  External                                                             0.4        0.1
 Current account balance (in percent of GDP)      –0.4      –9.2     –8.6        –6.5   –6.3       –3.1

Source: IMF Article IV Consultations Report 2014 and Ministry of Finance data.


IMF’ expectations of adopting a gradual/incremental approach to fuel prices increase. However,
the austerity measures did not include removing subsidies on wheat and electricity.

Sudan restored the growth from as low as 1.2 percent in 2012 to 3.7 percent in 2014. Inflation was
drastically reduced from around 44.4 percent in December 2012 to 28.7 percent in December
2014 and further to 15.5 percent in July 2015 with prices increasing by only 6.2 percent in the last
nine months. The exchange rate in the parallel market remained stable between 2013 and 2014
albeit the high margin compared to the official rate. These achievements were the result of the
reform programs and the hard measures implemented by the Government during 2012–2014.


Economic Growth
Economic activity for 2014 has been broadly recovering. GDP growth is estimated to reach 3.7
percent in 2014 compared to –0.3 percent in 2011. This growth was mainly driven by the good
agriculture seasons and recovery in Gum Arabic, and cotton and the positive growth in sesame
and livestock, as well as growth in the trade and services sectors. However, the pattern of Sudan’s
recent growth prospects underscore the need for economic diversification to help improve
growth prospects through a revitalization of sectors such as agriculture and livestock, and the
export sector, particularly in light manufacturing, driven by agro-processing.


Fiscal Policy and Inflation
Sudan’s fiscal performance improved during the review period. The overall deficit dropped to about
1 percent of GDP in 2014 compared to over 2 percent in 2013 and nearly 4 percent in 2012. The
fiscal improvements have reflected reform measures taken in September 2013 including sub-
stantial increases in domestic fuel prices and an increase in tax revenue. As a result, central bank
financing of the deficit dropped to 0.4 percent of GDP in 2014 compared to 0.7 percent of GDP
in 2013. Reducing the deficit has helped to curb monetization through the central bank, which
would ultimately bring about more price stability.
CHAPTER 3  IPRSP Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (2013–2015)	                                                         15


Table 3.2  World Bank Doing Business—Paying Taxes: Sudan and Comparator African Countries
                 Paying       Payments                                        Labor tax and
                 taxes       (number per      Time (hours      Profit tax     contributions        Other        Total tax
                  rank          year)          per year)          (%)              (%)            taxes (%)      rate (%)
 Sudan             101            42               180             13.8             19.2             3.1           36.1
 Botswana           39            32               152             21.7              0.0             3.6           25.3
 Ghana              89            32               224             18.5             14.7             0.4           33.5
 Lesotho            95            33               324             13.1              0.0             3.0           16.0
 Liberia            45            33               158             18.3              5.4             3.7           27.4
 Malawi             58            26               175             23.6               7.7            3.5           34.7
 Rwanda             25             17              134             21.2              5.6              4.4          31.3
 Uganda             93             31              213             25.0              11.3            0.8           37.1

Note: Doing Business records the taxes and mandatory contributions that a medium size company must pay in a given
year as well as measures of the administrative burden of paying taxes and contributions. Taxes and contributions mea-
sured include the profit or corporate income tax, social contributions and labor taxes paid by the employer, property
taxes, property transfer taxes, dividend tax, capital gains tax, financial transactions tax, waste collection taxes, vehicle
and road taxes, and any other small taxes or fees. The ranking on the ease of paying taxes is the simple average of the
percentile rankings on its component indicators, with a threshold being applied to one of the component indicators,
the total tax rate.
Source: World Bank (2013) Doing Business in the East African Community 2013.


Fuel subsidy reform yielded additional revenue of 1.2 percent of GDP in 2014. Revenue has
increased to 11.4 percent of GDP in 2014 compared to 9.8 percent of the GDP in 2012. On the
other hand, current spending was limited to 11.6 percent of GDP in 2014, reflecting contained
wage bill and subsidy reform, while public investment and social spending were each increased
by 0.3 percentage points of GDP to mitigate the negative impacts of fuel subsidy elimination.

Sudan’s efforts to strengthen tax revenue collection remained unchanged in 2014. Tax revenue is
still very low compared with neighboring countries due to exemptions and extensive tax incen-
tives. Sudan’s tax revenue collection was only 6.1 percent of the GDP in 2014, similar to what
was realized in 2013; this is very low compared to regional levels. Sudan needs to exert effort to
improve tax revenue collection through expanding the tax base and raising efficiency in tax col-
lections as well as reviewing the exemptions.

Simplify tax collection procedures with the view to achieve significant reduction in the processing
of taxes and enhance tax compliance. According to the 2013 World Bank Doing Business Report,
Sudan trailed other Sub-Saharan African countries in terms of ease of paying taxes, ranking 101
out of 185 countries. The report noted that Rwanda is the easiest country to pay taxes in, with
just 17 payments annually, followed by Burundi, 25, with Uganda businesses having to make
31 payments, and Sudan makes it harder for taxpayers with 42 payments. Complying with taxes
takes 180 hours a year in Sudan (Table 3.2). The World Bank Report advised governments to not
only choose appropriate tax rates within a broad based, fair and transparent tax system, but also
design a tax compliance system which does not discourage taxpayers from participation. Some
measures such as reducing tax payments frequency and introducing an electronic filing system
would make paying taxes faster for taxpayers.


Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies
The fiscal consolidation path that was initiated in 2014 led to an improvement in fiscal performance
and further lowered central bank financing of the Government and reduced reserve money growth.
The money supply growth rate was 12 percent in 2014 compared to 13 percent in 2013. How-
ever, monetary policy management remains weak, including the Central Bank of Sudan (CBOS)
involvement in quasi-fiscal operations such as the provision of foreign exchange at the official
16	                           CHAPTER 3  IPRSP Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (2013–2015)


rate to the Government for fuel and wheat imports. The exchange rate policy is also inconsistent
with current external imbalances and exchange rate instability. The CBOS has managed to limit
the multiplicity of the exchange rate by unifying the official rate and the custom rate (used for
valuing the imports and exports), yet a special rate is still used for importation of some goods
(e.g., medicine). The foreign exchange market is also still not fully liberalized and a parallel mar-
ket exists with a rate that significantly differs from the official exchange rate.

Foreign exchange market remains volatile. The gap between the official market and the paral-
lel market narrowed to 47 percent in mid-November 2014, but recently rose. Given the foreign
exchange shortage on the official market, the parallel market has almost completely replaced
the official market as a source of foreign exchange for private transactions. Intervention policies
to keep the official exchange rate at fixed level inevitably leads to shortage of foreign exchange.
These measures have provided a temporary “breathing space,” but have not addressed the source
of the foreign exchange shortfall, which is likely to be structural in nature.


Current Account Balance
Current account deficit narrowed to 6.5 percent of GDP in 2014 from nearly 9 percent in 2012
and 2013—reflecting an increase in exports and fiscal consolidation efforts. Despite progress,
the current account deficit remained higher than the target of 3 percent of GDP. Exports grew by
18 percent in 2014, while imports increased by only 1.8 percent. Exports covered 65 percent of
imports value in 2014 compared to 54 percent in 2013. However, the export sector remains fac-
ing critical structural rigidities and constrained supply capacity.



3.2	 IMF Program
Sudan and IMF agreed on a new Staff-Monitored Program, SMP, covering the period January–
December 2014 and the program was approved by the IMF Managing Director on March 2014.
IMF conducted the third review for Sudan’s Staff-Monitored Program (SMP) on December 8–17
and concluded that performance under the authorities’ reform program is broadly satisfactory.
All end-September quantitative targets were met except for minor deviations on the net domestic
assets of the Central Bank and reserve money growth reflecting additional credit to the agricul-
tural sector.

Sudan has implemented previous SMPs over 14 years (1997–2010) and performance under these
programs has been broadly satisfactory. Notable achievements under these programs include the
maintenance of macroeconomic stability and the implementation of a reform agenda to improve
capacity in economic management. However, some problems persist, including weak build-up of
international reserves due to an insufficiently flexible exchange rate, rising expenditure pressures,
slow implementation of reforms in domestic financing, arrears clearance, and public financial
management.


Implications for PRSP
Growth remains as the most powerful and effective way of reducing poverty, though growth alone
is not enough for reducing poverty. Sudan diversification of its economic sources of growth
remains a challenge.

Economic stability is essential for sustaining growth. The signaling effect of the government tak-
ing strong policy measures was also important in shoring the confidence in the economy. In
the absence of these measures, the country would have likely experienced a strong inflation—a
vicious depreciation cycle, a stronger loss of confidence, and a more extreme depletion of foreign
CHAPTER 3  IPRSP Medium-Term Macroeconomic Framework (2013–2015)	                               17


reserves, which would have led to an even bigger economic recession and hardship and will
deepen poverty rather than reducing it.

The fundamentals of economic stability have to be maintained. The exchange rate should be mar-
ket determined. In fact, there are no realistic alternatives to address the foreign exchange short-
age in the short term. Therefore, there is a need to use a combination of structural reforms and
demonstrate exchange rate flexibility to commercial banks in foreign exchange transactions.
Shorter-term strategy—greater exchange rate flexibility is essential to reduce the gap between
official and parallel market rates. Longer-term strategy—need to focus on the structural source
of the foreign exchange shortfall. Containment of growth in the money supply consistent with
the growth rate and inflation target is essential. Possible measures could include: (i) tightening
monetary policy and further lowering central bank’s financing of the Government to help further
lower inflation; (ii) enhancing the operational independence of the CBOS and to mandate it to
maintain price stability; (iii) sterilizing gold purchases by the CBOS to contain reserve money
growth; (iv) enhancing coordination between the CBOS and MoFEP to improve liquidity fore-
casts and management; and (v) using reserve money as the nominal anchor. Building foreign
reserves is among the essential measures that have to be undertaken and sustained.
chapter 4


Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures




4.1	    Defining Pro-Poor Expenditures—Sudan Experience
A poverty reduction strategy that identifies priority public policies for growth and poverty reduc-
tion is the appropriate basis for the definition of pro-poor expenditures. A pro-poor expenditures
framework is defined as the one that addresses the main roots/correlates of poverty and identi-
fies priority public actions for economic growth and poverty reduction. This includes spending
on critical poverty reducing and welfare, improving economic and social services that tackle the
deficiencies of the educational and health care system including the poor access and quality of
education and health care; improving survival indicators (e.g., infant and maternal mortality);
accelerating the process of recovery from conflict and integration; enhancing access to basic
infrastructure; and reviving the stagnant agriculture sector, with services to improve the produc-
tivity and incomes of the associated labor force. Given the role that the state governments have
in the provision of critical poverty reducing and welfare improving economic and social services,
consideration should be given to examining resources available to state governments through the
national revenue sharing mechanisms (Box 4.1). Measuring progress on pro-poor spending at
the sub-national/state level is therefore key to understanding pro-poor expenditure overall.

The definition of pro-poor spending adopted in this study builds on the IPRSP policies for prior-
ity actions for growth and poverty reduction. These priorities represent public policy on gover-
nance, national reconciliation and integration, gender, education, health and water supply and
sanitation, agriculture and infrastructure classified under the IPRSP four pillars of governance,
reintegration of IDPs, human resource development, and economic growth promotion. Box 4.1
summarizes how estimates for pro-poor budgetary expenditures at the federal and state level are
derived.

Non-budgetary expenditures such as Zakat and the Central Bank of Sudan micro-finance scheme
are integral parts of pro-poor spending. Zakat, which is an Islamic charity managed by the Cham-
ber of Zakat, is a major social protection program. The IPRSP recognizes the importance of
social protection, but does not identify challenges, strategy and priority actions. There is no
known assessment of Zakat and the Government of Sudan has identified the need to conduct
a diagnostic analysis of the social protection sector as a first step to understand the strength
and weakness of the current activities in the sector and to make an informed decision in social
protection programming. The World Bank Group is providing support to the Government of
Sudan to review the capacity and capability of current programming as well as gaps in benefits


                                                                                                19
20	                                                            CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures




  Box 4.1: Defining Pro-Poor Expenditures

  Without sustainable broad-based economic growth poverty cannot be reduced. However,
  growth that bypasses the poor will not by itself reduce poverty. The choice is therefore for
  sectors that facilitate growth and reduce poverty in a sustainable manner. Public policy
  and public expenditures has to support the twin objectives of growth and poverty reduction.
  Hence the pro-poor expenditure is the one that gives priority to: (i) Agriculture and Natu-
  ral Resources; (ii) Infrastructure (roads and rail); (iii) Education; (iv) Health; (v) Water; and
  (vi) Social Protection. This definition of pro-poor expenditures is consistent with the IPRSP
  and follows its four pillars of governance, reintegration of IDPs, human resource develop-
  ment and economic growth promotion.

  Source of expenditures

  Budgetary expenditures	                               Non-budgetary expenditures

  Federal Ministry of Finance and Economic 	            Central Bank of Sudan: Microfinance Unit
  Planning
  States	                                               Zakat Fund

  Budgetary pro-poor components:
                                                  Items tracked in the budget and actual
                                                expenditures data produced by the Ministry
                 Federal                             of Finance and Economic Planning
      Current: wages and salaries   Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources,
                                    Ministry of Animal Wealth Fisheries and Rangeland, Ministry of
                                    Environment and Forests, High Council for Environment, Ministry
                                    of Transport, Roads and Bridges, Ministry of Health, Ministry of
                                    General Education, Ministry of Welfare and Social Security, Ministry
                                    of Higher Education and Scientific Research, Agriculture Research
                                    Corporation, Livestock Research Corporation, Gum Arabic Council,
                                    Vocational Training Council, Humanitarian Affairs Commission,
                                    National Council for Illiteracy Eradication, High Council for
                                    Development of Nomads, Transfers to the National Pension Fund,
                                    and Support to current expenses of the National Health Insurance
      Current: centralized          Social transfers (cash transfers, transfers for free medical care,
      obligations                   transfers to National Fund for Students Support, transfers to the
                                    National health Insurance Fund) Subsidies
      Development                   Development projects of: Agriculture subsector, Irrigation subsector,
                                    Animal wealth subsector, paved and feeder roads, railways
                                    rehabilitation. Irrigation dams, National Forestry Corporation
                                    projects, Vocational Training Projects, DDR, Nomadic communities
                                    development projects, general education subsector, higher education
                                    subsector, health subsector, IDPs assistance projects
                 States                                Closed accounts of the states
      Current                       Ministries of: Agriculture and Livestock, Health, General Education,
                                    Social Welfare, Engineering Affairs (feeder roads, water harvesting,
                                    water supply)
      Development                   Agriculture and livestock subsector, and bridges, feeder roads, health
                                    subsector, general education subsector, social sector subsector
                                    (social protection, food security, governance, IDPs), energy projects
                                    (mainly solar energy), water supply subsector, Reconstruction Funds
                                    Projects (East Sudan, Darfur Additional support for Blue Nile, South
                                    Kordofan and Abyie)
CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures	                                                          21


provided. The central Bank of Sudan is supporting micro-finance targeted toward small enter-
prise as a means of employment generation and poverty reduction.

Data issues. There are data constraints related to misclassification and disaggregation of pro-poor
data in public expenditures at both the Federal Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning
level and the states. Most of these problems were resolved in this report without significant nega-
tive impact on the quality of public expenditures data used. However, further improvements are
required in the public expenditures data recording by the Ministry of Finance and more impor-
tantly by the states. A note on the data issue is annexed in this report (Annex 2).

The last Sudan’s Public Expenditure Review (PER—World Bank 2007) developed a pro-poor spend-
ing definition. The 2007 PER defined pro-poor spending as “expenditures that benefit the poor
more than the non-poor; expenditures that actually reach the poor; and expenditures expected
to have an impact on the welfare of the poor over time” (PER page 36). The report derived a
definition for pro-poor spending for Sudan, which includes both federal expenditures (current
and development) and states’ poverty reduction efforts. Federal expenditures include spending
on basic health care; primary education; water supply and sanitation; parts of agriculture, irriga-
tion and livestock; infrastructure (roads and bridges); energy and electricity (excluding Merowe
Dam); and the social subsidy. The states’ efforts on poverty reduction are captured by including
three-quarters of current and block transfers plus all development transfers including to war
affected areas.

The pro-poor expenditures framework adopted in this status report is more comprehensive than
the 2007 PER definition. While the PER definition is confined to budgetary expenditures at the
federal and state level, the current definition extends its scope to include non-budgetary expen-
ditures (e.g., Zakat and microfinance). Comprehensive pro-poor expenditure data was compiled
from MoFEP’s budgeted and actual expenditures of the spending units at federal level. Budgeted
and actual expenditures of the states and localities were compiled from the states yearly closed
accounts. Data for social protection institutions was compiled from the annual reports of Zakat
Fund, Social Insurance Fund, National Pension Fund and National Health Insurance for the
period 2012 to 2014.



4.2	 Defining Pro-Poor Expenditures—Sub-Saharan African
Experience
Poverty in Sudan has similar features to poverty in Sub-Saharan countries, highlighting the impor-
tance of drawing on their experience in pro-poor growth and poverty reduction. Most of the Suda-
nese poor live in rural areas. They are characterized by poor education and health standards,
and lack access to other basic services and facilities. Most rural households rely on agriculture
and productivity in their major occupation—agriculture—is low and declining. Growing out of
poverty requires sustainable economic growth; improvements in the quality of growth to ensure
broader participation; along with poverty targeting. The choice is therefore to promote pro-poor
growth in places and sectors where the poor live and work. Promoting pro-poor growth requires
a strategy that is deliberately biased in favor of the poor so that the poor benefit proportionally
more than the rich.

The HIPC Initiative and Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) resulted in sharper focus on
poverty and human development in Sub-Saharan African countries. In these countries the Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP) provides a rationale for classifying certain types of expendi-
ture as pro-poor and enables monitoring of government efforts. Although Sudan does not yet
have a full-fledged PRSP, it is possible to point to a set of policies and priorities developed in the
IPRSP that would anchor a definition of poverty-reducing allocations. Further improvements
22	                                                                 CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures


Table 4.1:  Components of Pro-Poor Expenditures for Sub-Saharan African Countries
                                                                                            Water and
                            Education      Health     Infrastructure       Agriculture      sanitation       Other
 Sudan                          ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                ✓             ✓
 Mozambique1                    ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                ✓             ✓
 Tanzania2                      ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                ✓             ✓
 Uganda3                        ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                ✓             ✓
 Chad4                          ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                              ✓
 Ethiopia5                      ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                              ✓
 Ghana6                         ✓             ✓              ✓                  ✓                 
 Burkina   Faso7                ✓             ✓              ✓                                   ✓             ✓
 Benin                          ✓             ✓
 Cameroon                       ✓             ✓
 Madagascar                     ✓             ✓                                                                  
 Niger                          ✓             ✓                                                                  
 Senegal                        ✓             ✓
 Democratic Rep.                ✓             ✓
 of Congo
 Sierra Leone                   ✓             ✓
 Mali8                          ✓             ✓              ✓                                                 ✓
 Malawi9                        ✓             ✓              ✓                                                 ✓
 Zambia                                                      ✓                  ✓                              ✓
 Number of countries            18           18              11                 8                5             10

Source: Based on Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative—Status of Implementation (IMF and World Bank
2006, Appendix Table 3). Other includes social safety net, food assistance, promotion of women employment, gover-
nance. 1\ For Mozambique infrastructure includes roads; other includes public works, governance and judicial system,
and rural development. 2\ for Tanzania, agriculture includes research and extension, land; infrastructure refers to
roads; and other to judiciary. 3\ for Uganda, infrastructure includes roads; other includes public order. 4\ for Chad
pro-poor spending covers domestically financed expenditures on health, education, rural development, infrastruc-
ture, and other (good governance). 5\ for Ethiopia, infrastructure includes rural roads. 6\ for Ghana, poverty-focused
expenditures on primary education, basic health, and agriculture and infrastructure. 7\ for Burkina Faso, pro-poor
spending includes current and capital expenditure on health, education, rural roads, other includes promotion of
women, employment and youth, water resources, environment, justice and communication. 8\ for Mali, other includes
social safety net. 9\ for Malawi other includes social safety net.



are expected during the process of the full PRSP preparation, including better monitoring of the
actual use of the funds classified as pro-poor.

The Sub-Saharan African experience has shown that what is typically included in pro-poor expen-
ditures are funds allocated to basic health, primary education, and infrastructure. Other pro-poor
expenditures components include agriculture, water and sanitation, and other (mainly social
safety net, food assistance, promotion of women employment, governance) as illustrated in
Table 4.1.3 The variation in identifying what sector to include in pro-poor expenditures is evident
in SSA countries experience.


3 It
   is important to underline that focusing on pro-poor does not necessarily imply that other expenditures are “anti-
poor” (e.g., growth-enhancing expenditure on the regulatory framework for the private sector, expenditures on anti-
corruption efforts, etc.), but rather that pro-poor spending has the most direct returns.
CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures	                                                                                                    23


Figure 1:  Mozambique—Public Expenditures Directed at Priority Sectors (% of total budget)
                                       80
                                       70



             Percent of total budget
                                       60
                                       50
                                       40
                                       30
                                       20
                                       10
                                        0
                                            1999      2000       2001      2002          2003        2004      2005        2006


                                            PARPA priority areas (calculated)                   Education
                                            Health                                              Water, sanitation, and public works
                                            Agriculture and rural development

Source: World Bank (2011): Mozambique Country Partnership Evaluation.



Table 4.2:  Zambia—Percentage Public Expenditure Allocations in Pro-Poor Sectors (2008–2012)
                                                                2008            2009               2010             2011              2012
 Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing                                5.82            7.18             6.81             6.0               6.13
 Transport                                                       8.58             9.87             9.11            16.13              16.82
 Tourism                                                         0.48             0.51             0.72             0.31              0.19

Source: World Bank (2012) Zambia CAS Completion Report.



Identification of pro-poor spending is of course highly context dependent, and is most useful when
country-driven, developed through a wide participatory discussion, and used as a means to help
guide and track government efforts. The IPRSP Status Report is expected to motivate the govern-
ment to improve on the definition of pro-poor expenditures. A government working definition
derived through the PRSP is an important step to formalizing monitoring in budget reporting
and should be incorporated in the next budget preparation process.

Ownership of this process is necessary for meaningful pro-poor expenditure management. While
identifying pro-poor expenditures is the first step, applying a working definition is vital towards
formalizing monitoring in budget reporting, implementation and execution. The experience of
some SSA countries in applying a pro-poor expenditures definition is discussed below.

Implementation of the PRSP in Mozambique resulted in allocating/maintaining 65 percent of the
budget to the priority/pro-poor sectors These sectors are education, health, agriculture, water and
public works (Figure 1). However, it should be noted that agriculture and rural development
received the lowest share of total expenditures.

Similarly public expenditure allocation to pro-poor sectors shows a real increase in Zambia. Overall
budget allocation to pro-poor sectors (agriculture, tourism and transport) increased during the
period 2008–12 (Table 4.2). The increase is reflected in transport and agriculture, while tour-
ism remains stagnant. The share of transport increased from 8.5 percent of the budget in 2008 to
16.8 percent in 2012 whereas that of agriculture increased only from 5.8 percent to 6.1 percent.
Tourism declined from 0.5 percent of the budget to 0.2 percent.
24	                                                                 CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures


Figure 2:  Pro-Poor Expenditures as Percent of GDP
             6.0%
                                                                                             5.4%
                                                                  4.9%         5.0%
             5.0%                      4.6%         4.4%
                         4.2%
             4.0%

             3.0%

             2.0%

             1.0%

             0.0%
                                2012                       2013                       2014

                                        Budgetary           Budgetary and Non budgetary

Source: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and authors’ calculations.


4.3	 Trends of Pro-Poor Budgeting and Expenditures in Sudan
The Government’s pro-poor expenditures have increased since 2012. The share of budgetary pro-
poor expenditures as percent of GDP has increased over the post-secession period. Pro-poor
expenditures as percent of GDP reached 5 percent of GDP in 2014 compared to 4.2 percent
in 2012. Both federal and state levels expenditures as share of GDP have increased during
the period in question as detailed (Table 4.3 and Figure 2). The share of budgetary and non-­
budgetary pro-poor expenditures also increased from 4.6 percent of GDP in 2012 to 5.4 percent
of GDP in 2014. These percentages do not include subsidies.

Maintaining government pro-poor spending, hovering around 5 percent of GDP (or nearly half
of total public expenditures) is a significant achievement given the adverse conditions facing the
government. These factors alluded to previously greatly weaken the fiscal capacity of the govern-
ment. Public expenditures in Sudan have benefited from the advent of oil in the economy since
the late 1990s that generated substantial revenues and resulted in an increase of public expendi-
tures as a share of GDP from 8.2 percent in 1997 to reach around 23 percent on average during
2005–2010. In 2009 and 2010, prior to secession a decline in public expenditures already started
to emerge, due to the global financial crises, through a sharp decline in oil receipts. This was
followed by the secession of South Sudan in July 2011, which affected public expenditures that
declined to around 17 percent of GDP in 2011. A package of corrective measures which were
implemented in June 2012 and September 2013 averted an economic collapse and started to
gradually bring the economic performance back in the path of sustained positive growth. Public
expenditures started to recover and increased to 13.8 percent of GDP in 2013. Despite the fluc-
tuations in total public expenditures, pro-poor expenditures have been protected. While Figure 3
shows a bell shape for total public expenditures, pro-poor expenditures shows a slightly rising
trend (Figure 2). These efforts were taken by the government despite sanctions, external debt
burden and the lack of significant assistance from the donor community, which confined their
efforts more in the humanitarian assistance rather than development and public investments.

It should be noted that the IPRSP did not spell out specific targets for poverty reducing expenditures
over its implementation timeframe and comparisons with other countries should be interpreted
with care. The lack of specific targets in the poverty reduction interim strategy precludes a com-
parison between actual and targeted poverty reducing expenditures. A comparison with African
countries that reached the HIPC decision point shows the average for poverty reducing expen-
ditures is 9 percent of GDP. However, this average hides wide variation, for example, Ethiopia
(15 percent of GDP), Uganda (10 percent of GDP), Mozambique (16 percent of GDP) while
Chad, Zambia and Sierra Leone have much lower ratios than the HIPC average (about 5 percent
of GDP). A substantial financial assistance was behind these figures for countries that benefited
from HIPC countries, unlike Sudan with low level financial assistance. Therefore, it should also
CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures	                                                            25


Table 4.3:  Overall Pro-Poor Expenditures (% of GDP)
                                             2012              2013                 2014
                  Public Funds               Budget   Actual   Budget    Actual    Budget    Actual
 Overall public funding pro-poor                       4.56               4.84                5.42
 expenditure (without subsidies) (I and
 II)—Budgetary and non-budgetary
 I. Budgetary poverty reducing                6.30     4.18     5.53      4.39      5.03       5.02
 expenditures (fed/states)
  Current poverty reducing expenditures      3.96     3.03     3.67      2.68      3.41       3.19
   of which:
   Wage expenditures                         2.69     2.32     2.98      2.06      2.55       2.38
   Non-wage expenditures
                                             1.27     0.71     0.70      0.62      0.86      0.81
  Development reducing expenditure           2.34     1.15     1.86       1.71     1.62       1.83
 Federal poverty reducing expenditures        2.69     1.68     2.67       1.84     1.96       2.17
  Current poverty reducing expenditures      1.45     1.15     1.82      0.99      1.38       1.38
   of which:
   Wage expenditures                         0.86     0.75     1.51      0.69      0.91      0.91
   Non-wage expenditures
                                             0.59     0.40     0.31      0.30      0.47      0.46
  Development reducing expenditure           1.24     0.53     0.85      0.85      0.58      0.79
 States poverty reducing expenditures         3.60     2.50     2.87      2.55      3.07       2.85
  Current poverty reducing expenditures      2.50     1.88     1.86       1.69     2.03       1.81
   of which:
   Wage expenditures                         1.82     1.57     1.46       1.36     1.63       1.46
   Non-wage expenditures
                                             0.68     0.31     0.39      0.32      0.39      0.35
  Development reducing expenditure           1.10     0.62     1.01      0.86      1.04       1.04
 II. Non-budgetary reducing expenditures               0.38               0.45                0.40
  Zakat                                                0.32               0.34                0.31
  Microfinancing                                       0.06               0.11                0.09
 III. Subsidies                                        1.88               2.27                 2.42
 Overall pro-poor expenditure with                     6.44                7.11                7.84
 subsidies (I, II and III)
 IV. Nonpublic funds                                   0.83               0.68                0.60
   National Social Security Fund                       0.38               0.27                0.26
  Food and nutrition assistance (WFP/                 0.45               0.41                0.34
   UNICEF)
 Total pro-poor without subsidies (public              5.39               5.52                6.02
 and nonpublic funding) (I, II, IV)
 Total pro-poor with subsidies (public and             7.27                7.79               8.44
 nonpublic funding) (I, II, III, IV)

Source: Authors’ calculations.



be noted that Sudan could hardly be compared with other African or HIPC countries because
they are not facing comparable conditions. Poverty reducing expenditures are also defined
according to each country’s poverty reduction strategy, which is highly context-dependent, thus
comparisons should be interpreted with care.

Actual pro-poor expenditures represent a commendable increase, but further efforts are still needed
given the magnitude of the poverty and the repercussions of the long standing conflicts in the coun-
try. Although there was a clear increase in actual pro-poor expenditures, planned/budgeted
pro-poor expenditures have shown a declining trend since 2012 (Figure 4). This highlights the
26	                                                                      CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures


Figure 3:  Total Public Expenditures as Percent of GDP (1997–2013)
 30.00%

 25.00%

 20.00%

 15.00%

 10.00%

  5.00%

  0.00%
          1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Source: Central Bank of Sudan Annual Reports and IMF-Sudan, Article IV Consultations Reports.


Figure 4:  Budgeted versus Actual Share of Pro-Poor Public Expenditures as Percent of GDP,
2012–2014

               7
                        6.3
               6                                     5.5                            5.3          5.0
               5                                                   4.4
                                     4.2
               4
               3
               2
               1
               0
                              2012                          2013                          2014

                                           Budget/planned                  Actual

Source: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and authors’ calculations.


need for improving the mechanisms for further prioritizing pro-poor expenditures during the
budget preparation. The PRSP should ensure that expenditures directed toward the poor be bet-
ter planned.

Pro-poor budget credibility remains, however, a challenge, imposing a serious implication for effec-
tive implementation of IPRSP. Figure 4 shows a budget execution rate averaging only 80 percent
of planned amount. The low budget credibility is largely explained by the shortfall on develop-
                                                                                     ­ ctivities—
ment pro-poor spending; reflecting strict priority for release of funds to recurrent a
such as wages and salaries—compared to development projects during resource envelope
shortfalls. Development pro-poor spending had fallen far short of plans to less than 60 percent
of the budgeted plan in 2012 and 2013. This highlights the need for improving the mechanisms
for further prioritizing development expenditures during budget preparation and execution
processes.

The quality of budget data and classification used presented a challenge. Although the Govern-
ment Finance Statistics (GFS) budget classification is being used since 2008, yet the budget sys-
tem does not provide actual executions of government expenditures according to their function.
A key issue has been the misclassification of several expenditure categories at both federal and
state levels. As a result the study examined the detailed expenditures items under expenditure
categories and subcategories and the detailed items under government units of each state based
on the closed accounts to determine/monitor pro-poor expenditures during the review period.
CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures	                                                        27


In addition, the study analyzed development projects to determine the actual level and functional
classification (sectoral shares) of spending achieved. This constituted a very detailed review cur-
rently hitherto unavailable in Sudan.



4.4	 Composition of Pro-Poor Budgeting and Expenditures
in Sudan
The composition of pro-poor expenditures is analyzed to determine the underlying factors behind
the aggregate trends noted above. The level of government (federal vs. state expenditure) and eco-
nomic classification (current vs. development expenditure) are analyzed here while the following
chapter examines sectoral pro-poor expenditures.

The composition of federal versus state expenditures shows that on average 58 percent of pro-poor
expenditures occur at the state level. This expenditure pattern indicates an overall trend in pro-
poor expenditures which is increasingly skewed toward the state level, where the responsibility
of delivering basic services (including education, health and water) has been transferred to the
subnational/state level since 2005 fiscal decentralization. The increasing state level pro-poor
efforts over the period are largely explained by higher federal transfers to states (though declined
as share of total expenditures in 2012–2014 compared to the CPA period (2005–2011), reflecting
the government‘s commitment to fiscal decentralization.

The economic classification of current versus development expenditures shows that total pro-poor
expenditures are dominated by current expenditures. Current expenditures (wage and nonwage)
amounted to 66 percent of the total during the period 2012–2014. Within current expenditures
wages constitute the largest share, about 50 percent, leaving only 16 percent for running expenses
such as operations and maintenance and supplies (Figure 5).

The breakdown of pro-poor expenditures into current and development support differs at the state
level where the emphasis is on current spending. Current expenditures account for more than
two thirds of state level spending, including 56 percent devoted to wages (Figure 6). A low share
goes to pro-poor development spending on basic services including education, health and water,
which states are entrusted to provide according to the fiscal decentralization policy. Within cur-
rent expenditures the share allocated to nonwage is small (about 12 percent). This pattern of




Figure 5:  Current versus Development Pro-Poor Expenditures at Federal and State Levels
                                              Average: 2012–2014




                                                 16%

                                                              34%



                                                 50%




                                   Wage            Nonwage             Development

Source: Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning and authors’ calculations.
28	                                                                  CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures


Figure 6:  Current versus Development Pro-Poor Expenditures at the State Level




                                               32%

                                                                   56%


                                                12%




                                    Wage                 Nonwage         Development

Source: Authors’ calculations based on collected data.


expenditures leaves meager resources devoted to running expenses with the consequent result of
poor sustainability and maintenance of development projects.

The dominance of current pro-poor spending over development spending, especially at the state
level, raises concerns. Improving service delivery to the poor in the longer term requires invest-
ment in schools, clinics, roads and so on and the relative emphasis on current spending leaves
little room for items that have a direct impact on the quality and sustainability of services (e.g.,
investments in facilities, equipment and capacity development).

In addition to budgeted pro-poor expenditures, safety net programs such as Zakat and microfinance
programs are non-budgetary expenditures targeting the poor and administered by independent bod-
ies outside the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning. Zakat is an Islamic
system, in which a compulsory religious tax is imposed on certain activities and the revenues are
mainly distributed to poor and vulnerable groups. Zakat revenue is administered by an indepen-
dent body (Zakat Chamber). Similarly the microfinance program which is targeting the poor,
being under the jurisdiction of the Central Bank, is also outside the jurisdiction of Ministry of
Finance and Economic planning. Zakat and microfinance expenditures have hovered around
0.4 percent of GDP as shown in Table 4.3.

Besides the public funds, budgetary and non-budgetary, there are other nonpublic funds expendi-
tures. The two major sources considered here are the expenditures by the National Social Secu-
rity Fund (NSSF), which is a contributory fund by the private sector and the workers, and the
food and nutrition direct assistance provided mainly by the WFP and UNICEF targeting the
internally displaced persons and the vulnerable population affected by the war. Both sources
constitute around 0.7 percent of GDP during 2012–2014.

The above figures do not contain subsidies which will be discussed in details in the section related
to social protection expenditures. Subsidies constitute a very significant share of GDP amounting
to 2.2 percent on average during 2012–2014 which if added to the pro-poor public expenditures
(budgetary and non-budgetary) will bring the total expenditures on pro-poor to around 6.0–
7.0 percent of GDP.


Implications for PRSP
There is a need for a measurable definition of pro-poor spending that effectively captures expendi-
tures directed to the poor, and enable monitoring of government efforts. While identifying pro-poor
spending is the first step, applying a measurable/working definition is vital towards formalizing
monitoring in budget planning, implementation and execution, and reporting. The set of poli-
cies and priorities developed in the IPRSP anchored a definition of poverty-reducing allocations.
CHAPTER 4  Tracking Pro-Poor Expenditures	                                                         29


Further improvements are expected during the process of the PRSP preparation, including bet-
ter monitoring of the actual use of the funds classified as pro-poor. Identification of pro-poor
expenditures is highly context-dependent, and is most useful as a means to help guide and track
government efforts when the conceptual framework is developed through a wide participatory
discussion and is country-owned, underscoring the desirability for the PRSP to provide the
framework. This report and the experience of some SSA countries in applying a pro-poor expen-
ditures definition can also provide guidance.

The growth in pro-poor spending is a commendable achievement as it has occurred in the context
of rapidly declining total expenditures. It will be important to protect and strengthen pro-poor
spending as a policy reflected in the budget, especially given fiscal pressures. The formulation of
a national poverty reduction strategy (PRSP) should help in this regard.

The need for improving the mechanisms for prioritizing pro-poor expenditures during the budget
preparation and execution processes is vital for effective implementation of IPRSP. Pro-poor bud-
get execution rates average only 80 percent of the planned amount. The low budget credibility is
largely explained by the shortfall on development pro-poor spending. It seems that expenditures
on development projects at both federal and state levels are treated as residual, depending on the
availability of the resources after meeting current expenses. This highlights the need for improv-
ing the mechanisms for further prioritizing development expenditures during the budget prepa-
ration and execution processes.

There is an urgent need to direct resources to development at the state and local levels, where
responsibility for basic service delivery has been devolved. The low level of development expendi-
tures at the state level is a cause for concern, and there is a need to direct resources to develop-
ment at the state level, where it will directly benefit the poor. Improving service delivery to the
poor requires investment in schools, clinics, roads and so on. The relative emphasis on wages
also leaves meager resources devoted to running expenses with the consequent result of poor
sustainability and maintenance of development projects. These efforts are to be guided by pov-
erty mapping to ensure equity.

The current fiscal constraints in Sudan, following the loss of oil windfall underscore the importance
of increasing expenditure efficiency and effective use of scare resources. The growth in pro-poor
expenditures have occurred in the contest of rapidly declining total expenditures and revenues.
The fiscal space created by the oil boom has been rapidly declining. Within this constrained fis-
cal environment, an improvement in the efficiency of expenditures, including pro-poor spending
should be supported. The M&E system is required to follow up the implementation of the PRSP.
Chapter 5


Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures
Analysis: Challenges and
Opportunities




5.1	      Overall
General education claims the highest share in pro-poor expenditures. Among the pro-poor sectors,
education accounts for 28 percent followed by social protection and health around 22 percent
each and infrastructure about 16 percent. Higher education has the lowest share of pro-poor
expenditures around 4 percent on average. A striking feature is the extremely low share of agri-
culture out of the total pro-poor expenditures, which is 5.6 percent on average, despite the fact
that agriculture is the key sector to a broad base growth and the reduction of poverty.


Table 5.1:  Pro-Poor Expenditures by Sector (Billion SDG)
                                                   2012                   2013                  2014
                                             Budget     Actual     Budget      Actual      Budget   Actual
 Pro-poor expenditures in SDG billion
 Agriculture, Livestock and Natural           1,294        784       2,596          778     2,205      1,226
 Resources
 Infrastructures: Irrigation Dams, Roads      2,446        1,116     2,390         2,728    2,164      3,425
 and Rail
 Health                                       2,922       2,198      3,234         3,097    4,729      4,531
 Education—General                            3,973       2,760      4,213         3,949    5,850      6,070
 Education—Higher                               878        438         551          496       871       860
 Social Protection                            2,696       2,144      4,587         2,882    6,056      5,718
 Total                                       14,209       9,440     17,572     13,929      21,875   21,829
 In percent of total pro-poor expenditures
 Agriculture, Livestock and Natural             9.1%       8.3%      14.8%          5.6%    10.1%       5.6%
 Resources
 Infrastructures: Irrigation Dams, Roads       17.2%      11.8%      13.6%         19.6%     9.9%      15.7%
 and Rail
 Health                                       20.6%       23.3%      18.4%         22.2%    21.6%      20.8%
 Education—General                            28.0%       29.2%      24.0%         28.3%    26.7%      27.8%
 Education—Higher                              6.2%        4.6%        3.1%         3.6%     4.0%       3.9%
 Social Protection                            19.0%       22.7%      26.1%         20.7%    27.7%      26.2%

Source: Compiled by authors from Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning data.

                                                                                                           31
32	                       CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


5.2	 Growth and Development with Employment Creation:
Agriculture and Agriculture Related Infrastructure
Introduction
Public agriculture expenditure (PAE) is defined to include agriculture as well as agriculture related
sectors like dams, and infrastructure. The definition of PAE adopted in this study draws on a tech-
nical note by AU-NEPAD issued in 2005 to assist countries in defining what to include in Public
Agriculture Expenditures for measuring progress in Maputo Declaration of July 2003 that com-
mits the African countries to agree to allocate at least 10 percent of national budgetary resources
for agricultural and rural development.4 To allow for further analysis, a distinction is made
between the core agriculture sub sectors and the agriculture related infrastructure.

Agriculture is largely traditional and subsistent with low yields as evidenced by long term crop pro-
duction trends, as well as low livestock productivity and off-take rates. Traditional farmers expand
horizontally by increasing area planted to compensate for the low yields. Meanwhile, nomadic
livestock herders continue to increase their herd numbers beyond the grazing capacity as a cop-
ing mechanism against the risks of diseases and drought. Livestock farming is dominated by tra-
ditional management systems that lack business orientation, thus limiting breeding, exploitation
of markets and improved value chains. There is little use of improved varieties of seed with little
fertilizer application in crops. Access to technology or extension services is poor and research is
crippled by the small funding. The land tenure system—besides being a source of conflict—does
not encourage sustainable use of land. The modern irrigated sector is at the brink of collapse due
mainly to mismanagement, lack of institutional reforms and the deteriorated irrigation facilities.
This situation is exacerbated by weak market access due to poor infrastructure and high taxes
particularly at the sub national governments level. The agro industrial base is loaded with con-
straints and most agriculture is exported as raw materials to limited markets. This situation does
not serve the poor.

One of the blows to agriculture was the negligence of this sector during the oil period. The oil has
shifted the structure of the economy in Sudan from an agrarian base where most of the popula-
tion earns their livelihood to an oil growth driven economy. Following the oil boom, the share of
agriculture in GDP declined from 48 percent in 1997 to about 30 percent by 2010, while the ser-
vices sectors share in the GDP started to increase gradually from around 40 percent in 1996/97
to peak at 48–50 percent in 2009–2011. Sudan did not use the oil windfall to invest in improve-
ment of agriculture.

All indicators derived from Sudan National Baseline Household Survey (NBHS) of 2009 point to
the importance of agriculture to poverty in Sudan. About 57.6 percent of the households below the
poverty line live in the rural areas that are dominated by agriculture as the main source of liveli-
hood. States at the bottom of the poverty rely on agriculture. For example, about 74 percent of
North Darfur population, being the poorest state (with 69.4 percent of its population live below
the poverty line) derives their livelihood from agriculture and livestock. About seventy per cent
of the labor force is principally employed in agricultural or agriculture related activities.

The importance of agriculture was recognized by the IPRSP. Agriculture was part of the “promo-
tion of economic growth and employment creation” pillar of the IPRSP. The actions proposed by

4 The FAO has developed common indicators for monitoring key commodities and public expenditure in agriculture
through Monitoring and Analysis of Food Agricultural Policies MAFAP, which is more comprehensive including agri-
culture specific investments and general sector support like roads, training, research, infrastructure, storage, marketing
and also agriculture supportive policies like rural education and rural health and it includes all public institutions like
state public enterprises and state banks. It also measures both budgeted and actual expenditures. In this study what
constitutes agriculture in Sudan is defined in such a way as to include more than what is contained in the narrow defi-
nition of the COFOG/AU-NEPAD but not as broad as the MAFAP. The definition will include agriculture and agricul-
ture related sectors like dams for irrigation, railways, agroindustry and paved roads. To allow for any further analysis
distinction will be made between the core agriculture sub sectors and the agriculture related infrastructure.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                    33


the IPRSP relied on the Government plan “Agriculture Revitalization Program”. The main objec-
tives of agriculture development were ambitious given time and resource availability and exist-
ing capacity: (i) increase agriculture growth (ii) increase agriculture productivity (iii) increase
exports, particularly livestock and (iv) make agriculture production environmentally sustainable.
To achieve these objectives, the actions proposed were: assisting smallholder to become more
productive by strengthening land rights, investing in research, providing access to financial ser-
vices and link producers to modern supply chains for higher-value urban markets, rehabilitating
the irrigated sector, improving quality of exports, improving livestock marketing and the quality
of stock routes, improving access to credit, handling facilities and veterinary inspection and vac-
cination services; addressing environmental degradation and making agricultural systems more
environmentally sustainable, rehabilitating the Gum Arabic Belt; and building the capacities of
agro-industries. The strategy calls for more public investments for agriculture sector, particularly
research.

The IPRSP also recognized the paucity of infrastructure as one of major impediments to growth,
particularly to agriculture. As stated in the IPRSP, poor infrastructure is also impediment to
national integration and the spreading of the benefits of growth to all parts of the country. Out-
comes like integration of the nation, making growth inclusive, moving bottlenecks to production,
promoting competitiveness will have positive impacts on the poor and therefore, infrastructure
will require sustained investments, which is a major challenge facing the country. Within the
investment portfolio for infrastructure, maintenance should be given priority along with roads
in lagging regions and rural areas and rehabilitation of the railways especially sections passing
through the conflict areas. It was obvious that many of the proposed actions will not be fully
implemented during the period mentioned. However, what was required is working towards
meeting these objectives.


Agriculture Public Expenditures (2012–2014)
The total expenditures on agriculture and infrastructure-related spending amounted to 8.2 percent
of total public expenditures on average during 2012–2014. This is close to Sudan’s commitment
to the Maputo Declaration.5 The following table shows the actual public expenditures allocated
for the agriculture sector and related infrastructure.6 The share of agriculture and related infra-
structure out of total public expenditures has consistently increased from 6.4 percent in 2011
to 8.2 percent. The increase in agriculture and agriculture related expenditures is mainly due to
the government’s investments in infrastructure like dams and roads, indicating the high prior-
ity accorded by the government to infrastructure investments. However, if agriculture spending
is considered in a narrower context, i.e. less infrastructure spending, the public expenditure in
agriculture as a ratio to the total public expenditure is 2.2 percent over the same period, which is
disappointing given the role that has to be played by the agriculture sector in poverty reduction.

The bulk of federal development spending in agriculture and agriculture related sectors is directed
towards dams (around 60 percent of total agriculture expenditures), paved roads and rail (22 per-
cent), indicating the government priority of investing in infrastructure. Within the core agriculture
activities, most federal development resources are spent on irrigated agriculture. Livestock and
rain fed agriculture receive meager resources (Figure 7). Expenditures on services like plant
protection, technology transfers and research, receive a small allocations. Although natural
resources are showing small amounts of expenditures, but it is to be noted that forestry, receives
additional resources from the Forestry Public Corporation which are not recorded here (the pub-
lic corporations are excluded from the definition of agriculture in this study).

5 In 2003, 53 African countries have met and issued what is known as Maputo Declaration in which they have com-

mitted themselves to accord agriculture investments a high priority and a target of 10 percent of public expenditures
should be devoted to agriculture. Agriculture definition by African Countries varies but all African countries defined
agriculture to include other related sectors.
6 Infrastructure   includes roads, irrigation dams and water harvesting.
34	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Table 5.2:  Agriculture and Infrastructure Public Expenditures (2012–2014)
                                                                                                        Average
                                                               2012          2013            2014      2012–2014
 In SDG million
 Agriculture and infrastructure                               1,899         3,505            4,650
  Agriculture                                                  (783)         (777)           (1,225)
  Infrastructure                                              (1,116)       (2,728)         (3,425)
 As % of total public expenditures
 Agriculture and infrastructure                                6.4%          8.5%            8.2 %       7.7%
  Agriculture                                                 (2.6%)        (1.9%)           (2.1 %)     (2.2%)
  Infrastructure                                              (3.8%)        (6.6%)           (6.1 %)     (5.5%)
 As % of GDP
 Agriculture and infrastructure                                0.8%           1.1%            1.1%       1.0%
  Agriculture                                                 (0.3%)        (0.2%)           (0.3%)      (0.3%)
  Infrastructure                                              (0.5%)        (0.9%)           (0.8%)      (0.7%)
 Federal versus states expenditures ratios
 Agriculture: Federal                                          59%           49%              64%         57%
  States                                                       41%            51%             36%        43%
 Infrastructure: Federal                                       69%           78%              76%         74%
  States                                                       31%           22%              24%        26%
 Current expenditures versus development expenditures
 Agriculture: Current                                          37%           38%              33%        36%
  Development                                                  63%           62%              67%        64%
 Infrastructure: Current                                       17%            11%             13%         14%
  Development                                                  83%           89%              87%        86%

Source: Authors’ calculations.


Figure 7:  Composition of Agriculture Development Expenditures by Category
                          Sub sectoral composition of agriculture and agriculture related
                        development expenditures (federal and states): average 2012–2014




                                                                           Irrigated
                                                                           Rain fed
                                                                           Services
                                                                           Livestock
                                                                           Natural resources
                                                                           Agro industries
                                                                           Irrigation dams
                                                                           Roads and rail


Source: Sudan Ministry of Agriculture and NAIP.


Sudan’s public agriculture expenditures though close but have not met the 10 percent target after a
decade has passed since Maputo Declaration was launched in 2003. Only 13 countries out of the
53 African countries have met or surpassed the 10 percent target in one or more years. Sudan
performs within the average of its neighbors (except for Ethiopia) and the continent, which is less
than the 10 percent target, but not within its IGAD Region (Table 5.3).
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                  35


Table 5.3:  Public Agriculture Expenditures as Percentage of Total Expenditures—Sudan
and Comparators
  Egypt         Ethiopia          Chad          Central Africa          Sudan           Africa          IGAD Region
   1.8%          21.2%            6.2%                2.3%                8.2%           3.9%              10.7%

Source: Re SAKKS, Annual Trends and Outlook Report (2012).


Domestic Development Expenditures versus Foreign Expenditures
The government has met 97 percent of the financing for the agriculture and agriculture related
development during 2012–2014 from domestic resources and loans. Grants by the international
community covered the remaining balance. Out of the 97 percent financing, 50 percent was met
from domestic resources and 47 percent from loans. Most of the loans were directed for the agri-
culture related expenditures (dams, rail and paved roads) as reflected in Figure 8.

For more than two decades, Sudan has received extremely low level of development assistance from
the donor’s community. This is mainly attributed to the political tensions between Sudan and the
western countries. Sudan’s access to concessional financing for development is aggravated by the
unilateral economic sanctions of the USA since 1997, and the inability of Sudan to access the
international debt initiatives like HIPC. Therefore, Sudan has to depend on other sources, which
are mainly loans from the Arab institutions and China to implement its major development proj-
ects, particularly dams for irrigated agriculture and roads.

Figure 8:  Public Agriculture Expenditures by Source of Financing
                           Composition of agriculture public expenditures by source of financing


                8000

                7000

                6000
                                                                                   Domestic financing
                5000
                                                                                   Loans
                4000                                                               Grants
                3000

                2000

                1000

                    0
                         2012                 2013                 2014



Table 5.4:  Sudan-Public Agriculture Loans by Source in US$
 Donor                                                             2012                2013                2014
 Islamic Development Bank                                        37,166,745         53,331,878           10,460,927
 International Fund for Agriculture Development                   5,338,071           5,712,935             897,269
 Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development                   55,113,961         98,651,363          104,235,712
 Abu Dhabi Fund for Economic Development                          4,341,083           2,322,100                    0
 Kuwait Fund for Economic Development                            13,819,593         44,273,055           49,145,859
 Saudi Fund for Development                                     45,530,337           41,517,822         55,903,320
 OPEC Fund                                                      14,245,268           16,626,767           11,804,941
 China                                                          61,595,233                       0                 0
 India                                                              134,793                      0                 0
 Total Loans                                                   237,285,084        262,435,920           232,448,028

Source: Central Bank of Sudan, External Debt Unit.
36	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Table 5.5:  Sudan—Grants Covering Public Agriculture Expenditures Classified by Development
Partners—US$
                                                                  2012                 2013           2014
 UNDP                                                            1,421,621           2,761,394      1,498,909
 FAO                                                            8,008,319            7,071,907      2,352,489
 World Bank/MDTF                                                4,369,000           2,785,000                0
 EU                                                             3,220,079              415,439      7,653,886
 Total grants                                                   17,019,019         13,033,740       11,505,284

Source: Ministry of Finance, Planning Secretariat, International Cooperation Directorate.


Current Expenditures versus Development Expenditures
Current expenditures constitute around 15 percent of the agriculture and agriculture related sectors
on average during 2012–2014, while the bulk of expenditures amounting to 85 percent are develop-
ment expenditures. However, this situation largely changes in case of only considering agriculture
without related sectors. Average current expenditures for agriculture expenditures during the
same period amounted to 30 percent while development expenditures declined to about 60 per-
cent (Figure 9). A noticeable feature in both cases (with or without related sectors) is the meager
resources devoted to the running expenses which ranged between 3–9 percent, with the conse-
quent result of poor sustainability and maintenance of agriculture development projects.


Federal Expenditures versus States Expenditures
States spend on average an equivalent of around 16 percent of the total public resources spent on
agriculture and agriculture related sector nationwide. Table 5.6 shows the distribution of public
agriculture expenditures at the federal and state level, where the federal level claims the largest
share. The state share of agriculture expenditures to total public expenditures average 16 percent
during 2012–2014, but with a declining trend. Moreover, within the current expenditures, the
substantial part is directed to meet wages and salaries at the expense of providing running cost
and surpluses for development.

Wages and salaries constitute the largest current spending component in agriculture. Out of the
16 percent expenditures on agriculture at the state level, about half of it (46 percent) is current
expenditures, of which 70 percent is spent on wages and salaries i.e. around 30 percent. Agricul-
ture expenditures at the federal level as a percentage of total expenditures on agriculture show a
similar trend. The share of expenditures on federal agriculture amount, on average, to 19 percent
of which about one third (35 percent) are current expenditures, out of which 80 percent are spent
on wages and salaries.

Figure 9:  Recurrent and Development Agriculture Expenditures Shares
                       Composition of agriculture and agriculture related sectors expenditures

                    100%
                                                                                 Wage
                     80%                                                         Non-wage current
                                                                                 Development
                     60%


                     40%


                     20%


                      0%
                                Agr & Agr                Agriculture
                              related sectors
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                                                           37


Table 5.6:  Sudan: Federal and States Agriculture and Infrastructure Expenditures as a Share
of Total Agriculture and Infrastructure Expenditures
                                                                                                                                             Average
                                                                                       2012              2013                  2014         2012–2013
Federal agriculture                                                                     27%                12%                  19%               19%
Federal infrastructure                                                                 52%                74%                  69%               65%
States agriculture and infrastructure                                                   21%                14%                  12%               16%
Total                                                                                  100%              100%                  100%             100%



Budget Execution: Budget Allocations versus Actual Expenditures
The credibility of development expenditures is poor, imposing serious implications for effective
implementation of agricultural projects/investments. It seems that expenditures on development
projects in agriculture at both federal and state levels are treated as residual, hinging on the avail-
ability of the resources after meeting current expenses. This is clear from the deviation of over
50 percent between budgeted and actual figures for development expenditures, which is poor by
international standards. The extent of deviation is shown in Figure 10 below. As expected, the
degree to which actual expenditures deviate from budgeted level has been reasonable by inter-
national standards for the agriculture current expenditures at the federal level (deviation of less
than 4 percent between budget and actual expenditures) and to a lesser degree at state level (due
to overestimation of running expenditures).


Figure 10:  Budgeted versus Actual Agriculture Expenditures at Federal and State Levels
                                                              Federal and states budgets for agriculture-budget credibility;
                                                                         budgeted versus actual expenditures
  Actual expe. divided by budgeted exp




                                         140%                                                                          Current expenditures agr
                                         120%                                                                          Development agr fedr
                                         100%                                                                          Current state
                                                                                                                       Current expenditures agr related
                                         80%
                                                                                                                       Develop agr and related fed
                                         60%
                                                                                                                       Develop states agr
                                         40%
                                         20%
                                          0%
                                                2011            2012               2013               2014




Figure 11:  Bank Financing to Agriculture
                                         8000                                                              17.00%                 % Share of agriculture
                                                                                                                                  in total bank financing
                                         7000                                                              16.00%
                                         6000                                                                                     Agriculture bank
                                                                                                           15.00%                 financing in normal
                                         5000                                                                                     terms
            SDG million




                                                                                                           14.00%
                                         4000                                                                                     Agriculture bank
                                                                                                           13.00%
                                         3000                                                                                     financing in real terms
                                                                                                           12.00%
                                         2000
                                         1000                                                              11.00%

                                           0                                                               10.00%
                                                       2011       2012          2013          2014

Source: Central Bank of Sudan Annual Reports 2011–2014 and author’s compilations.
38	                     CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Seasonal Financing
The agriculture public expenditures were supported by noticeable increase in banks financing to
agriculture, both in nominal and real terms. The share of agriculture in total banks financing has
also increased from around 13 percent in 2011 to around 17 percent in 2014, which contributed
to the financing of the agriculture seasons during 2012–2014.


Achievements
Recovery of Production, Productivity and Exports
Several actions identified by the IPRSP were implemented. Beside the huge investments in infra-
structure, particularly roads and water harvesting in rain fed areas, considerable efforts were
made in the livestock sector. Investment in this sector included the successful health program
of vaccination and inspection for livestock exports of sheep and investments in quarantines that
resulted in remarkable recovery of live animal’s exports. Suitable policies in the area of liberal-
izing and investments in the Gum Arabic and oilseeds led to increased production and exports of
those commodities. Investments in technological improvement—genetically modified cotton—
resulted in the recovery for cotton.

These efforts had positive results on agriculture production. Output and yields started to recover
particularly oil seeds and cotton. A positive achievement in the agriculture sector is the clear ris-
ing trend in yields and quantities exported as shown in Figure 12. The rising trend is also driven
by non-crop production, livestock sector, which shows a remarkable recovery with virtually no
exports in 2008 that grew to a multi-million business and earned about US$682 million in 2013,
compared to total agriculture exports of US$1,626 (Bank of Sudan Annual Reports and Trade
Digest).

The livestock sector—that accounts for half of total agricultural GDP in Sudan—has been much
stronger in contrast to crop production. The national herd and exports have seen significant
growth over the past decade, exporting over 6 million heads in 2014 (Figure 12). Sudan’s recent
export values of livestock products indicate that the growth is led by the increase of sheep
exports from $44 million in 2008 to $477 in 2013, primarily to Arab countries. The backbone of
this success is pastoral livestock production.

Cotton production and yields have recovered over the past years. After a number of years with
declining yield and production of cotton, cotton production is on the rise again since 2010 (Fig-
ure 12). Cotton average yields doubled from 500 kg/feddan in 2009 to 1014 kg/feddan 2014, fol-
lowing the introduction of genetically modified cotton. However, current cotton production is
far below its 1960’s level, when Sudan was one of the world’s largest producers of cotton.

Gum Arabic production has also shown a remarkable recovery, but there is considerable scope to
expand production. The Gum Arabic trade was liberalized with the removal of the Gum Arabic
Company (GAC) concessions on the marketing and export of raw gum Arabic and the suspen-
sion of the floor price system. Production increased to 50 thousand tons between 2009 and 2012,
after a sharp drop in the 1990s where annual production averaged 15 to 20 thousand tons.7 The
current production level is closer to the average of the 1960s, when Sudan was the world’s largest
producer of gum Arabic, but its domination has declined over time. Latest estimates available for
2014 suggest that production reached 75 thousand tons and this is probably far below potential
output of gum Arabic. The production potential with current gum Arabic trees as speculated
by the Secretary General of the Gum Arabic Council can reach about 200 thousand tons. Farm



7 The sector was supported by 2010 Gum Arabic project, known as “as ‘Revitalizing the Sudan Gum Arabic Produc-
tion & Marketing Project” financed by the World Bank (Multi-Donor Trust Fund) and the International Fund for
Agricultural Development (IFAD).
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                                                   39


Figure 12:  Agriculture Production and Yields for Selected Crops and Agriculture Exports
                      Production and yield of sesame                                     Production and yield of groundnuts

                800                                    100                         300
                                                                                  2000                                        350
                700                                    90
                                                                                    250                                       300
                                                       80
                600                                                               1500
                                                       70                          200                                        250
    000’ tons




                                                                      000’ tons
                500                                    60




                                                             kg/fed




                                                                                                                                        kg/fed
                                                                                                                              200
                400                                    50                           150
                                                                                  1000
                                                       40                                                                     150
                300                                                                100
                                                       30                                                                     100
                200                                                                500
                                                       20                            50
                100                                    10                                                                     50
                  0                                    0                             0
                                                                                     0                                        0
                  09 9
                  10 0
                  11 1
                  12 2
                  13 3
                  14 4
                        5




                                                                                    20 010

                                                                                    20 011

                                                                                      12 2

                                                                                      13 3
                                                                                      14 4
                                                                                              5
                20 /200
                20 /201
                20 /201
                20 /201
                20 /201
                20 201
                      01




                                                                                    20 01

                                                                                    20 201
                                                                                    20 201
                                                                                            01
                    /2




                                                                                         /2

                                                                                        /2

                                                                                         /2




                                                                                         /2
                    /




                                                                                         /

                                                                                         /
                  08




                                                                                      09

                                                                                      10

                                                                                      11
                20




                                                                                    20
                             Yield (kg/feddan)                                                    Yield (kg/feddan)
                             Production (000 tons)                                                Production (000 tons)

                            Cotton production                                             Sudan selected exports volume

                400                                                                400                                        8
                350
                300                                                                300                                        6




                                                                                                                                    Million heads
    000’ tons




                250
                                                                        000’ MT



                200                                                                200                                        4
                150
                100                                                                100                                        2
                 50
                  0                                                                  0                                        0
                      2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                                          2012     2013     2014

                                                                                                  Livestock (million heads)
                                                                                                  Gum Arabic (000 MT)
                                                                                                  Oil seeds (000 MT)

Source: Central Bank of Sudan: foreign trade statistical bulletin (2008–2014) and Agriculture Economics Department
MOAI.


reach results have shown that productivity per tree can be considerably increased by 47 to 60 per-
cent. Thus there is considerable scope to expand production.

Sesame is a relatively high value crop, with a stable world market in which Sudan plays a relatively
strong role. Sesame yields slightly improved during the review period (Figure 12). Sudan exports
about two-thirds of its sesame production, and is among the main exporters of sesame seeds
worldwide with a 10 percent share in total world export of sesame, Sudan’s ranked fourth after
Nigeria, India, and Ethiopia who had, respectively, 38, 20, and 16 percent shares of the market.
Sesame exports in 2008–2013 accounted, on average, about 32 percent of agricultural exports,
ranking next to livestock that accounts for 42 percent. However, sesame productivity levels are
low relative to other major producing countries (Table 5.8). Increasing productivity through
adopting improved production and using higher quality inputs will create jobs and increase
incomes in the rural area.


Agriculture Supply and Improved Food Security Situation
Household food security in Sudan is strongly linked with the performance of the agricultural sec-
tor. However, taking the food security in its broad definition other factors like prices and access
and food utilization matter. Moreover, food security situation varies in terms of locations, being
worse in conflict affected areas.
40	                       CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


The outcome of the increased production had positive impacts on food security. It has enhanced one
pillar of the food security situation in the country which is food availability. The three agriculture
seasons 2012–2014 had good harvest (except for 2013). In 2014/2015 season cereals production
reached 7.84 million tons which is 86 percent above the average of the last five years 2008–2012
and so was the agriculture season 2012 in which cereals production amounted to about 6 million
tons.8 Generally food security conditions have significantly improved as cereal crop production
increased local supply and reduced most vulnerable households’ dependence on markets.

However, the stability of food supply was affected by the increase in prices in the first half of 2012,
where average cereal prices were about 2 to 3 times their level in 2008. But prices remained stable
through 2013 and 2014, yet still higher than average of the last five years.9 High inflation has
affected the general price levels including food. Inflation rates continued to hike from 18 per-
cent in 2011 to 35.1 percent in 2012 to 37 percent in 2013 and 2014. However, bread prices were
not affected by any price increase due to maintaining wheat subsidies. Inflation started to come
down in late 2014 and the first half of 2015 (14 percent in July 2015). The decline in the inflation
rates coupled with the good agriculture season, is expected to improve food security situation in
2015.

On the other hand, unemployment also has negative impacts on accessibility. Unemployment rate,
which was around 14.8 in 2009 as estimated by the CBoS, increased to 18.8 percent in 2013 as
noted by the Ministry of Manpower based on a survey that was conducted in collaboration with
the ILO.

In conflict affected areas food security was adversely influenced by the increase in displace-
ment. About 400,000 new internally displaced people (IDPs) were registered between January
and August 2014 in the country, particularly in Darfur mainly due to tribal conflicts whereas
resources of UNOCHA for Sudan program have been going down since 2011, thereby affecting
access to food security. In Darfur, a decline in food security (from November 2012 to November
2014) was seen in all five states, but was most pronounced in South and West Darfur, where the
proportion of the population classified as food secure shrank by 24 and 22 percentage points,
respectively.10


Increased Market Access
Sudan invested heavily in roads construction during 2012–2014, with noticeable achievements.11 In
the period 2012–2014 around 1,262 km of roads or about 20 percent of the network were added
to the road network bringing the total paved roads network in 2014 to 8,706 km. The distribu-
tion of the new roads constructed gave due consideration to the regional balance where several
roads were completed or near completion in Darfur, like Zaling/Algeniena (178 km) in the far
west, and Nyala/Idd Al Firsan (158 km) and Nyala-Kass-Zalingi (146 km) in South Darfur.


Challenges
Low Agricultural Growth Compared to Potential
Sudan is producing far below its potential. Total area under irrigation declined to about 2 mil-
lion feddan compared to a potential of 4.7 million feddan. Irrigation intensity of Gezira Scheme
is currently around 37 percent from a level of 75 percent in the 1970s. Sudan is now producing

8 Food   Security Cluster—FAO/WFP Sudan Report 2015.
9 FAO    Country Brief: Sudan 2015.
10 Food   Security Cluster—FAO/WFP Sudan Report 2015.
11 Sudanhas made considerable investments in paved roads. The paved roads network has expanded considerably
from around 3,358 km in 2000 to 6,444 km in 2011.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                          41


Figure 13:  Roads Lengths and Density
                       Paved roads in km                                            Paved roads density

   10000                                            800          5
                                                    700
     8000                                                        4
                                                    600
     6000                                           500          3
                                                    400
     4000                                           300          2
                                                    200          1
     2000
                                                    100
         0                                          0            0




                                                                     1963
                                                                     1966
                                                                     1969
                                                                     1972
                                                                     1975
                                                                     1978
                                                                     1981
                                                                     1984
                                                                     1987
                                                                     1990
                                                                     1993
                                                                     1996
                                                                     1999
                                                                     2002
                                                                     2005
                                                                     2008
                                                                     2011
                                                                     2014
             1963
             1966
             1969
             1972
             1975
             1978
             1981
             1984
             1987
             1990
             1993
             1996
             1999
             2002
             2005
             2008
             2011
             2014
                         Roads network in km                                             km per 1000 sq km of area
                         Roads constructed in km
Source: Roads and Bridges Public Corporation.



one tenth the cotton it used to produce in the                                   Agriculture sector annual growth rates
1970s. Current cotton production is 130,000 bales
                                                                               10.0%
whereas its production reached 1,300,000 bales in                                           6.8%                6.4%
mid-seventies. Sesame production is one fifth of the                            5.0%
                                                                                                                          3.6%
level attained in the early 1960s. Growth of agricul-                           0.0%
                                                                     Percent


                                                                                         2010      2011       2012     2013
ture is still volatile and is largely influenced by rains                       5.0%
and follows the volatility of the rainfall. Moreover,
                                                                               –10.0%
production from the irrigated sector is weak. Areas
under irrigation fell from 2.9 million feddan in                               –15.0%
                                                                                                   –15.0%
2010/2011 to 2.4 million feddan in 2013/2014. Irri-                            –20.0%
gation schemes still suffer from poor management
                                                                     Source: CBoS
and lack of institutional reforms, which have been
the main reasons behind the deterioration of pro-
duction and productivity in the irrigated sector.


Low Productivity
Productivity is still extremely low. Sudan is not investing well in research. The following table
reveals that expenditures on research during the IPRSP period are about 0.08 percent of agricul-
ture GDP. Brazil invests in research 1.8 percent of agriculture GDP, China 0.5, India 0.4.12

Table 5.7:  Agriculture and Livestock Research Public Expenditures, 2012–2014
 Ratios of research expenditures                    2012         2013                   2014        Average
 As % of agriculture GDP                             0.09%        0.07%                 0.08%         0.08%
 As % of total public expenditures                   0.22%        0.19%                 0.23%         0.21%
 As % of federal agriculture expenditures           14%         20%                 14%              16%
 Share of wages                                     84.4%        81.3%              67.6%            77.8%
 Share of nonwage                                    7.1%         8.8%              18.6%             11.5%
 Share of development                                8.5%         9.9%              13.8%            10.7%

Source: Authors’ calculations.


12 Agriculture   and R&D in South Asia. Gert Jan Stads and Micheal Rahija 2012.
42	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Table 5.8:  Sudan Yields for Some Crops Compared to Selected Countries
            Sesame                                   Cotton                                  Cereals
 Country               Kg/ha             Country               Kg/ha             Country                Kg/ha
 Ethiopia                750             Egypt                    737            Sudan                   589
 Sudan                   259             Sudan                   422             Brazil                 4826
 China                  1200             Brazil                 1563             China                  5891
 Nigeria                 500             China                  1484             Malaysia               3889
 India                   422             India                   554             Ghana                   1678
 Myanmar                 580             Pakistan                 757            Zimbabwe                 724

Source: Getahun Bikora, oilseed production and marketing situation in Ethiopia, Ministry of Trade, Nov. 14, 2015, US
Department of Agriculture; World Bank data and FAO STAT.


Yields of cereals in countries with high investments in research are higher than Sudan. Yields of
cereals in Brazil are 4826 kg per hectare, 5891 kg per hectare in China and 3889 kg per hectare
in India while in Sudan they are only 589 kg per hectare. Fertilizer use is limited in Sudan. Urea
is used at an average of 5 kg per feddan placing Sudan among the lowest in the world. Table 5.8
compares yields of selected crops with some countries and Sudan is at the bottom of this com-
parison in almost all crops.

Low productivity is also associated with low agricultural inputs usage and support service in the
country. Fertilizer use is limited and has experienced a declining trend since 1970. For example,
in 2009 the average fertilizer use per hectare of cropland was 7.3 kg, which ranked Sudan at 129
among 155 countries, far behind Ethiopia, which used 17 kg (ranking 115). Available statistics
indicate that Sudan used as much as 80 kg/ha in the mid-1970s, and 70 kg/ha in the 1980s (2015
World Bank CEM). While it is not entirely clear how the low fertilizer usage came about, it is
clear that the decline in agriculture is associated to fertilizer usage. Similarly improved seed
technology is essential for bridging the gap between yields in demonstration trials and farmers’
fields. Agricultural research, which is under the responsibility of the federal government, has
been under-funded as shown in Table 5.7.13 Agriculture support services receive meager public
resources compared to other investment program as noted earlier in Figure 7. Without increased
agricultural inputs usage, crop yields will remain at unacceptable levels. On the other hand, the
declining productivity under rain-fed agriculture is also attributed to low and fluctuating rain-
fall, necessitating the use of drought-tolerant verities, water harvesting techniques or appropriate
crop rotations.


Value Added in Trade and High Taxes
Almost all agriculture products are exported as raw material except few semi-processed and pro-
cessed items like skins, ethanol, oil cake and meat. During 2012–2014 about 92 percent of the
total agricultural exports were raw materials. Exports are concentrated in few markets; about
75–80 percent of Sudan agriculture exports are concentrated in three foreign markets; Saudi Ara-
bia (sheep), Egypt (camels and meat), China (oil seeds). This situation puts the Sudanese exports
under great risks.

While there was considerable improvement in the policy environment for agriculture, taxes still
impede competitiveness of the sector. In the past the Government has used a variety of instruments


13 The allocation of resources across various lines of research is primarily a policy decision. The Agricultural Research

Corporation (ARC) is the principal research arm of the government on agriculture, in addition to the universities.
Agricultural extension services in Sudan are provided by the government through the Ministry of Agriculture and Irri-
gation and the Ministry of Livestock and Fisheries. The Technology Transfer and Extension Administration (TTEA)
is responsible technical body for agriculture extension services. But the government delivery of Livestock and Fishery
extension services do not appear to be contributing to significant increases in productivity.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                  43


to intervene in the markets which distorted the price incentives like distorted exchange rates,
export taxation, tariff policies, incentive payments, and trading monopolies. Most of these poli-
cies were corrected and the major policy change that needs to be reviewed is the taxation system
for cops and livestock particularly the sub national taxes, which greatly impedes competitiveness
of agriculture.


Market Access
Despite the remarkable achievement of expanding the road network, particularly over the last three
years, road density is low. Sudan paved road density is only 4.6 km per 1000 km square of land
area. Road density in Sudan is low even when compared to Sub Sahara Africa with 20.4 km per
1000 km square of land area.14

A basic challenge for infrastructure, particularly roads is maintenance. Out of the total 8,000 km,
about 3,500 km or 43 percent of the network needs maintenance of which 1,400 km or 18 per-
cent is in extremely critical condition as of 2014. The Roads and Bridges Corporation although
allowed to retain the proceeds of the road tolls for maintenance, but these resources currently
cover only 12 percent of maintenance cost. That is, the revenue from tolls (being recently
adjusted upwards) covers only 168 km of overlay and rehabilitation per year. With this rate, it
will take the Roads and Bridges Corporation about 8 years to rehabilitate the roads which are in
critical conditions and 20 years for all the Roads that require maintenance. The underfunding of
the Roads and Bridges Corporation could lead to serious deterioration in the roads network.

A sizable share of the country lacks roads, particularly rural connectivity and linkages between agri-
culture areas and the main road network. This situation poses serious threat for agriculture mar-
ket and greatly reduces farmers’ prices when agriculture areas are completely cut off during the
rainy season due to lack of roads connectivity.

Moreover, infrastructure development requires addressing a variety of constraints. These include
pricing/toll, regulatory framework and governance.


Implications for PRSP
Despite recovery of production in certain basic crops over the past three years and the good perfor-
mance of agriculture in total exports partially compensating for the loss of oil; the main problems
faced by agriculture are still prevailing. Besides improving the macroeconomic environment for
agriculture growth, Sudan has to make strategic choices to address the constraints facing agricul-
ture, particularly the structural issues. The PRSP will be an opportunity to start working in these
choices, mostly being of a medium to long nature. While pragmatic actions are needed in terms
of policy and investment to increase agriculture growth and remove impediments to production
in the short run, steps are to be taken towards long term solution of structural problems facing
the sector.

Transformation of traditional agriculture: Implementing the strategic choices of transforming
the traditional sector to economically viable commercial businesses has to be looked into. The
transformation will have certain policy choices and requisites that the government has to take.
The transformation is linked to the change in land rights and access to services such as modern
and innovative technology, extension, improved seeds, rural credit, and development of infra-
structure. The current level of investments and institutional arrangement in agriculture will not
achieve these objectives, an issue that needs to considered in the PRSP.




14 African   Development Bank—Economic Brief, Volume 1, September 2011.
44	                  CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Land rights: Sustainable production in rain fed agriculture is critically dependent on resolving
land issues and land rights. However, land reform in Sudan is difficult to manage and if not care-
fully designed could result in massive conflicts and social disintegration. Nevertheless, strategic
choices are required to address the dichotomy between the statutory and customary land laws
and the dichotomy between tribal management of land and civil administration of land. The
challenge is how to initiate a gradual approach to reform the land rights issue with the least dis-
ruptions to the social system and without fueling further conflicts.

Steps towards modernizing livestock sector: Fundamental issues related to the nomadic livestock
sector needs to be addressed. On one hand, livestock shows remarkable performance in terms of
production and resilience in response to climate change. However, on the other hand, it is facing
serious challenges that threaten its existence. The mobile system of nomadic livestock produc-
tion often leads to conflicts among parties competing for grazing, water and space. Pastoralists
are being driven into more remote areas through the gradual expansion of agriculture, miner-
als explorations and the situation is exacerbated by the land degradation. The secession of the
South resulted in loss of pastures and grazing space. While the livestock population fell by only
28 percent due to secession, the natural rangeland resources upon which they depend fell by
40 percent. The normal wet land areas in South Sudan in which grazing was practiced by North-
ern Sudan tribes for centuries is now considered trespassing by the South. Moreover, the inher-
ent volatility of the sector, being exposed to frequent drought and diseases, is apparent. Issues
of quality are also a concern that affects commercialization and competitiveness of the sector.
When pastoralists come up against highly efficient modern livestock industries they face major
threat. Live sheep exports which dominate the livestock exports in Sudan have limited markets
which are risky. The future demand for livestock products is based on food quality, including
food safety and animal welfare, while modern systems of production greatly benefit from genetic
improvement in grass and animals which are both difficult to meet in traditional production sys-
tems. Therefore, the future is for the modern livestock production rather than the mobile system
of nomadic livestock production. Although the change seems inevitable, but the last thing the
current volatile livestock sector in Sudan needs is an abrupt change. Meanwhile, the traditional
livestock sector has to be provided with the required services of water, veterinary, education,
rangelands rehabilitation and stock route demarcation.

Irrigated agriculture as strategic choice: Rainfall in Sudan is erratic and varies from one location
to the other. Drought episodes occur from time to time. Dependence on rain fed agriculture may
pose great risks and increase vulnerability of the poor and puts the economy under volatility
pressures. Actions to reduce volatility in the rain fed areas like use of water harvesting and other
measures will be needed. Revitalization of the irrigated sector remains a strategic choice despite
the substantial investments it requires. The challenge will be how to develop the irrigated sector
that is located in the centre and northern parts of Sudan, without neglecting the rain fed sector
in which the majority of the poor live and in such a way as not to turn the rest of the country into
resource poor areas.

Food self-sufficiency versus food security: The policy choice of food self-sufficiency and food
security should be addressed. To what extent should the government through informed policy
redirect the crop mix? Wheat, for example, is draining a considerable foreign exchange resource
which is a justification to increase its production as import substitution commodity. However,
climatic conditions do not favor this crop. Another example is the direction (i.e. import substitu-
tion versus exports) that should be taken in the production of sugar taking into consideration
availability of irrigation water. The role of adequate storage facility in food security, and other
pillars of food security, which are weak, needs to be considered.

Agro industrialization and diversification: Sudan cannot afford continuing relying on exports of
agricultural raw material from mainly traditional and subsistence economy. Industrialization
and modernization of agriculture are inevitable for sustaining poverty reduction and economic
development. But Sudan has a long way to go to reach this goal. The large scale agro-processing
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                   45


factories in the Sudan are either not working or working far below capacity. The constraints
inhibiting the growth of agro industry include: weak integration between agriculture, manufac-
turing and trade, irregular supply of raw materials, outdated technology, high cost of electricity
and interrupted power supply, unskilled manpower and unstable supply of foreign exchange to
buy inputs. Nevertheless, initial steps have to start to achieve this medium to long term goal.
Meanwhile, reform and actions to increase production and growth from the existing systems
have to continue. Industrialization of agriculture raw materials issues should be looked into as
medium to long term solution. Meanwhile, diversification of exports is essential in the short run.
Emerging sectors like horticulture should receive the appropriate attention particularly in the
area of varieties suitable for exports, better farming practices and better post-harvest prepara-
tions like appearance, careful grading, packaging and labeling.

The role of women and youth in agriculture: Consideration regarding the youth and women roles
in agriculture has to be observed. Several developments have changed the population dynam-
ics in Sudan. The 1983–85 drought catastrophe and the prolonged internal conflicts have led
to mass exodus of rural males to urban areas in search of food and off farm employment. This
has resulted in women constituting the overwhelming majority of the rural population and
with more responsibilities. Also Sudan has about 35 million people, and young people (less
than 25 years of age) account for 62 percent of the population. About 20 percent of youth are
unemployed.

Infrastructure priorities: Poor transport infrastructure is the main cause of high transport costs
in Sudan and, therefore, is a major factor in weak competitiveness of Sudanese agriculture. The
poor quality of roads as a result of lack of maintenance in Sudan significantly lowers the effi-
ciency of transport services. Poor maintenance will reduces the life-span of the existing stock of
infrastructure and will result in higher operating costs.



5.3	 Basic Service Delivery: Education, Health and Water
and Sanitation
With the implementation of the decentralization policy, primary responsibilities for basic services
such as education, health and water have shifted to sub-national governments. There are three tiers
of government in Sudan—federal, state and local. Whereas the federal government is responsible
for policy and stewardship, state and local governments are responsible for the delivery of basic
services. To support decentralized delivery of basic services, fiscal federal transfers to states have
increased as noted earlier. Currently, fiscal federal transfers finance about two thirds of states’
expenditure.

This section provides an overview and analysis of public spending on education, health, and water
supply and sanitation with the objective of measuring and monitoring pro-poor expenditures and
examining progress in human capital development and MDG-related indicators. This is particu-
larly important in the context of Sudan where the basic service system is decentralized with vary-
ing capacities to deliver services across states, and where there are significant state differences
in education, health and water inputs, outputs and outcomes. With data on financing, access
and quality of service, the section contextualizes valuable information about the challenges and
emerging priorities for Sudan’s education, health and water sectors.


5.3.1	 Education
As indicated in the IPRSP, “Scientific research and studies have shown that education makes
significant contributions to the welfare of individuals and sustained economic growth through
increased productivity, including in agriculture.” The IPRSP called for bridging the gap in enroll-
ment between the states and between boys and girls; increase the quality of education including
46	                       CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


teachers training; reduce illiteracy; and achieve full coverage of schools with textbooks and seat-
ing. For tertiary education, the IPRSP stated that the main challenge for tertiary education is the
improvement of its quality.

The Government has committed to achieving the Education for All (EFA) targets and the education-
related Millennium Development Goals (MDG) by 2015. This signals the Government’s readiness
to continue to invest in education and expand education opportunities. The Five Year Education
Sector Strategic Plan (ESSP) for 2007–2011 expresses the country’s commitment to the EFA goals
and outlines activities to meet the MDG education targets (i.e. achieve universal primary educa-
tion and promote gender equality). The ESSP forms part of the government’s longer-term vision
(i.e. Quarter Century Strategic Plan 2007–2031) and feeds into policy documents prepared by the
government, including the IPRSP. The current ESSP for 2012–2016, is designed to supplement
the earlier plan and identify priority areas for development in the sector.


Public Education Expenditure: Size Structure, Trend and Sector Performance
There has been a substantial increase in public education expenditure since 2012, reflecting the
government’s commitment to education. Total public education expenditure more than doubled
in nominal terms during the review period (Table 5.9). As a share of total public expenditures,
education spending has increased by more than 2 percentage points to 11 percent, indicating the
importance the government attaches to the education system.

Despite the increase in education spending, Sudan spends less as a share of total public spend-
ing than do comparable countries. In 2014, Sudan’s education spending as a share of total public
spending was nearly 11 percent (Table 5.10). By comparison, other countries with similar depen-
dency ratio (i.e. school age population as a share of the total population) spent more—including


Table 5.9:  Total (Federal and State) Public Education Expenditures, 2012–2014
                                                      2012                         2013                    2014
                                               Budget       Actual         Budget     Actual          Budget   Actual
                                                                              SDG Millions
 General education expenditure                  3,973       2,760           4,213     3,949           5,850    6,070
  Current                                       2,882        2,172          2,787      2,618          4,227    3,832
  Development                                   1,090         588           1,426         1,331       1,623    2,238
 Federal expenditure                                62          54            151           98          150        103
  Current                                           60          54             76           81          105         94
   Wage                                             22          22             26           27           33         32
   Nonwage                                          37          31             50           54           72         62
  Development                                        2           0             76            17          45          9
 States expenditure                              3,911      2,706          4,062      3,851           5,700    5,967
  Current                                       2,832        2,118           2,711    2,537            4,122      3,737
   Wage                                          2,154      1,889           2,340     2,230           3,608    3,308
   Nonwage                                        668         229             371          307          514        429
 Development                                    1,088         588           1,350         1,314        1,578   2,230
                                                                      Education spending shares (%)
 Education sending as % of total public            11.6        9.3           10.5          9.5          11.4       10.6
 spending
 Education sending % of GDP                         1.8         1.2            1.3          1.2          1.3        1.4
 Memo item: Higher education                      878         438             551         496           871        860
 expenditures (SDG million)

Source: Authors’ estimations based on data collected at federal and state level.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                 47


Table 5.10:  Public Education Expenditures: Regional Comparison
                                                                                                  Primary school
                                   Public expenditure on education        Primary school            enrollment
                                    % of total public expenditure        enrollment (% net)          (% gross)
 Sudan                                            10.6                            54                        70
 Neighboring countries                               
  Ethiopia                                       22.0                             NA                     98
  Kenya                                          20.6                             84                     114
  Uganda                                          14.0                            91                    107
 Other SSA lower middle-
 income countries
   Cape Verde                                     15.0                            98                     114
  Benin                                          22.3                             95                    124
  Senegal                                        20.7                             84                        73
 MENA lower middle-income
 countries
  Egypt                                           12.6                           115                     98
  Morocco                                         18.5                           118                     98
  Tunisia                                         21.2                           110                     99

Source: World Bank; World Bank Development Indicators. Data refer to latest year available for 2010–2014.


neighboring Ethiopia, and Kenya. Other lower-middle-income such as Morocco and Tunisia
each spent more by this measure.

The bulk of the growth in education spending occurs at the state level, which is consistent with the
fact that the primary responsibility for basic service delivery lies with state governments. About
98 percent of total public spending now takes place at state level (Table 5.9). State level education
expenditure more than doubled in nominal terms during the review period. Spending at the fed-
eral level also increased over the period, but at a slower rate.

Increases in education spending have been almost entirely absorbed by current spending both at the
federal and state levels, raising concerns about further expanding education services. Current edu-
cation spending, mostly wages, accounts for over 60 percent of state and federal-level total edu-
cation spending. The dominance of wage spending over development spending at the state level
raises concerns about the quality and sustainability of education. Improving service delivery in
the sector requires investment in schools, equipment, teacher training, and capacity building.15

Within current spending, teacher salaries account for the largest share at an average of 60 percent,
with little resources to cover other running expenses.16 Spending on goods and services is gener-
ally low, and particularly so for basic education, which means that households have to contribute
towards school running costs such as school maintenance, water and electricity.

Although basic education is supposed to be provided for free, household out-of-pocket spending is
significant and poses a barrier to education, especially for poor households. According to the 2011
World Bank report entitled, “The Status of the Education Sector in Sudan,” out-of-pocket spend-
ing averaged SDG15 per student for basic education, which is higher than government spending
per student for school running expenses that amounts to SDG12. Thus household out-of-pocket

15 Many schools in Sudan are of poor quality. According to the baseline survey (MoGE/UNICIEF 2008), 42 percent of

classrooms in basic schools were in need of repairs and 9 percent required replacement. In addition, in some schools
teaching only takes place in the non-rainy season since schools are built of tree branches and hay and get destroyed
during the rainy season.
16 World   Bank (2011), The Status of the Education Sector in Sudan, The World Bank, Washington DC. 2012.
48	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


payments provide the main source of financing for every-day school running costs. In addition,
households also pay for school uniforms, meals and textbooks. According to the report, urban
households reported spending an average of SDG 84 and rural households SDG 24 per person on
education per year. For the poorest households, out-of-pocket education spending poses a real
barrier to education, and even more so when a family has many children, with implications for
student attendance and drop-outs.

Budget creditability is low but improved since 2012. The overall execution rate of education budget
has been low, but has improved during the review period. In 2012, actual education expenditure
was only 70 percent of planned expenditures. However the rate of execution has improved since
2012. Current expenditures were relatively better executed, reflecting higher priority for wages
and salaries in terms of budget execution. This finding is also confirmed by the previous chapter
that examines overall pro-poor budget execution.


Achievements
Student enrollments have grown sharply since 2005/06. Enrollments have increased at all four lev-
els of the education system: pre-school, basic, secondary and higher education. However, basic
education is the level that accounts for the largest absolute increase in enrollments. Basic school
enrollments grew from 4 million in academic year 2005/06 to 5 million students in 2013/14
(Table 5.11 and Figure 14). The growth in enrollments for basic education is evidence of both
strong demand for education and commitment by the Government to achieving the MDGs and
the EFA goals. At the state level, evidence points to a positive impact of peace (i.e., 2005 CPA) on
basic school enrollments for the populations that were affected by conflict prior to 2005. Second-
ary education also grew driven by an increase in enrollments in the academic track, but enroll-
ments in the much smaller technical track contracted. Higher education enrollments increased
from 453,866 students in 2007/08 to 681,130 students in 2013/014. On the other hand, literacy
and adult education experienced a declining trend during the review period.

Basic education dominates budget allocation and enrollment share. The composition of enrollment
by the level of education and the budget allocation by sub-sectors is given in Figure 14. Basic
education accounts for nearly half of the education budget and 60 percent of total enrollment.
On the other hand, higher education absorbs, on average about 30 percent of total education
expenditure and accounts for 8 percent of the total enrollment.




Table 5.11:  Trends in Student Enrollments by Level of Education, 2005/06–2013/14
 Education
 level       2005–06     2006–07     2007–08     2008–09      2009–10     2010–11     2011–12     2012–13     2013–14
 Preschool     471,189     470,928    592,399       725,113    797,624     877,387     816,074     897,681    1,490,080
 Basic       4,193,939   4,237,907   4,688,685   4,870,464    4,851,468   4,832,473   5,037,617   5,289,498   5,231,155
 Secondary     613,863     615,534     657,802     734,859     762,621     791,526    822,955      872,332     902,627
 Academic      569,735    585,266     628,295      707,654     735,960     765,399     797,850     846,725     884,756
 Technical      44,128      30,268      29,507      27,205      26,661       26,128     25,105      25,607       17,871


 Higher                               453,866     485,636       519,631    556,005    594,925      636,570      681,130
 Education
 Literacy      422,576    288,256      301,903     181,465                            204,859      186,422     169,644
 and adult
 education

Source: Ministry of General Education Educational Statistics, and the World Bank (2012), the Status of the Education
Sector in Sudan.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                   49


Figure 14:  Student Enrollments by Level of Education and Public Education Expenditures
2013/2014
                                2%                                                  2% 2%


                           8%

                  11%                18%
                                                                             30%
                                                                                               49%


                            61%
                                                                                17%




               Preschool             Higher                             Preschool            Higher
               Basic                 Literacy and                       Basic                Literacy and
               Secondary             adult education                    Secondary            adult education

Source: Author’s own calculations based on Table 4.11.     Source: World Bank (2012). The Status of the Education
                                                           Sector—Sudan.


The steady rise in enrollment in basic education is expected to continue and will generate rising
demand for secondary education and exert pressures on education expenditure. The increase in
enrollment in basic education will put pressure on secondary education spending to accommo-
date rising demand for secondary education over the next few years. This is an area that requires
closer monitoring by government at all levels and further improvements in the level, efficiency as
well as composition of expenditures need to be pursued.


Challenges
Despite progress in overall access to all levels of education, access still remains a substantial chal-
lenge for basic and secondary education. Sudan’s basic education system provides education
opportunities for three-quarters of the age group (i.e. the gross enrollment rate (GER) is less than
75 percent). Only three out of four children of basic school age are receiving a formal educa-
tion. A recent UNICEF report (Sudan: Country Report on Out-of-School Children, 2014) noted,
“Significantly, there are still more than 3 million children aged 5–13 years out of school.”17 The
secondary school gross enrollment rate is about 34 percent or less than half the basic GER (Edu-
cation Sector Strategic Plan 2012–2016, Interim Plan 2015/16–2016/17, Ministry of Education,
Feb. 2015).18

Education performance varies markedly by state and gender. Access to basic education varies
enormously from one state to anther with the range of GER spanning from less than 40 percent
to over 90 percent (Figure 15). Conflict affected and poor states such as East Darfur, Red Sea,
and Blue Nile lack behind central states such as Gezira, River Nile and White Nile. On gender,
despite relative parity in enrollment and retention rates in basic education, significant variation
exists across states. Khartoum State has a Gender Parity Index of 1.1 in favor of girls; whereas
conflict affected states of Darfur have on average, a low GPI of 0.7 in favor of male. Similarly
access to secondary education is subject to significant state and gender disparities (Figure 16).



17 UNICEF   (2015): Sudan—Country Report on Out-of-School Children. 2015 UNICEF Sudan Country Office, page 1.
18 According  to the Ministry of Education’s Statistics for 2008–2009, 1,981,839 children between the ages of 6 and 13
are out of primary school and 1,336,006 children between the ages of 14 and 16 are out of secondary schools. Also the
World Bank (2012), The Status of the Education Sector in Sudan also reported the data.
50	                     CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Figure 15:  Basic Education Enrollment Rate (GER %) by State and Gender, 2013/14
                          Gezira
                      White Nile
                       River Nile
                  Northern State
                  Central Darfur
                 Western Darfur
                      Khartoum
              Northern Kordofan
                 Northern Darfur
               Western Kordofan
                          Sinnar
                         Gadarif
              Southern Kordofan
                       Blue Nile
                Southern Darfur
                        Kassala
                        Red Sea
                     East Darfur

                                    0          20               40              60           80             100

                                                               Female        Male

Source: Education Sector Strategic Plan 2012–2016, Interim Plan 2015/16–2016/17, Ministry of Education, Feb. 2015.


Figure 16:  Secondary Education Enrollment (GER %) by State and Gender, 2013/14
                          Gezira
                      White Nile
                       River Nile
                  Northern State
                  Central Darfur
                 Western Darfur
                      Khartoum
              Northern Kordofan
                 Northern Darfur
               Western Kordofan
                          Sinnar
                         Gadarif
              Southern Kordofan
                       Blue Nile
                Southern Darfur
                        Kassala
                        Red Sea
                     East Darfur

                                    0        10           20            30           40           50         60

                                                               Female        Male

Source: Education Sector Strategic Plan 2012–2016, Interim Plan 2015/16–2016/17, Ministry of Education, Feb. 2015.


Many students drop out, a serious concern. According to the Education Sector Strategic Plan
2012–2016, Interim Plan 2015/16–2016/17, Ministry of Education, Feb. 2015, about 80 percent
of children enroll in the first grade of basic school in 2008, only 54 percent of them reached
grade 8, indicating a drop-out rate that averages 6 percent per grade—a serious concern for basic
education. The number of drop-outs in secondary education is even higher than basic education,
amounting to a 13 percent drop-out rate for the first two years of the cycle (The Education Sector
Strategic Plan 2012–2016, Interim Plan 2015/16–2016/17, Ministry of Education, page 11). There
are several reasons that cause this phenomenon such as early marriage of girls, child labor, and
lack of water and latrines in some schools.

Sudan’s education outcome indicators lag behind comparable countries and MDG targets. Sudan
has made progress since 2005, albeit from a low base compared to other African countries
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                    51


Figure 17:  Primary School Enrollment (% gross of age group) Sudan and Sub-Saharan Africa
      120


                                    98      98       98    99     100          Sub-Saharan Africa
      100            96     97
             94
                                                                               Sudan
       80
                                    72      71       71    69     70
                     67     67
             63
       60


       40


       20


         0
             2005   2006   2007    2008    2009     2010   2011   2012

Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.


(Figure 17 and Table 5.10). These comparable African countries have attained or are likely to
attain the goal of universal education. Given that Sudan’s school enrollment is lagging with
regards to universal access, there is scope for increasing the level and efficiency of spending in
this sector.

While the federal government has progressively increased budget transfers to states, the capacity for
data collection and information management within the decentralized framework of service deliv-
ery remains weak, challenging evidence base planning and targeting service delivery. According to
the Education Sector Strategic Plan 2012–2016, Interim Plan 2015/16–2016/17, the number of
schools and enrollment rates reported differently by locality, State and Federal Ministries of Edu-
cation (Ministry of Education, Feb. 2015, page 12). Similarly, a World Bank Public Expenditure
Track Survey conducted in the health sector, found that the number and type of health facilities
reported by localities, states and the federal ministry were different.


Implications for PRSP
The substantial increase in current education expenditures is encouraging, but improved service
delivery to the poor requires an appropriate balance between current expenditure and development
investment in schools. Education expenditure performance continued to reflect strict priority for
release of funds to wages and salaries compared to development expenditures, which exhibit the
lowest execution rate. Low level development expenditure has serious repercussions for effective
implementation of state’s pro-poor programs and development efforts more generally. Improved
services delivery to states and local areas requires large development spending, given the poor
infrastructure and low level of socioeconomic development in these areas. Government expen-
ditures have to be coordinated with spending from NGOs and other sources. This urges actions
that aim at improving resource allocation, given that the primary responsibility for basic services
delivery lies with the state governments.

The brunt of low budget creditability is borne by development expenditure. The overall execution
rate of education expenditure is low. On the other hand, current expenditures were relatively bet-
ter executed, reflecting higher priority for wages and salaries in terms of budget execution.

Despite progress made, school enrollment remained low, falling short of achieving the MDG of
universal access. Only three out of four children of basic school age are receiving a formal educa-
tion. Among the children who are of basic school age (6 to 13 years old), almost 2 million are out
of school. This number increases to more than 3.3 million of children of secondary school age
52	                   CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


(14 to 16 years old) are included. The secondary school gross enrollment rate is about 34 percent
or less than half the basic level. However, these average enrollment rates masks wide variation
across states and gender. The declining trend in the number of technical education needs to be
studied in order to implement the necessary remedial measures.

Education performance disparities across states and gender have not yet been fully addressed, neces-
sitating further effort to consolidate and improve progress. While the increase in education spend-
ing and fiscal decentralization are expected to redistribute resources to match public service
delivery responsibilities, and hence improve inter-state equity, education performance disparities
across states and gender have not yet been fully addressed. This necessitates further effort to
consolidate and improve progress. Education facilities should in particular be extended to war
affected areas which are witnessing stability lately.

Given the increase enrollment in basic education, demand for secondary education is expected to
rise. The government will need to address the allocation and efficiency of education subsectors to
accommodate growing demand for post-basic education in the medium-to-long-term.

Whereas the policy of the government is free basic education, household out-of- pocket spending is
significant and poses a barrier to education, especially for poor households. Available data suggests
that households pay for the running of schools in addition to other costs for uniforms, textbooks
and meals for their children. For poorest households, out-of-pocket basic education spending
poses a real barrier to education, and even more so when a family has many children, with impli-
cations for student attendance and drop-outs.

Drop outs remains as a serious issue in the education sector. There are several reasons that cause
this phenomenon like early marriage of girls, child labor, and high household out-of-pocket
spending on education. The World Bank Group and the EU are funding programs to address this
concern. More government efforts are required in this respect.

Food for education should continue to be encouraged. Considerable efforts are being carried out by
the WFP to implement food for education programs, especially for poor households.

Teachers training is an issue that needs to be looked into. Poor teachers skills affect the quality of
education.

Technical and vocational education is neglected despite its importance. Efforts are needed to
expand the technical and vocational education.


5.3.2	 Health
Trends in Public Health Expenditures
The IPRSP emphasized primary and first-referral health care services and improve access, equity
and coverage. The IPRSP based its priorities on the Ministry of Health four pillars: control of
communicable diseases, improved maternal and child health and nutrition, human resource
development and an improved health care management system based on decentralization,
extended coverage and accessibility. These priorities will require increased public spending and
creation of partnership with NGOs.

During the review period, federal expenditures on public health programs have been supplemented
by increasingly higher levels of State levels expenditures. Table 5.12 summarizes a comprehensive
picture of federal and state expenditures on health, which has grown reaching around 1.0 percent
of GDP. The growth in state health spending is driven by rising federal transfers to states, which
is in line with the decentralization policy of delegating the primary responsibility for basic ser-
vice delivery to state governments. States’ actual spending on health has doubled since 2012, ris-
ing from SDG 2.2 billion to SDG 4.5 billion (US$789 million) in 2014 (Table 5.12).
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                              53


Table 5.12:  Federal and State Health Expenditures, 2012–2014
                                                           2012                        2013                     2014
                                                Budget        Actual         Budget       Actual      Budget       Actual
                                                                                SDG millions
 Total health expenditure                        2,922         2,198          3,233       3,097        4,729       4,531
 Current                                         2,278            1,824       2,416       2,294        3,508           3,213
 Development                                       644             374          817            803     1,221           1,318
 Federal expenditure                               401             363          394            389       471            476
 Current                                           366             349          382            388      456             471
   wage                                            253             243          263            279      305             322
   nonwage                                          113            106           119           109       151            150
 Development                                         36             14            13              1       15              5
 States expenditure                              2,521         1,835          2,839       2,707        4,258       4,055
 Current                                          1,913           1,475       2,035           1,906    3,052           2,742
   wage                                           1,378           1,199        1,577          1,477    2,412           2,173
   nonwage                                         535             276          458            429      640             569
 Development                                       608             360          804            801     1,206           1,313
                                                              Breakdown of total health expenditure (%)
 Current                                           77.9           83.0          74.7           74.1     74.2           70.9
 Development                                       22.1            17.0        25.3            25.9     25.8            29.1
                                                             Breakdown of federal health expenditure (%)
 Current                                            91.1           96.1        96.8            99.7     96.8           99.0
 Development                                        8.9             3.9          3.2            0.3      3.2             1.0
                                                              Breakdown of state health expenditure (%)
 Current                                           75.9           80.4          71.7           70.4     71.7            67.6
 Development                                       24.1            19.6        28.3            29.6     28.3           32.4
                                                                          Health spending shares (%)
 Health spending as % of total public               8.6             7.4         8.0             7.5      9.2            8.0
 spending
 Health spending % of GDP                            1.3            1.0          1.0            1.0       1.1            1.0

Note: Development expenditure refers to new investment, rehabilitation or construction of existing development facilities.
Source: Authors’ estimation based on data collected at federal and state levels.



Like education, the bulk of the growth in health expenditures takes place at the state level, consistent
with the fact that the primary responsibility for basic service delivery lies with state governments.
Around 87 percent of the health expenditures occur at the state level (Figure 18). The share of
expenditures at the federal level shows a declining trend (Figure 18).

A major concern is the extremely low level of development/investment spending in the health sector,
with about 75 percent going for current expenditure. Improved service delivery to the poor in the
longer term will require larger investment in health infrastructure. In 2014, development spend-
ing rose to nearly 30 percent of health expenditure, but from negligible levels and in both abso-
lute and relative terms remains very low. Assessing the appropriate balance between development
and current expenditures is warranted given that health-MDGs have not yet been met.

The health budget at federal and state levels enjoys good credibility unlike many sectors in the econ-
omy. There is insignificant deviation between planned and executed expenditures (Figure 19).
Even the small deviation in 2012 almost disappeared in the next two years making planned bud-
get execution close to 100 percent.
54	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Figure 18:  Public Health Expenditures at the Federal and State Levels, 2012–2014
                                      100%


                                      80%


                                      60%


                                      40%


                                      20%


                                       0%
                                             2012               2013              2014
                                                      Federal                 States

Source: Authors’ calculations based on health sector data given in Table 5.9 above.


Figure 19:  Expenditures for Health for Federal and States in Millions SDG
        500                                                            4500
                                                                       4000
        400                                                            3500
                                                                       3000
        300
                                                                       2500
                                                                       2000
        200
                                                                       1500

        100                                                            1000
                                                                        500
          0                                                               0
                2012           2013          2014                              2012             2013      2014

                      Budget            Actual                                         Budget          Actual
Source: Table 5.12.


Sudan’s level of public spending on health compares to some of its peers and even exceeds some
MENA lower middle income countries. In 2014, Sudan’s health spending as a share of total pub-
lic spending was 8.0 percent. Sudan spends more than Kenya, Senegal, Egypt and Morocco
(Table 5.13).

Some progress was made in the health indicators. The under-five mortality rate (deaths per 1,000
births) improved, dropping from 83 per thousand live births in 2006/2010 to 68 per thousands
in 2014. The maternal mortality rate declined from 534 per one hundred thousand live births in
2010 to 521 per one hundred thousand in 2013.

HIV prevalence is low, the incidence of tuberculosis (TB) is declining. Prevalence of TB declined to
114 per one hundred thousand in 2012. However, the TB detection rate is 35 percent, well below
the 70 percent target, though the treatment success rate is 82 percent. HIV prevalence amongst
the population aged 15–49 was estimated at 0.24 percent in 2013, with annual new HIV infec-
tions and AIDS deaths standing at 7,032 and 4,797, respectively (African Economic Outlook,
AFDB, OECD and UNDP, 2015).

Malaria patient’s treatment has improved. Malaria patients receiving treatment within 24 hours
increased to 36 percent in 2013, up from 16 percent in 2010.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                    55


Figure 20:  Trends in Under-Five Infant Mortality Rates
      120

                 104              102
      100                                                                                   Under-5 mortality rate

                                                   83                                       Infant mortality rate
       80
                                  71                               68
                 68
                                                   60
       60
                                                                   48

       40


       20


         0
             1995/2000        2001/2005        2006/2010       2010/2014

Source: MICS, Key Findings, Central Bureau of Statistics, April 2015.


Table 5.13:  Public Health Expenditures: Regional Comparison
                                           Public expenditure                                  Maternal mortality
                                          on health (% of total         Under-5 mortality      rate (per 100,000
                                          public expenditure)            rate (per 1,000)          live births)
 Sudan                                             8.0                         73                        512
 Neighboring countries                                
  Ethiopia                                        16.4                         64                        420
  Kenya                                            5.9                         71                       400
  Uganda                                          24.3                         66                       360
 Other SSA lower middle-income
 countries
   Cape Verde                                     10.0                         26                         53
  Benin                                           10.7                         85                        340
  Senegal                                           7.6                        55                        320
 MENA lower middle-income
 countries
  Egypt                                            5.5                         22                         45
  Morocco                                          6.0                         30                        120
  Tunisia                                         13.3                         15                         46

Source: WHO, Global Health Observatory Data—2013.


Challenges
Despite progress, Sudan faces significant challenges in meeting MDGs-related goals on health. Child
and maternal mortality rates remain high. The under-five mortality rate of 77 per thousands in
2013, is far above the 2015 MDG target of 41 per thousand. The maternal mortality is 521 per
one hundred thousand in 2013, while the 2015 MDG target is 134 per one hundred thousand.
Mortality rates vary significantly across states. The under-five mortality rate is highest in Darfur
(170) and lowest in Gezira State (63).

Malaria patient’s treatment has improved, but much effort is still needed to roll back malaria.
According to the 2013 World Malaria Report, Sudan accounted for 57 percent of malaria cases
and 27 percent of reported malaria deaths in the Eastern Mediterranean Region, indicating that
much effort is needed to reverse the disease.
56	                        CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


In terms of health indicators—under 5-mortality and maternal mortality rates, Sudan’s perfor-
mance lacks behind comparable countries. These results highlights a conceivable problem of effi-
ciency in the use of the funding.


Implications for PRSP
The composition of health spending is broadly similar to education. The increase in health expen-
diture since 2012 has been largely directed to current spending. Current health expenditure
accounts for some 70 percent of state–level total health expenditure. The high level of current
spending over development spending at the state level raises concerns as improving service deliv-
ery in the sector requires investment in health facilities, medical equipment, staff training and
capacity building.


5.3.3	 Water and Sanitation
Water has significant bearing on poverty in Sudan from different perspectives. Water is linked to
the livelihood of the majority of rural communities in Sudan where livestock which constitute
the backbone of livelihood to these communities depend on water. Water also is used to irrigate
small agricultural holdings in rural areas, which provide food for the families. Water scarcity
also affects education in rural areas where due to time travelled for water, many of children at
school age do not attend school or drop out. Water scarcity in some areas could cause families to
spend as much as 50 percent of their income to purchase water from vendors. Water gains more
importance when it is linked with conflicts. A significant numbers of conflicts are directly linked
to scarcity of water resources particularly between nomadic pastoralist groups and settled farm-
ing communities. Poor water sources also lead to exposure to diseases particularly children. The
results of SHHS (2006) show the clear link between the increased access to both improved water
and sanitation facilities and decreased incidence of diarrhea in Sudan.

The key challenges identified by the IPRSP for the water and sanitation sector included: inadequate
implementation, management and sector coordination capacities and sector policies and plans;
lack of resources for investment in provision, conservation, water quality and monitoring; lack of
community awareness of water supply and sanitation issues; and poor record of sustainability of
interventions. Several actions were recommended by the IPRSP encompassing rehabilitation of
existing water and sanitation facilities and construction of new ones, improving hygiene aware-
ness, improve capacity building and training.

A plan was developed for the water and sanitation sector; the Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Sec-
tor Strategic Plan for 2011–2016 (WASHSSP) as well as the draft Water Supply and Environmental
Sanitation Policy (2012). The WASHSSP aims to increase per capita safe water consumption to
20 and 90 liters per day in rural and urban areas respectively by 2016. The plan targets were to
increase household members with access to safe drinking water to 82 percent and household
members with access to improved sanitation to 67 percent by 2016.19

Despite the commitments and targets defined in the above development strategy/plans, the perfor-
mance in the sector is still far from reaching the planned targets and from the MDGs targets. The
percentage of household members using improved sources of drinking water reached 68 per-
cent in 2014, while the percent of household members using improved sanitation facilities only
reached 32.9 percent,20 indicating considerable efforts are required to achieve these targets.
Around 50 per cent of the existing basic schools don’t have access to improved drinking water

19 Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Sector Strategic Plan for 2011–2016 (WASHSSP), Ministry of Water Resources and

Electricity, Drinking Water and Sanitation Unit.
20 Sudan:   Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (MICS); Key Findings, April 2014 (Central Bureau of Statistics).
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                   57


and sanitation facilities. The increasing number of internally displaced people adds to this chal-
lenge. There is a large variation in access to water and sanitation among states. Water and sanita-
tion access in West Kordofan State, for example, stands at 60 percent and 23 percent respectively,
which are below national average of 68 percent and 33 percent.


Challenges
The water and sanitation sector is underfunded. Meager resource is devoted to water expenditures
at federal level. Expenditures on water and sanitation at the federal level constitute only 0.5 to
1 percent of expenditures on infrastructure. The water and sanitation federal budget clearly lacks
credibility as indicated by the large variations between the budgeted and actual figures. It was not
possible to segregate expenditures on water supply and sanitation at the state level from the total
expenditures on infrastructure.

Funding is essential for the water sector to meet the MDGs targets and to rehabilitate and replace
the aging infrastructure of water infrastructure due to inadequate past investments and destruction
of the facilities in conflict areas. Much of the achievement in the sector was the result of the assis-
tance received from UNICEF which has extended its support to the water and sanitation sector
since 1975 through the Water and Sanitation Program.

There are several institutions at different levels that govern water resources development and man-
agement. At state level, the key institution is the state Water Corporation, which functions under
the auspices of the Ministry of Planning and Public Utilities. At federal level, the key ministries
are the Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Agri-
culture and the Ministry of Environment. Under the Ministry of Irrigation and Water Resources
are the General Directorate of Water and the Groundwater and Valley Directorate. There are also
community organizations establishing and managing water resources. Similarly, there are various
acts and strategies under different institutions and sectors. Important relevant acts are the Water
Resources Act of 1995 and the State Water Corporation Acts of 1998. Authority in the water sec-
tor is mostly fragmented and responsibilities are distributed among various institutions without
effective or institutionalized mechanism of coordination. This often leads to conflicting actions
and lower impacts of projects that could have a much better return. Institutional capacity varies
among states.

Like the other services sector, the water and sanitation suffers from weak capacity particularly at
state levels.

The contested ownership structures of water investments affect the sustainability of the services and
remains as a concern in the localities.

Sanitations in schools and health facilities are inadequate especially in the rural and remote areas.



Table 5.14:  Water and Sanitation Federal Expenditures 2012–2014 (in SDG Million)
                                    2012                            2013                            2014
                         Budget            Actual        Budget            Actual        Budget            Actual
 Wage                       2.040           1.789           1.729           1.545           2.516           1.743
 Nonwage                    0.636          0.287            0.562          0.367            0.693           0.644
 Development             198.0             13.564        276.5             9.509         213.4             26.809
 Total                   200.676           15.64         278.791           11.421        216.609           29.196

Source: Data provided by the General Directorate of Water and Sanitation, Ministry of Water Resources and Electricity.
58	                   CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Implications for PRSP
Water has to be given adequate funding commensurate with its important role in the livelihood of
the population. Adequate funding is required. Funding has to ensure addressing disparities in
access to water and sanitation among states.

Specific attention has to be given to the information of the water sector as a separate sector, particu-
larly at state and locality levels to allow for better planning. Lack of monitoring reflects poor qual-
ity of available data concerning actual coverage of water supply and sanitation. The water and
sanitation should be supported with better capacity and training particularly at state levels.

Efforts are required to integrate water, sanitation and hygiene within other sectors—mainly educa-
tion, nutrition and health should continue. Schools, health and nutrition centers are useful entry
points for such interventions.

Institutional reform for sustainability of the water facilities is a concern that needs to be tackled.
There should clarity in defining the roles and responsibilities between the federal, states and
locality levels and communities, in terms of managing and operating projects, and ensuring
sustainability.

Meeting the multiple demands for water for domestic, farming and livestock (in an integrated man-
ner) is crucial for maintaining local economic development within a peaceful and stable society.


Service Delivery: General
There is an urgent need to strengthen the link between budget allocations and outcomes in basic
service delivery. Since responsibility for basic services devolved to the state and locality levels and
more resources are getting to these sub-national levels, it is imperative to monitor and evaluate
progress on the use of funds and related outcomes at the state/locality level. The weak capacity at
the sub-national levels has led to incomplete reporting of expenditures and inadequate monitor-
ing and evaluation (M&E) of outcomes. The capacity for data collection and information man-
agement within the decentralized framework of service delivery remains weak. Weak financial
management capacity at the state and locality levels led to incomplete reporting/­    monitoring
of expenditure and inadequate evaluation of related results at these levels. This challenges evi-
dence base planning and targeting service delivery. Therefore, capacity building efforts need
to be strengthened in those areas. In particular, efforts to strengthen expenditures reporting by
purpose/function (e.g., across education, health, roads), economic lines (e.g., wages), and by
administrative levels (e.g., state, local) would also allow for a more systematic analysis of the fis-
cal position of states/localities and as well as sectors. In turn, improved data on sectoral outcomes
would highlight potential disparities across states.

The locations of social services—schools, health and water centers—have to be based on technical
considerations. Factors like population density, equity have to determine the location of the ser-
vices rather than the political considerations.



5.4	 Social Welfare, Security and Protection
The IPRSP document had a sub-heading of social safety net programs under the pillar of human
resources. However, it only covered Zakat, pensions and health insurance without specific strate-
gic direction or actions. Issues mentioned were basically the problems of managing the pension’s
funds, and erosion of pensions as a result of inflation. By and large the social protection and
social safety net programs did not receive any attention in the IPRSP.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                     59


Social protection programs complement the investments in the agriculture and infrastructure, aim-
ing at increasing incomes of the poor and support social investments in health and education
which will all help in reducing poverty.

Sudan faces considerable vulnerability challenges due to the presence of a multiplicity of factors.
These factors include internal conflicts and displacement in certain parts of Sudan, harsh cli-
matic conditions, droughts, erratic and low rainfall, unemployment and frequent economic
adjustments with direct consequences on the poor. All these factors have pervasive impacts on
the food security and nutrition requiring a strong social protection mechanism.

The Social Initiative Program (SIP) for poverty reduction is the overarching program for the social
protection which is a vital component in poverty reduction. In 2012 the government has adopted
the Social Initiative Program for poverty reduction implemented by the Ministry of Welfare and
Social Security and its agencies: Zakat Chambers, Saving Development Bank, Health Insurance
Fund, the National Council for the Disabled, and the Students Support Fund. Eligible beneficia-
ries of the Cash Transfer Program are identified based on the poverty census of 2011 that was
undertaken by the Zakat Fund in collaboration with the Central Bureau of Statistics. The social
protection is a fairly extensive program that includes: (i) Direct cash transfers to poor families;
(ii) National Health Insurance Fund; (iii) National Pension Fund; (iv) Support to poor students
safety nets interventions, including cash and in kind transfers by the Government and Zakat
Fund; (v) General support to certain medical care services like free treatment in emergencies and
free lifesaving medicines; (vi) Social Insurance Fund; (vii) Zakat Fund; (viii) Microfinance; and
(ix) Support programs to special groups like rural women, DDR programs for ex-­       combatants,
disabled programs, vocational training centers to enhance youth employment, support to
humanitarian crises in war affected areas, creation of productive opportunities for university
graduates and support to returnees from South Sudan. The government also runs an expensive
general subsidies scheme.

As several institutions are responsible for the social protection network and the Social Initiative
Program; coordination remains a major challenge. These institutions include: Ministry of Wel-
fare and Social Security being the main government institution responsible for social protection
(supervising Zakat Fund, Social Insurance Fund, National Health Insurance Fund and National
Pensions Fund, implementing the cash transfers); Ministry of Finance (delivering cash transfers
to the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security, subsidies and social development expenditures);
Ministry of Health (nutrition and health services outlets for the health insurance); Medical Sup-
plies Corporation (procuring medicines); Ministry of Education (school feeding ); Humanitar-
ian Affairs Commission (coordination of humanitarian assistance and NGOs activities); the
DDR Commission (DDR programs); and The Central Bank of Sudan (microfinance). Coordi-
nation represents a daunting task particularly with weak capacities in most of the institutions
concerned.

The government system is supported by donor community and strong informal networks stemming
from the tradition of the Sudanese society. Informal networks include remittances to families
particularly by Sudanese migrants abroad and support to poor families by civil society organiza-
tions. The system is also strongly supported by the international community which has an effec-
tive and extensive food aid and nutrition program targeting the IDPs and vulnerable population
affected by internal conflicts.


Overall Expenditures of Social Welfare, Security and Protection Programs
Public expenditures of social protection programs are defined here to include both budgetary and
non-budgetary expenditures. The budgetary expenditures include subsidies, cash transfers to poor
families, contribution of the Ministry of Finance to the NHIF, and the NPF, health fees waiver
and free life-saving medicines and under five children in public health institutions, support to
60	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


poor university students and rural woman, current expenditures for the social protection institu-
tions and development activities for IDPs and DDR programs. The non-budgetary social pro-
tection expenditures included expenditures by the Zakat Fund and The Central Bank of Sudan
financial support to microfinancing.

Total public expenditures on social protection (budgetary and non-budgetary) without considering
subsidies increased from 1.4 percent of GDP in 2012 to 1.7 percent in 2014. Budgetary expendi-
tures (federal and states) amounted to 1.0 percent of GDP in 2012 and increased to 1.3 percent
in 2014. With the inclusion of subsidies the budget and non-budgetary expenditures significantly
increase from 3.3 percent of GDP in 2012 to 4.1 percent in 2014.

The total expenditures on social protection increases further when adding non-public funding
expenditure. When the National Social Insurance Fund and the direct food transfers by WFP
and nutrition assistance by UNICEF are included, total expenditures on social protection reach
2.3 percent of GDP on average without considering the subsidies. If the subsidies were included
the total public and non-public social protection spending will increase to 4.7 percent of GDP in
2014 from 4.2 percent in 2012.




Table 5.15:  Social Protection Public Expenditures—Budgetary and Non-Budgetary (in million
SDGs and as % of GDP)
                       Social protection components                                2012        2013        2014
 I.  Budgetary public resources (Ministry of Finance and States)

 Cash transfers to poor families                                                     120         165        702
 Health insurance contribution transfers to NHIF                                       0         138         271
 Pensions contribution                                                              884         1,115     2,826
 Health fees waiver—free emergency treatment and free life-saving drugs              176         195        236
 Support to poor university students and CSOs poverty programs                      356          174         318
 Current expenses for social services public institutions and states cash            416        789         857
 transfers (federal and states governments)
 Development activities (DDR, rural women livelihood opportunities,                  192        305         506
 support to IDPs) (federal and states governments)
 Total                                                                             2,144       2,881       5,716
 Budgetary expenditures as percent of GDP                                           1.0%        0.9%        1.3%
 II.  Non-budgetary public resources
 Zakat Fund                                                                          719       1,094       1,345
 Microfinance resources paid by CBoS                                                 129        352          401
 Non-budgetary public resources spent as % of GDP	                                  0.4%        0.5%        0.4%
 Budgetary and non-budgetary social protection public expenditures                  1.4 %       1.4%        1.7%
 as percent of GDP
 III.  Non-public funding expenditures
 National Social Insurance Fund                                                     850         852         1,118
 Food and nutrition—WFP/UNICEF                                                     1,025       1,299       1,485
 Non-public funding expenditures as % of GDP                                        0.9%        0.7%        0.6%
 IV. Subsidies                                                                      1.9%        2.3%        2.4%
 Total social protection expenditures excluding subsidies                           2.3%        2.1%        2.3%
 Total social protection expenditures including subsidies                           4.2%        4.4%        4.7%

Source: Ministry of Finance, Zakat Fund Annual Reports, Reports of the Social Security Mechanisms by the Ministry of
Welfare and Social Security (2012–2014), CBoS Annual Reports.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                   61


It is difficult to undertake cross comparisons with similar countries or regions due to the different
definitions used for social protection and its components. It is estimated that Africa has an average
of social expenditures of 2.8 percent of GDP with wide variations from 12 percent to 0.5 percent.
Low income countries average expenditures on social protection amounts to 3.5 percent (2011)
as noted by the ILO.21


Components of the Social Protection
Budgetary Components
Cash Transfers
Direct cash transfers program, as one of the main components of the SIP, targets poor and vulner-
able families. The Program was introduced in 2012 following the austerity measures implemented
in September 2012 as a result of the economic shock created by South Sudan secession. The Min-
istry of Finance started to allocate substantial amounts for this program, which is implemented
by the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security. The Ministry is using Zakat Fund as a vehicle
for implementation on the ground utilizing the data base and extensive institutional infrastruc-
ture of Zakat Fund that reaches all the way down to the village level; as well as using Savings
and Social Development Bank utilizing the outreach of the Bank and Sudapost. By 2014 around
500,000 families were reached. Studies for monitoring performance of implementation have been
conducted so far in four states: Kassala, White Nile, North Kordofan, and West Darfur


The National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF)
The NHIF was established in 1994 with the aim of reducing the health expenditures for the poor
population, and increasing the access to the health services. The Fund targets universal health
coverage by 2031. NHIF predominantly enrolls the formal sector workers, compulsorily, and the
informal sector workers, voluntarily. There a number of health insurance windows beside the
NHIF namely, military, police, parastatals and private health insurance.

NHIF is the largest among the health insurance institutions. The subscriber unit is ‘family’ and the
benefit package covers almost all services including, in some cases, even treatment abroad. The
health care service providers, are mainly health centers and hospitals which have increased since
2012 from 1,347 providers to 1,446 in 2013 and further to 1,584 in 2014. The main source of
financing remains the Ministry of Finance and Zakat Fund. In addition, the Ministry of Finance
supports the NHIF by funding its staff wages.

Health insurance contribution amounts to 10 percent of the salary of staff working in the formal
sector. The amount is deducted at source; 4 percent from the employee and 6 percent from the
employer. However, the level of the current contribution is far less than it should be to achieve
sustainable and universal coverage.22

The Government is now in the process of making the health insurance mandatory for all. According
to the Director of NHIF about 60 percent of the poor are still outside the coverage.23 Coverage
varies between 66.9 percent in Khartoum state, 40.1 percent in Gedarif State, and 38 percent in
Northern state to 19.7 percent in North Kordofan, and 17.4 percent in East and South Darfur
states. Improvement of the services will require an additional 56 hospitals and 3,000 health cen-
ters. The treatment system of the NHIF also suffers continuous loss of medical doctors, particu-
larly in the states due to migration and lack of incentives.


21 Social   Protection Policy Papers (12), Social Protection Global trends 2010–2015, Social Protection Department, ILO
2014.
22 Health   System Financing Review Report, Federal Ministry of Health Sudan, 2014.
23 Workshop     of States Coverage Directors, NHIF, Khartoum, August 2015.
62	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Table 5.16:  Sudan’s National Health Insurance Coverage by State, 2014
                                                                                             Coverage rate %
 State                              Population               Beneficiaries                 (column2/column3)
 Sinnar                               1,580,157                 497,904                             31.5
 Gadarif                              1,739,478                 697,686.00                         40.1
 Sea Red                              1,366,991                 375,500.00                          27.5
 River Nile                           1,309,129                 456,514.00                         34.9
 White Nile                          2,086,650                  550,330.00                         26.4
 North Darfur                         2,414,305                 478,910.00                          19.8
 Blue Nile                             965,573                  351,304.00                         36.4
 West Darfur                            862,775                  316,127.00                        36.6
 North Kordofan                      2,344,495                  462,193.00                          19.7
 South Kordofan                       1,002,222                 314,963.00                          31.4
 Northern                               813,685                  311,376.00                        38.3
 Kassala                              2,133,663                 504,340.00                         23.6
 South Darfur                         3,163,528                 549,592.00                          17.4
 West Kordofan                        1,626,912                 385,014.00                         23.7
 East Darfur                          1,330,738                 231,866.00                          17.4
 Central Darfur                        639,074                   198,421.00                         31.0
 Khartoum                            6,534,795                4,371,400.00                         66.9
 Sudan                              36,199,578               12,252,692.00                         33.8

Source: Ministry of Welfare and Social Security. Performance of Social Security Institutions Report, July 2, 2015.


The National Pension Fund
The Sudan pension system is old, established since the colonial period in 1904. The pensions for
the civil service are organized by a 1991 law, which was amended in 2004. However, the regu-
lar forces (army, police and security) have their separate pension laws. The Fund has witnessed
frequent institutional shifts being part of the Ministry of Finance, then Ministry of Civil Service
and Administrative Reform and latter affiliated to Ministry of Manpower and finally affiliated to
Ministry of Welfare and Social Planning.

The Fund is facing financial constraints as the monthly payment of the government contribution,
particularly from the states is irregular and arrears continue to accumulate. Total overdue arrears
to states as end 2014 amounted to SDG 1.8 billion which is equivalent to the total obligations of
the Fund for a whole year. About 40 percent of the arrears are due to only two states Khartoum
and Gazira, and around 25 percent are due to four states (South Darfur, Red Sea, North Kordo-
fan and North Darfur). The Fund is investing its resources to generate additional income; how-
ever the rate of return from these investments seems to be low.24


Poor Students Support and Other Support
The National Students Welfare Fund (NSWF) was established in 1991 to support university stu-
dent’s accommodation (hostels) and was also mandated to support poor students by providing them
with living allowances and free medical treatment. The NSWF is now operating under its Act
of 2005 (amended in 2010). The Fund provides support of SDG 200 per month for each of the
200,000 students receiving support, half of this support is in cash to meet the living allowance of

24 Returns to investments in 2012 were SDG 77 million (6% of total resources) and declined to SDG 75 million in

2014 (4% of total resources) whereas average inflation rate between 2012 and 2014 was 37% annually. These figures
were derived from the annual report of the social protection mechanisms by Ministry of Welfare and Social Security
(Reports of 2012–2013 and 2014).
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                      63


the student and the other half covers the health insurance and the clothing. The major funding
for the poor students support is extended by the Ministry of Finance (along with Zakat Fund).
The Ministry of Finance also extends direct financial support for civil society organizations and
other government institutions that have social protection programs.


Free Medicines and Fee Waiver for Emergency Treatment
The Ministry of Finance pays for free treatment of emergency in all public hospitals and free of
charge life savings medicines. The Ministry of Finance bears the cost of 192 types of medicines
including all medicines in emergency, kidney dialyses and cancer. The Ministry of Finance is
also providing for free medicines for children less than five years in all health units and hospitals.
The financing of the free medicines increased from US$2.3 million in 1997 to US$134 million in
2014. Coverage of health units supplied with free medicines started to increase gradually since
the inception of this program in 1997 to reach 70 percent in 2014 with some variation among
states. The two states: Sinnar and South Kordofan reached 100 percent coverage while East Dar-
fur coverage is only 29 percent. The list of free medicines for children less than five years of age
reached 36 types of medicines. However, the basic problems facing this scheme are the delays
by the health institutions in the replacement of their stock of medicines when depleted; and the
black market trade in the freely distributed medicines.


Non-Budgetary Components
The two major non-budgetary programs are the Zakat Fund and the CBoS microfinance support.
Both programs utilize public resources.


Zakat Fund
Zakat is a compulsory religious tax on property and capital (not on income or profit) payable in
currency or in kind. Zakat is paid by all Muslim, adult, sane, Sudanese who possess a certain min-
imum amount of extra wealth in excess of personal use for a whole year.

Zakat is collected from the following sources: money, gold and silver, cattle, crops and fruits, invest-
ments, shares and debentures, real estate, freelancing and wages. There are eight categories of
people to whom Zakat is distributed: (i) the poor; (ii) the needy; (iii) Zakat collectors; (iv) those
in bondage and in debt; (v) those fighting for a religious cause; (vi) those whose hearts have
been recently reconciled; (vii) free from slavery or servitude; and (viii) wayfarers and stranded
travelers.

Zakat is administered by independent body (Zakat Chamber) outside the jurisdiction of Ministry
of Finance. Since 1986, the Zakat administration has been separated from the Taxation Chamber
with complete independence from the Ministry of Finance. Zakat is currently governed by the
2001 Act which gives the chamber an independent legal identity. The Chamber is supervised by
a Council chaired by the Minister of Social Welfare and the members are appointed by the Presi-
dent. The Act considers Zakat as public money that has to be audited by the Auditor General and
its report is approved by the National Assembly.

Zakat covers a substantial number of poor of about 3 million households, although this number
declined to around 1.9 million in 2014. The major share of the resources is directed to the poor
and needy category, amounting to around 70 percent of total eligible persons for Zakat. Interven-
tions include direct cash supplement, which constitutes the major share, as well as investments.
Interventions of Zakat cover areas like health care, health insurance, education fees, and special
program for the people with disabilities.
64	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Microfinance
Microfinance started in Sudan in 2007. By 2014 institutions of microfinance were well developed
including: a Microfinance Unit at the Central Bank of Sudan’s headquarters (the regulator), the
Supreme Council for Microfinance, and State Councils of Microfinance (microfinance policies
and oversight), Sudan Microfinance Development Facility (an apex institution), Kafalat insur-
ance (microfinance whole sale insurance), and Microfinance Planning Units at related ministries
and microfinance institutions.

Despite recent experience with microfinance, Microfinance Institutions (MFIs) considerably
expanded. They grew from 7 in 2012 to 30 in 2014 and the total number of clients increased from
around 500,000 in 2012 to close to one million in 2014.

The Bank of Sudan has directed commercial banks to allocate 12 percent of their portfolio to micro-
finance. There are several microfinance programs covering different groups in different locations.
First, the Islamic Development Bank Microfinance Support Program launched in April 2011 is
a partnership between the CBoS and the IDB aims at contributing to the alleviation of poverty
by extending financial assistance to MFIs. So far 10 MFIs were financed. Second, the Graduate’s
Projects Microfinance Portfolio was launched in March 2012 with the objective of providing
microfinancing for projects submitted by graduates across all the states in the country. The CBoS
is the main single contributor (36 percent) along with 20 commercial banks to the financing
portfolio. Around 10,240 graduates benefited from the portfolio. The programs are implemented
by two banks: Savings and Social Development Bank and Farmers Commercial Bank. Third,
the Rural Women Program is a microfinance program fully funded by the CBoS in collabora-
tion with ministry of social planning with a capital of US$ 1.5 million targeting 8,200 families
implemented by the Savings and Social Development Bank. Finally, Al Amman is a microfinance
portfolio that was formed in mid-2010 by commercial banks (32 banks) and the Zakat Fund. The
objective is to extend microfinance to poor individuals and groups. The total portfolio is SDG
200 million in which bank’s share amount to SDG 150 million and the Zakat Fund SDG 50 mil-
lion. The financing targeted 189,000 beneficiaries.

Microfinance potential customers in the country may exceed 8 million individuals, while demand
covers only about 12 percent. It is, therefore, evident that the gap between coverage and demand
is massive and indicates a huge potential for microfinance.25 Commercial banks have the bulk of
the financial resources but they are not yet ready to be fully involved in the microfinance sector.

Microfinance in Sudan still faces some challenges. There are signs of inequitable distribution of
microfinancing. About 40 percent of the MFIs are mainly operating in Khartoum, which has
the least poverty incidence (26 percent) compared to the other states. The global experience
demonstrates that MFIs develop as the scale of their operations grows beyond delivery of credit

Table 5.17:  Microfinance Indicators (SDG million)
 Indicators                                                                2012        2013         2014
 Total banks financing                                                    30,483       37,657      44,321
 Microfinance financing                                                     1,496       1,546       2,055
 % of microfinance to total banks financing                                   5%           4%        4.6%
 Total financing by MFIs                                                      174        230          503
 Central Bank of Sudan wholesale financing extended                          129          351         400
 to microfinancing
 No. of licensed MFIs                                                           7          25          30

Source: Central Bank of Sudan (CBoS) Annual Reports.


25 A study made by UNICONS for MFU, CBoS—A vision for the development and expansion of the microfinance sec-
tor in Sudan, 2006.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                           65


services to include savings, deposit and non-financial services, but in Sudan attracting savings
is an ignored activity in microfinancing so far. Only two of the licensed MFIs were deposit tak-
ers (7 percent of total MFIs). There is a clear scarcity and in many cases absence of non-financial
services including training for clients, business development services, value chains, and technical
support which are all part of a sound microfinancing system for the poor to improve their pro-
ductivity, especially outside Khartoum.


Nonpublic Funding Programs
The Social Insurance Fund (SIF)
The SIF is a mandatory insurance system for all private sector employees and self-finance pub-
lic corporations as well as state owned banks and companies. The major resources are from the
Employers and the employee’s subscription in which the employer contributes 25 percent of the
wage and the employee 8 percent. The Fund is organized by the 2008 Act which stipulates its
status as an independent legal entity under the supervision of the Minister of Welfare and Social
Security.

The compensation of after service benefits paid for pensioners is extremely low and does not cope
with the inflation rates. Expansion in social support programs without ensuring funding could
future sustainability of the fund as indicated by the last Actuarial Study.26 The arrears accumu-
lated by the states represent also a serious challenge to the sustainability of the Fund services.


Food Aid and Nutrition Programs
The Humanitarian Appeal funding of UN and Partners Work Plan is coordinated by the United
Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) in partnership with Humani-
tarian Affairs Commission (HAC). The Commission is supervised by the Ministry of Welfare and
Social Security. The appeal is implemented by UN agencies and NGOs. It covers a wide range of
activities including: agriculture, economic recovery and infrastructure, education, food, health,
nutrition, mine action, protection and rule of law, shelter and nonfood items and multi sector.
What is considered here as social safety net program is the direct assistance in food and nutri-
tion. The major provider of the food is the WFP, and main provider of nutrition is UNICEF. The
main beneficiaries are war affected and displaced population in the country. WFP has several
food programs including General Good Distribution, supplementary ration for children, and
school feeding. UNICEF supports the tackling of micro-nutrient deficiencies, low birth weight
and chronic malnutrition through increased routine vitamin A supplementation, iron and folic
acid supplementation, promotion of iodized salt, and the marketing of fortified foods such as
flour and sugar.


Subsidies
Sudan runs an extremely expensive generalized subsidy system for fuel and wheat. Subsides were
around 22 percent of total public expenditures in 2014 which is equivalent to the federal and

            Table 5.18:  The Social Insurance Fund
                           Indicators                      2012               2013                2014
             Expenditures in SDG million                      850                852                1,118
             Expenditures as % of GDP                         0.4%              0.3%                0.3%
             Number benefited                             316,606           323,538               321,318

            Source: Social Security Mechanisms Reports (2012–2014), Ministry of Welfare and Social
            Security.


26 Quoted   in Social Security Mechanisms Report 2014, Ministry of Welfare and Social Security.
66	                     CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Table 5.19:  Safety Nets Expenditures
 Program                                               2012        2013        2014         Source of funding
 Cash transfers                                           120        165         702    Ministry of Finance
 Contribution to health insurance                         125        198        264     Ministry of Finance
 Zakat                                                   688       1,039       1,420    Zakat Chamber
 Health fees waiver—support to poor in                    158        194         251    Ministry of Finance
 emergency treatment (hospitals), essential
 lifesaving medicines
 Subsidies                                             4,235       7,202      10,521    Ministry of Finance
 % of GDP including subsidies                            2.4%       2.8%        3.0%
 % of GDP excluding subsidies                            0.5%       0.5%        0.6%

Source: Ministry of Finance, Zakat Fund Annual Reports, Reports of the Social Security Mechanisms by the Ministry of
Welfare and Social Security (2012–2014), CBoS Annual Reports.


development budgets combined. Total subsidy increased from 1.9 percent of GDP in 2012 to
2.3 percent of GDP in 2013 and further to 2.4 percent of GDP in 2014. The subsidies are domi-
nated by fuel representing over 75 percent of the total subsidies. Most of the benefits from subsi-
dies are captured by higher-income households. The top income quintile receives 48 percent of
total subsidy compared to 3 percent received by the bottom income. However, there are certain
variations for the different products where in the case of kerosene the top quintile receive only
21 percent compared to Gasoline where the top quartile receive 68 percent of the subsidy ben-
efits.27 The subsidy resources could benefit the poor more effectively if they were targeted. The
IMF concluded that fuel subsidies are expensive, inefficient and inequitable.

Similarly a recent Bank study of social safety nets in 22 African countries concluded that general
subsidies are costly mechanisms for redistributing income and often do not benefit the poor.28 The
study found that fuel subsidies do not benefit the poor in Cameron, Mauritania and Sierra Leone
and concluded that reducing poorly targeted programs and subsidies can make fiscal space for
more effective and better targeted safety nets. Likewise, well performing safety nets providing
support to the most vulnerable groups can be important mitigating mechanisms to facilitate
reform of expensive general subsidies.


Social Safety Nets
Social safety net is one of the components of the social protection. Considerable number of poor
and vulnerable people is unable to meet basic commodities and essential services needs due to
the conflicts and displacement. Therefore, special consideration is to be given to social safety nets
which include cash transfers, in-kind support, as fee waivers for basic services and school feeding
and nutrition programs.

Expenditures on social safety net increased during the IPRSP review period. Safety net
­
expenditures—defined as non-contributory programs to include cash and in kind transfers,
health waivers; and subsidies—rose from 2.4 percent of GDP in 2012 to 3 percent in 2014 while
excluding subsidies expenditures increased from 0.5 percent in 2012–2013 to 0.6 percent in 2014.

Most African countries spending on social safety nets—which average about 1.7 percent as a share
of GDP—is higher than Sudan’s spending. Africa’s average spending on social safety nets, however,

27 IMF: Sudan Selected Issue Papers; Fiscal cost and Distributional Subsidies; Sudan Country Report No. 12/299,

November 2012 (pages 4–13).
28 The
     World Bank: Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of Safety Nets in Africa. The World Bank
Washington DC. 2014, (pages 6–7).
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                  67


Table 5.20:  Spending on Social Safety Nets (% of GDP) in 21 Sub-Saharan African Countries
                    Spending on social        Spending on social
                     safety nets (% of         safety nets (% of            General          Share of total gov.
                      GDP) excluding            GDP) including             subsidies        spending, excluding
 Country            general subsidies         general subsidies         only (% of GDP)     subsidies (% of GDP)
 Benin                      0.3                        0.9                    0.5                      1.1
 Botswana                   3.7                        3.7                     0.0                    9.5
 Burkina Faso               0.6                        1.3                     0.7                     1.0
 Cameroon                   0.2                        1.6                     1.4                     1.5
 Ethiopia/ a                 1.2                       1.2                     0.0                    —
 Kenya                      0.8                        0.8                     0.0                     1.0
 Lesotho                    4.6                        4.6                     0.0                    8.0
 Liberia                     1.5                       1.5                     0.0                     4.4
 Madagascar                  1.1                       1.1                     0.0                    5.0
 Mali                       0.5                        0.5                     0.1                    —
 Mauritania                  1.3                       3.2                     1.9                     4.6
 Mauritius                  4.4                        5.2                     0.8                    9.0
 Mozambique                  1.7                       3.1                     1.4                    —
 Rwanda                      1.1                       1.1                     0.0                    —
 Sierra Leone               3.5                        5.6                     2.1                   13.1
 South Africa               3.5                        —                       —                      —
 Swaziland                  2.1                        2.1                     0.0                    —
 Tanzania                   0.3                        0.3                     0.0                     1.0
 Togo                       0.5                        1.3                     0.8                     1.8
 Zambia                     0.2                        2.1                     1.9                     1.9
 Average                     1.7                       2.2                     0.6                     4.4

Source: World Bank (2014). Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of Safety Nets in Africa. The World
Bank, Washington DC. 2014, Table 5.1, pp. 117–118.
Note: The figure for Ethiopia includes only the Productive Safety Net Program and does not include spending on other
safety net programs.


masks wide variation, ranging from 3.5–3.7 percent of GDP in Botswana and South Africa
(middle income countries) to 0.2–0.3 in Benin and Tanzania (low income countries) as noted
in Table 5.20. Neighboring Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Program costs 1.2 percent of GDP.
However, cross country comparisons should be interpreted with care as Sudan’s social safety net
system differs from other African countries. The African experience has shown that what is typi-
cally included in social safety nets are school feeding, public work programs, fee waivers, cash
transfers and vouchers, food and in-kind distributions, nutrition programs and other as noted in
a recent World Bank study (World Bank 2014).29


Remittances
Remittances are considered as an essential and strong informal social protection mechanism for mil-
lions of families in Sudan. Sudanese working abroad according to the Secretariat of the Sudanese
Working Abroad are around 4 million persons (of whom 2 million are working in Saudi Arabia)
and their total remittances are estimated to be around US$ 4 billion per year (about 7 percent

29 World Bank (2014). Reducing Poverty and Investing in People: The New Role of Safety Nets in Africa. The World

Bank, Washington DC. 2014, Table 5.2, p. 120.
68	                      CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


of GDP) transferred mostly outside the banking sector.30 US sanctions and other undeclared
sanctions imposed by non-US bank (due to over compliance) resulted in a breakdown in rela-
tions with corresponding banks in recent years and consequently transfers of remittances were
severely affected. However, they are not considered in the calculations of safety net expenditures
and pro-poor spending.


Achievements
Sudan has made significant increase in coverage for most of the social protection programs.
Table 5.21 shows the increase in the number of social protection beneficiaries by program. How-
ever, progress varies from one program to another. Despite progress made, the country has a long
way to go to reach adequate coverage in certain programs like health insurance and microfinance
given the magnitude of vulnerability and widespread poverty as well as the low base from which
these programs started.


Challenges
The main weakness in the social protection programs in Sudan is basically the inefficient use of
resources. Sudan requires streamlining of the current system to increase resource use efficiency.
Substantial resources are spent on non-targeted social protection programs like subsidies. Waste
of resources occurs due to inappropriate targeting. There is weak coordination particularly given
the given the large number of agencies involved.

The cash transfer program, for example is thinly spread across the states, indicating there is room
for better targeting. A breakdown of cash transfer by geographic locations reveals important
variation across the states (Figure 21). While North Darfur state has the highest poverty rate
(69.4 percent), Khartoum state has the highest share of cash transfer (nearly 16 percent of ben-
efited families are located in Khartoum). Khartoum and Gezira states (where poverty is relatively
low) host more than 25 percent of cash transfer beneficiaries. Residents of Darfur and other
conflict affected areas were significantly worse-off in terms of cash transfer than the rest of the
country.




Table 5.21:  Social Protection Programs Beneficiaries (Number of Beneficiaries)
 Program                           2012             2013             2014              Beneficiaries type
 Zakat                           3,111,996        3,037,255        1,920,000     Households
 Social insurance fund            316,606          323,538           321,318     Persons
 Health insurance fund         10,044,829       10,857,063        12,252,692     Persons
 Pension fund                      412,733          412,733          503,217     Persons
 Cash transfers                     99,817         260,000          500,000      Families
 Poor students                    150,000          194,000          200,000      University students
 Microfinance                     490,000          624,000          860,000      Clients (banking and MFIs)
 WFP/UNICEF                     3,500,000        3,600,000        3,600,000      Persons

Source: Annual Reports: Zakat Chamber (2012–2013), Central Bank of Sudan, Microfinance Unit, Performance of Social
Security Institutions, Ministry of Welfare and Social Security (2012–2013).




30 M. Swar, General Secretary of the Secretariat of Sudanese Working Abroad: Al Mighar 28/8/2015 (Arabic) and

Sander, Cerstin. Capturing a Market Share? Migrant Remittance Transfers and Commercialization of Microfinance in
Africa, Bannock Consulting, London, 2003, citing Brown (1982) in Puri et al, 1999.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                              69


Figure 21:  Poverty Rate and Cash Transfer Distribution by State (%)
                       Red Sea
                 Western Darfur
                Northern Darfur
                 Northern State
              Southern Kordofan
              Northern Kordofan
                        Kassala
                        Gadarif
                       Blue Nile
                Southern Darfur
                         Sinnar
                      River Nile
                      White Nile
                        Gazera
                     Khartoum
                                   0     10       20       30         40      50       60         70      80

                                                Cash transfer share                Poverty rate

Source: Authors’ own calculations based on the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security and World Bank Analysis of
NBHS 2009.



Implications for PRSP
Subsidies: The issues of subsidies removal needs to be seriously looked into. Lifting of subsidies
could be sequenced to minimize impacts on the poor (like starting with lifting items that are less
important to the poor as recommended by the IMF) and utilize the subsidy resources for a well-
targeted compensation programs.

Social security funds: The weakness capital of the social security institutions poses great risks to
the sustainability of their services. The weakness is a result of low coverage and hence low con-
tributions by subscribers, resistance of the private sector for mandatory social security insurance,
the large arrears accumulated by the federal government and the states, the low rate of returns
from the invested money of the social funds, and the high inflation rates.

Coverage: The coverage of social protection needs to be expanded and performance of the outlets
that provide the treatment services for the health insurance need to be improved. Many areas
which are remote and in which poverty is higher are not well served with health services out-
lets; the health facilities providing services to the health insurance in rural areas suffer from the
shortages of the medical staff due to lack of incentives; and there are weaknesses in the availabil-
ity of all the packages covered by the health insurance in the health centers. A strong monitoring
is needed as there is an emerging black market trade in the freely distributed medicines including
for children less than five years.

Zakat: Several recommendations were made to improve the Zakat performance in the conference
held in Khartoum in March 2015. These recommendations included using modern management
tools and appropriate IT technology for increasing management efficiency, enhancing partner-
ships with civil society organizations to improve the targeting; streamlining expenditures priori-
ties; and strengthening internal audit.

Targeting and equity: Targeting mechanisms for the cash transfers reviewed for further improve-
ments and has to be supported by transparent data base and a monitoring system. Further
improvement is required in targeting of beneficiaries and the delivery mechanism for the cash
transfers. This should be based on a rigorous evaluation of the current experience. There should
be more equity considerations in the social protection programs. A large variation in the cover-
age among states is clear with the poorest states getting the least benefit.
70	                     CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Institutions: Review of the existing institutional set up to particularly enhance the coordination
aspects is needed.

Impact of sanctions: Economic sanctions and over compliance by non US commercial banks
severely affected transfers of remittances to Sudan by Sudanese national working abroad. Remit-
tances are used as an important safety net for millions of poor families around the country.



5.5	 Governance
Strengthening governance and institutional capacity is one of the IPRSP pillars. Human rights,
peace and security, effective public financial management and decentralization were the essential
elements of good governance which is considered by the IPRSP as critical for achieving growth
and reducing poverty.

The IPRSP identified certain challenges that need to be addressed. Reconciliation and resolution
of conflicts, improving human rights records and make the Human Rights Commission to be
operational, resolving land tenure issues, strengthening local governments, reforming the public
expenditure managements system and fighting corruption were the main challenges identified.


5.5.1	 Human Rights
Considerable progress was made in the human rights record since 2011. It should be recalled that
in 18th session of the UNHRC in August 2011,31 the independent expert of human rights to
Sudan concluded that the Government of the Sudan has not taken any significant steps towards
the implementation of most of the recommendations since his previous report to the Council.
However, in September 2014 The Report of the Independent Expert on the situation of human
rights in the Sudan, covering period Oct 2012–June 2014, concluded that despite the human
rights challenges in the Sudan, the government’s human rights policy orientation and legislative
and institutional developments aimed at improving the situation of human rights has improved
over the past two years. In addition, human rights awareness has improved across the different
government sectors.

The Government has taken noticeable reforms in the area of human rights during the IPRSP review
period. The Government has adopted a 10-year National Action Plan for the Protection of
Human Rights in the Sudan. In September 2013, Sudan voluntarily issued mid-term report on
the implementation of recommendations of the Universal Periodic Review (This was a process
created by the UN assembly for all countries), including drawing up a detailed action plan for its
implementation.

A National Commission for Human Rights (NCHR) was established in 2012. The Sudan National
Human Rights Commission is the country’s first and only national human rights institution. The
National Commission on Human Rights adopted a promising four-year national strategic plan
for 2014 to 2018.

A Unit of Combating Violence against Women and a Woman Center for Human Rights were estab-
lished at the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security. In addition, the National Council for Child
Welfare was established under the supervision of the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security.

A human rights adviser has also been assigned to the Minister of Education to advice on the inclu-
sion of human rights in the educational curriculum. A high-level committee was established in the
Ministry of Education to monitor the implementation of the Action Plan at national level.

31 On the status of implementation of the recommendations compiled by the Group of Experts to the Government of

the Sudan for the implementation of Human Rights Council resolution.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                     71


On 22 February 2015, Sudan Penal Code of 1991 was amended to expand and clarify the definition
of rape that meets international standards (Article 149). The amendment distinctly separates the
crime of rape from the crimes of zina (sex outside of marriage), thus reducing the risk of women
being accused of zina when they report rape. These factors may make it more likely that women
who have been raped will report the crime and take the perpetrator to court. The Code amend-
ment also included for the first time a new element criminalizing sexual harassment (Article 151).

Elections legislation was amended to stipulate an increase of women representation in the Parlia-
ment to reach 30 percent of total seats in the elections of 2015. In addition to these affirmative
action women are allowed also to compete with men in the geographical constituencies. In the
elections of 2015, about 1900 women nominated themselves for the Parliament seats compared
to 900 in the previous elections (an increase of 110 percent) and, for the first time, a woman con-
tested the presidential elections in 2015.

The Government continued its massive campaign against Female Genital Mutilation FGM/C; a
deep rooted culture in the society.32 Saleema campaign against Female Genital Mutilation FGM/C
was adopted by National Council for Child Welfare and is vigorously implemented.

The Government campaign against FGM/C has gained wide support. The Government is being
assisted by doctors, religious leaders, media and other civil society organizations with support
from UNFPA and other UN agencies after enacting all necessary legislations incriminating it.33

A unit dedicated for combating SGBV was established. A specialized police force was established in
the various states in Sudan to serve Family and Children Protection Units (FCPUs).

Sudan’s efforts in combating human trafficking were recognized by the international community.
Sudan because of its location has become a transit hub of mixed migration flows from the Horn
of Africa to North Africa and Europe. Sudan has acknowledged and showed increasing concerns
about the scope and extent of the country’s human trafficking problem through press statements,
conferences and cooperative efforts as reported by UN agencies. Sudan attracted regional atten-
tion to this issue. A testimony to that is the last Regional Ministerial Conference on Human
Trafficking and Smuggling in Khartoum on mid October 2014.34 Sudan has recently adopted a
Law to Combat Human Trafficking (March 2014) with severe punitive measures for traffickers.35
Sudan established a National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. A special prosecu-
tor for human illegal migration and trafficking was established. The Informatics and Organized
Crimes Bureau of the Sudan Police Force (SPF) investigated and reportedly referred cases of sus-
pected trafficking for prosecution and cases were tried and convicted.36


32 FGM/C has long been an integral part of the social system. It is a cultural belief of many Sudanese that the practice

safeguards the family’s honor and the prospect of their daughters’ future marriage, linking it with premarital virginity
and marital fidelity. Consequently, there is a great deal of stigma against women and girls who are not circumcised.
33 Sudan was the first African country to legislate against Female Genital Mutilation/Cutting (FGM/C). The infibula-

tions form of the practice was declared illegal in 1946 in Sudan’s Penal Code. The first international conference on
FGM/C was held in the capital of Sudan, Khartoum in April 1999. Sudan has also ratified various international agree-
ments under which FGM is considered a violation, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(1976); International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (1976) ; and Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1990).
34 Organized by the African Union (AU) in collaboration with the Government of the Sudan, the United Nations High

Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) and the International Organization for Migration (IOM) and attended by Min-
isters from more than 15 countries of migration source, transit and destination along with High level delegations.
35 The law prescribes between three and 10 years’ imprisonment for acts of trafficking, between five and 20 years’

imprisonment for aggravated trafficking, and capital punishment in cases where the trafficking victim dies; these pen-
alties are sufficiently stringent and commensurate with those prescribed for other serious crimes, such as rape.
36 Trafficking-related arrests 2011 to 2013 had resulted in 70 convictions, and 600 in 2014 (Dongola Court). The gov-

ernment initiated prosecutions in 2013 against 25 defendants for suspected human trafficking crimes, and achieved
28 convictions.
72	                    CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


To demonstrate its regional commitment to combat human trafficking, Sudan established joint
patrols with Ethiopia and Eritrea, two major sources of trafficking. The Government authorities
rescued and provided assistance to an increased number of trafficking victims. It also succeeded
in bringing traffickers to justice and many were convicted. The Human Right Council welcomed
all the efforts exerted by Sudan in combating human trafficking (Session 27, September 2014).

Anti-money laundering and combating of Financing of Terrorism Act (AML/CFT) was passed
in line with international standards and in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund
(2014). A specialized Anti-money laundering and Combating of Financing of Terrorism Attor-
ney was established to examine relevant lawsuits in April 2014. A manual for AML/AFT was
issued as well as circulars for awareness to the relevant government bodies.

The Financial Inquiries Unit was established as an independent unit in the Central Bank of Sudan
(CBoS) acting as Financial Intelligence Unit. A new section for CML/CFT was established in
several institutions. All units which are obliged to report on money laundry and their staff were
adequately informed and trained.

The UN Anti-Corruption Convention was ratified in February 2014. Regulations were issued to
implement the Security Council Resolution 1373 (2001) aimed to hinder terrorist groups in vari-
ous ways, and Resolution 1267 (1999) aimed to take certain measures in connection with any
individual or entity associated with Al-Qaida. A technical committee was formed to ensure the
implantation of these resolutions.37

Sudan is playing an active role with its region. It has played instrumental role in bringing together
Ethiopia and Egypt to agree on the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam (GERD) thereby defusing
a regional tension which started to emerge. On March 23, 2015, Egypt, Ethiopia and the Sudan
signed a declaration of principles on the GERD which has stirred fears of a regional resource
conflict and paved the way for further cooperation and sets an example among Nile Basin
countries.


5.5.2	 Public Financial Management
Sudan has undertaken several institutional reforms in the financial sector. Work in the computer-
ization of the taxation system has started, and this step will increase transparency of the financial
performance of the government.

A new Transparency and Anti-Corruption Commission law was passed with the view to establish
and regulate the operation of the Commission. The Commission is expected to assume its respon-
sibilities in due course.

The implementation of an Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS) in con-
formity with international best practices started in 2014 with assistance from the African Develop-
ment Bank. IFMIS contains important new elements; implementing a new budget classification
system (GFS), financial system for Line ministries; improving the electronic transfer of data at
sub levels; adapting a new Treasury Single Account System, starting to transform from Cash
accounting system to Accrual accounting system and interacting on daily basis with other sys-
tems of financial organizations in the country (Such as Central Bank Core banking System,
Taxation Chamber, and Customs). The World Bank Group is also extending assistance to reform
the budget process with particular attention to the state’s financial management systems. Part
of the above projects outcomes will be the presence of highly trained staff in debt management,
macroeconomic management, accounting, procurement, budgeting (including gender-based

37 Institutions
              included: The Insurance Supervisory Board, The Customs General Administration, The taxation Cham-
ber, and The National Intelligence and Security Service.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                           73


budgeting), and using multi-year methodology. These efforts are expected to enhance account-
ability of using public resources, improve effectiveness of macroeconomic policies and poverty
reduction strategies and reduce corruption.

The Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning adopted an electronic receipt voucher (instead of
the paper voucher known as form 15) as a collection tool for the revenues at federal and states levels
starting in July 2015. The new system is expected to raise collection efficiency to increase reve-
nues and to prevent many misuses that were occurring in the paper-based system. Any receipt of
money will be automatically recorded in the Ministry of Finance system, thereby, reducing cor-
ruption and misuse of public funds. A law criminalizing the use of paper voucher was enacted.


5.5.3	 Decentralization
The IPRSP identified some major challenges facing the decentralized system in Sudan. The key
challenges of a functioning decentralization in Sudan identified include the lack of technical
and institutional capacity at all levels, the inadequacy of financial resources at the state and local
governments to meet the constitutionally assigned responsibilities, and the lack of real auton-
omy and participation of the population at the local government level. The IPRSP has basically
emphasized the role of the localities indicating that localities have very limited autonomy, and
they fall under the control of the states. The revenue sharing between the states and the localities
is not transparent, therefore, the IPRSP called for strengthening the autonomy and capacity of
local governments.

There were considerable improvements in the federal system in Sudan since its inception in 1992,
particularly after the CPA which brought increased devolution of powers and financial resources.
These developments were accompanied by some progress in the service delivery. To further
improve the governance system, a recent amendment of the 2005 Interim National Constitution
legislated for the localities as a separate level of government was approved.38 Clear independence
was given for localities and their revenue sources were specified. The jurisdiction of the states
over local government was abolished. The local government will have separate elections of its
respective organs in accordance with the National Election Act.

However, the federal system faces some weaknesses that need to be addressed to improve its opera-
tion in the service delivery. Further efforts are required to enable state to have more resources to
meet its expenditures responsibilities. The current situations shows that the pool of total rev-
enues (federal and states), though much increased compared to the period before 2005 are still
dominated by the federal government. Total public expenditures (federal and states), though
showing a slight increasing trend are still dominated by the federal government as shown by Fig-
ure 22.

The transfers to states as percent of total government revenues that have increased considerably dur-
ing the CPA interim period started to decline during since 2012. The substantial transfers allocated
from oil revenues to the south prompted the government to ensure equity in resource allocation
and started to transfer similar levels to the northern states. However, after South Sudan secession
the transfers to states as a percent of total government revenues have declined.

On the other hand, states resources are not being efficiently utilized as more resources are devoted to
increasing wages and salaries bill. Figure 24 shows that despite the increase in own revenues of the
states, these resources were utilized in wages and salaries which keep growing unchecked.


38 Localities were given the powers to legislate, by laws or local orders, for the following taxes which constitutes the

resources: real estate tax, sales tax, agriculture and livestock tax, fees on inland and river local transport, excise duties
on local industries and handicrafts, local fees on mining, and other local resources.
74	                                  CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Figure 22:  Relative Shares of Revenues and Expenditures between Federal and States
                     Relative shares of federal and states                   Relative share of state and federal governments
                        governments in total revenues                                   in total public expenditures
   100%                                                                   100%


      80%                                                                  80%


      60%                                                                  60%


      40%                                                                  40%


      20%                                                                  20%


      0%                                                                    0%
             2011                  2012         2013         2014                2011        2012          2013            2014


                            Share of state governments                             States expenditures share

                            Share of federal governments                           Federal government expenditures share
Source: Economic Bulletin MoFNE and FFAMC.


Figure 23:  Transfers to States as Percent of Government Revenues
                                           Transfers to states as percent of government revenues
                35%
                30%
                                                                                                    Post seccession
                25%
                20%
                15%
                10%              Pre-CPA

                      5%
                      0%
                            2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

Source: IMF Article IV Consultation Reports.


Figure 24:  Wages and Salaries Increase in States
                                                          Annual wages increase in states

                          6000                                                                                        80%

                          5000
                                                                                                                      60%
                          4000
            SDG billion




                          3000                                                                                        40%

                          2000
                                                                                                                      20%
                          1000

                            0                                                                                         0%
                                   2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013


                                                  States % of wages and salaries to expenditures

                                                  States own revenues in SDG million

                                                  States wages and salaries in SDG million

Source: FFAMC records.
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                                75


Table 5.22:  Basic Schools Seating and Textbooks Availability for Selected States (2014)
                             Percent of students seated                Percent of students with textbooks
 Khartoum                                50%                                           98%
 Northern                                60%                                           45%
 North Darfur                            29.7%                                         28%
 Kassala                                 94.4%                                         89%
 White Nile                              70.6%                                         73.4%
 North Kordofan                          52%                                           73%

Source: Economic Survey 2014, Draft-MoFEP.


The negative impacts of the continuous increase in wages and salaries leave little resources for many
states to meet the running expenses let alone development. As seen from Table 5.22 above, several
states were unable to meet the expenses of the textbooks or the seating for students. Many stu-
dents are sharing textbooks and some are sitting on the ground.

The existing federal system needs to be reformed to address one of the major root causes of the Suda-
nese conflict which is the disparities among the states. The aggregate economic and social indica-
tors in Sudan do not reflect the large geographical disparities in the country. Improvements in
the social services indicators mentioned previously in this document mask significant regional
disparities. Table 5.23 reflects disparities in important selected indicators. Vertical and horizontal
equalization formulas seem not to fully capture these disparities as seen for example from the per
capita transfers of the state when compared to the level of poverty in the states.

Capacities in all financial management aspects are weak invariably in all states. The weakness of
staff capacities is a major reason for the poor PEM. States lack electronic networking system link-
ing all departments, let alone localities. None of the states have an electronic archiving system
in place. The average number of computers available is ten computers per state and when they
are available most of staff is not trained to use them. Also, staff is poorly trained. The Staff in
all states is not trained to conduct revenues and expenditures forecasting, budgeting, cash flow
planning and management and other budget related analysis. Only 72 senior managers (out of
96) have knowledge and experience in how to review and interpret the three key financial docu-
ments; a cash flow projection worksheet, a balance sheet and an income statement.39

There are apparent weaknesses in the public expenditure management and financial governance.
States do not prepare their budgets within a medium term expenditures framework, but rather
formulate incremental budgeting. Localities budgets are not fully integrated into the states bud-
gets. The Auditor General indicated in his last report that retention and extra budgetary practices
still exist in the states, but there are improvements in 2013 compared to 2012. Internal auditing
in the states suffers from lack of uniform legislation between the federal government and the
states and weak capacities (there are rarely certified auditors in states). Staff of the procurement
in most of the states is unqualified. There are wide discrepancies in the reporting of the financial
data.

Lack of continuous consultations in financial matters between the state and the federal Ministry of
Finance and Economic Planning adds an additional burden to the state’s financial planning. Lack of
consultations is cited as a concern by many states. States are sometimes taken by surprise when
certain decisions of direct or indirect fiscal implications on their budgets are taken by the federal
government without consultations. A good example is wage increases where in many instances
the federal government suddenly announces wage increases or employment benefits without
prior consultations with states. This complicates the budget process, weakens expenditures fore-
casting and discredit the budget preparation. Some State Ministers alluded, for example, to the

39 Manal, M O Elehemier (2014), Report on: Capacity Building Assessment of States Ministries of Finance, Sudan, pre-

pared for Mamoun Beheiry Centre (MBC) for Economic and Social Studies and Research in Africa (December).
76	                     CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities


Table 5.23:  Selected Socioeconomic Indicators by State
                                   Per capita
                                      share                                            Health           % with
                                    in fiscal                        Infant          insurance        improved
                                     federal                       mortality        coverage as         source
                    Poverty %     transfers %      GER basic       per 1,000         % of state        of water
 State               (2009)          (2014)       education %      live birth       population          (2009)
 North Darfur         69.4             4.7           56.0              69               18.5              65
 South Darfur         61.2             3.2           39.9              53               15.8              55
 South                60.0             7.1           79.3              70               21.1              60
 Kordofan
 Central Darfur       59.0             5.6           96.5              45               19.5              —

 North Kordofan       57.9             4.5            71.8             36               18.4              49

 Red Sea              57.7             5.1            47.3             44              23.6               33

 Blue Nile            56.5             8.0           56.3              47              33.0               42

 West Darfur          55.6             4.1           80.5               71             32.7               46

 White Nile           55.5             5.4           80.7              47              23.6               58

 East Darfur          54.8             2.0           36.5              88               14.7              —

 West Kordofan        53.8             4.0           68.7              68              32.7               —

 Al Gadaref           50.1             5.5           68.1              53              36.5               48

 Sinnar               44.1             5.6           73.8              34               27.4              70

 Gazira               37.8             6.9           83.8               41             25.5               73

 Kassala              36.3             4.0           54.3              62              20.6               48

 Northern             36.2            11.2           78.8              30              33.7               87

 River Nile           32.2             8.1           80.2              28              30.3               75

 Khartoum             26.0             5.0           93.3              45               61.7              73

 Best                 26              11.2           96.5%             28               61.7              75
 Performing
 state
 Worst                69.4             2.0           36.5%             88               14.7              33
 Performing
 State

Note: Water is based on % of population with improved water source compared to those with unimproved source.
Source: Sudan IPRSP 2012, FFAMC, Education Sector Strategic Plan Feb. 2015, Social Security Mechanisms Report 2015,
NBHH Survey 2009—Tabulation Report.


fact they have to suddenly deal with 7 federal circulars related to benefits for compensation of
employees which surfaced late in the year of 2014 and which will have implications on the state’s
budget in 2015. These circulars were issued by the federal government without due consultations
with the states. Moreover, states would not know well in advance their share in transfers which
also jeopardize the already weak planning and budgeting process.

Borrowing by sub national governments if went unchecked can create long-term problems for fis-
cal sustainability. Almost all states are accumulating expenditures arrears, which fall under four
CHAPTER 5  Sectoral Pro-Poor Expenditures Analysis: Challenges and Opportunities	                             77


categories: (i) obligation to social security institutions namely the Pensions Fund and the Social
Security Fund; (ii) after service compensation to holders of constitutional posts; (iii) unpaid
contractual commitment to private sector contractors and suppliers; and (iv) employees benefits.
Accumulated arrears for South Darfur as end 2012 amounted to SDG 210 million equivalent
to around 188 percent of its annual own revenues; Gezira arrears (SDG 366 million) amounts
to about 106 percent of its annual own revenues.40 These arrears have crippled the work of the
social insurance institutions like the NPF and the NSSF in some states with negative impacts on
poverty.


Implications for PRSP
Despite progress achieved in the area of human rights considerable challenges remain. Identifying
and specifying actions to address remaining human rights is an area that needs to be looked into
by the PRSP.

Pending issues of concern to the UN Human Rights Council need to be addressed. These issues
include prosecution of the perpetrators responsible for the lethal shooting of demonstrators in
September 2013 and March 2014. There were also concerns regarding restrictions on the media,
pre- and post-publication censorship, seizure of newspapers, the banning of some journalists
and violations of the rights to freedom of expression and freedom of association and of peaceful
assembly. Furthermore, there are also concern related to the human rights and security situation
in conflict-related areas, particularly in the Darfur and the states of Southern Kordofan and Blue
Nile, and the profound negative impact of this on civilians, in particular women and children.
The amendment of the Press and Publication Act of 2009 to ensure more protection for journal-
ists and newspaper publishers is still an unfinished job.

Vertical and horizontal financial transfers have not yet succeeded in narrowing disparities among
the states. This necessitates a review of the formulas with the view to consider other options in
the transfers like blocked and specific purpose grants to address the disparities in certain critical
areas like education. However, this should be accompanied by strict adherence to prudent finan-
cial management by the states. Allocation of resources between wages, running expenses and
development is a concern.

A comprehensive capacity building program funded and supervised by the federal government
is needed. This is essential to improve efficiency in managing the states resources and service
delivery.




40 Report   of the Committee for Review of States Debt, Formed by Council of Ministers, Final Report, 2012.
chapter 6


Conclusions




I
  n 2012, the Government of Sudan adopted an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (IPRSP)
  that was informed by the results of the 2009 National Baseline Household Survey (NBHS). The
  strategy is clustered under four broad pillars: (i) promote economic growth and employment
creation; (ii) develop human resources; (iii) reintegrate IDPs and other displaced populations;
and (iv) strengthen governance and institutional capacity of the public sector.

The Government is formulating a full-fledged PRSP that draws on the new household survey
expected to be completed by mid-2016. Prior to embarking on the PRSP, the Government in col-
laboration with the development partners decided to: (i) assess the status of implementation of
the IPRSP (2012–2014); (ii) analyze achievements and obstacles towards poverty reduction; and
(iii) draw lessons learned to inform the preparation of the PRSP. This study is in fulfillment of
these objectives.



Country Context
The IPRSP was carried out within a volatile situation with conflicts in some parts of the country,
secession of South Sudan, negative external environment and unsustainable debt burden, economic
and financial sanctions, and fragile relations with the international community. The country was
severely affected by an economic shock created by the loss of oil due to secession of South Sudan
with negative impacts on growth and economic stability. The government however, was able to
weather the economic shock through the painful adjustment measures in June 2012 and Septem-
ber 2013. Economic growth was restored to 3.7 percent in 2014. Inflation was drastically reduced
from around 44.4 percent in December 2012 to 12.6 percent in December 2015. However, a high
margin between the official and parallel exchange rate still prevails.

Pro-poor expenditures. The definition of pro-poor expenditures adopted in this study builds on
the IPRSP policies for priority actions for growth and poverty reduction. The pro-poor sectors
defined in the assessment are agriculture and infrastructure, education, health, water and social
protection. Non-budgetary expenditures such as Zakat and Central Bank of Sudan microfinance
scheme are integral part of pro-poor expenditures. Expenditures include both the federal and
state levels. This definition is also in line with the pro-poor sectors definition utilized in many
Sub-Saharan African countries.



                                                                                                 79
80	                                                                        CHAPTER 6 Conclusions


Identification of pro-poor expenditures is highly context dependent, and is most useful when
country-driven, developed through a wide participatory discussion, and used as a means to help
­
guide and track government efforts. This IPRSP status report is expected to motivate the Govern-
ment to improve the definition of pro-poor expenditures that effectively captures and monitors
expenditures directed to the poor through the PRSP.

The government pro-poor expenditures have increased since 2012. Pro-poor expenditures as per-
cent of GDP reached 5 percent in 2014 compared to 4.2 percent in 2012. Both federal and state
levels expenditures as share of GDP have increased. When non-budgetary pro-poor expenditures
(i.e., Zakat and microfinance) were included, pro-poor expenditures would increase from 4.6
percent of GDP in 2012 to 5.4 percent of GDP in 2014. These percentages do not include the
expensive subsidies scheme.

Maintaining government pro-poor expenditures, hovering around 5 percent of GDP (or nearly half
of total public expenditures) is a significant achievement given adverse conditions facing the Gov-
ernment. These conditions include sanctions, high external debt level and low level of external
financing, and loss of 90 percent of exports and 55 percent of revenues as a result of the secession
of South Sudan. Comparison with African countries that reached HIPC decision point shows the
average for poverty reducing expenditures is 9 percent of GDP with wide variation, for example,
Ethiopia (15 percent of GDP), Uganda (10 percent of GDP), Mozambique (16 percent of GDP)
while Chad, Zambia and Sierra Leone have much lower ratios than the HIPC average (about
5 percent of GDP). Unlike Sudan, a substantial external financial assistance was behind these
figures for the above-mentioned HIPC countries. It will be extremely difficult for Sudan to effec-
tively address poverty reduction without assistance from the international community. Major
steps required are lifting of the devastating US sanctions, resolving Sudan’s external debt and
increasing development funding.

One of the basic features of pro-poor expenditures in Sudan is that 58 percent of pro-poor expen-
ditures, on average, occur at the state level, where the responsibility of delivering basic services
(including education, health and water) has been transferred to the state level. The economic
classification of current versus development expenditures shows that total pro-poor expenditures
are dominated by current expenditures. Current expenditures (wage and non-wage) amounted
to 66 percent of the total during the period 2012–2014. Within current expenditures, wages con-
stitute the largest share, about 50 percent, leaving only 16 percent for running expenses such as
operations and maintenance and supplies.

Agriculture and related infrastructure. All indicators derived from the 2009 National Baseline
Household Survey point to the importance of agriculture to poverty in Sudan. About 57.6 per-
cent of the households below the poverty line live in the rural areas which are dominated by agri-
culture as the main source of livelihood.

The share of agriculture and related infrastructure out of total public expenditures consistently
increased from 6.5 percent in 2011 to 8.2 percent in 2014. The increase in agriculture and agricul-
ture related expenditures is mainly due to the Government’s investments in infrastructure such
as dams and roads, indicating the high priority accorded by the Government to infrastructure
investments. However, if agriculture spending is considered in a narrower context (i.e., less infra-
structure spending), the public expenditure in agriculture as a ratio to the total public expen-
diture is 2.2 percent over the same period, which is disappointing given the role that has to be
played by the agriculture sector in poverty reduction.

Several measures identified by the IPRSP to develop agriculture were implemented. Beside the huge
investments in infrastructure, particularly roads and water harvesting in rain fed areas, consider-
able efforts were made in the livestock sector. Investment in this sector included the successful
health program of vaccination and inspection for livestock exports of sheep and investments in
quarantines that resulted in remarkable recovery of live animal’s exports. Suitable policies in the
CHAPTER 6 Conclusions 	                                                                              81


area of liberalizing and investments in the Gum Arabic and oilseeds led to increased produc-
tion and exports of those commodities. Investments in technological improvement—genetically
modified cotton—resulted in the recovery for cotton.

These efforts had positive results on agriculture production. Output and yields started to recover
particularly oil seeds and cotton. A positive achievement in the agriculture sector is the clear
rising trend in yields and quantities exported. The rising trend is also driven by the livestock
sector, which shows a remarkable recovery with virtually no exports in 2008 that grew to a multi-
million business and earned about US$682 million in 2013, compared to total agriculture exports
of US$1,626. Cotton production and yields have recovered over the past years, after a number of
years with declining yield and production. Gum Arabic production has also shown a remarkable
recovery, but there is considerable scope to expand production. Sesame yields slightly improved
during the review period.

Market access for agriculture improved as investments in infrastructure increased. Sudan invested
heavily in roads construction during 2012–2014, with noticeable achievements. In the period
2012–2014 around 1,262 km of roads or about 20 percent of the network were added to the road
network, bringing the total paved roads network in 2014 to 8,706 km. The distribution of the
new roads constructed gave due consideration to the regional balance.

The outcome of the increased production had positive impacts on food security. It has enhanced
one pillar of the food security situation in the country, which is food availability. However, the
stability of food supply was affected by the increase in prices in the first half of 2012, when aver-
age cereal prices were about two to three times their level in 2008. On the other hand, unem-
ployment also has negative impacts on accessibility. Unemployment rate, which was around
14.8 percent in 2009 as estimated by the Central Bureau of Statistics increased to 18.8 percent in
2013, as noted by the Ministry of Manpower based on a survey in collaboration with the Interna-
tional Labor Organization. In conflict affected areas, food security was adversely influenced by
the increase in displacement.

Despite agricultural progress several challenges remain. Sudan is producing far below its potential.
Total area under irrigation declined to about 2 million feddan compared to a potential of 4.7 mil-
lion feddan. Irrigation intensity of Gazira Scheme is currently around 37 percent from a level of
75 percent in the 1970s. Current cotton production is 130,000 bales whereas its production had
reached 1,300,000 bales in mid-seventies. Sesame production is one fifth of the level attained in
the early 1960s. Irrigation schemes still suffer from poor management and lack of institutional
reforms, which have been the main reasons behind the deterioration of production and produc-
tivity in the irrigated sector.

Agricultural productivity is still extremely low. Sudan is not investing well in research or in use of
fertilizers and has weak extension services. Expenditures on research during the IPRSP period
are about 0.08 percent of agriculture GDP. Brazil invests in research 1.8 percent of agriculture
GDP, China 0.5, and India 0.4. Yields of cereals in Brazil are 4826 kg per hectare, 5891 kg per
hectare in China and 3889 kg per hectare in India, while in Sudan they are only 589 kg per
hectare.

During the review period of 2012–2014, about 92 percent of the total agricultural exports were raw
materials. Exports are concentrated in few markets; about 75–80 percent of Sudan agriculture
exports are concentrated in three foreign markets; Saudi Arabia (sheep), Egypt (camels and
meat), China (oil seeds). This situation puts the Sudanese exports under great risks.

Despite the remarkable achievement of expanding the road network particularly over the last three
years, road density is low. Sudan paved road density is only 4.6 km per 1000 km square of land
area. Road density in Sudan is low even when compared to the Sub Sahara Africa average of
20.4 km per 1000 km square of land area.
82	                                                                          CHAPTER 6 Conclusions


A basic challenge for infrastructure particularly roads is maintenance. Out of the total 8,706 km,
about 3,500 km or 43 percent of the network needs maintenance of which 1,400 km or 18 per-
cent is in extremely critical condition as of 2014. The resources devoted to maintenance currently
cover only 12 percent of maintenance cost. Moreover, despite the huge investments in roads a
sizable share of the country lacks roads, particularly rural connectivity and linkages between
agriculture areas and the main road network.

Education. The Government has committed to achieving universal basic education and the
education-related Millennium Development Goals by 2015. This signals the Government’s readi-
ness to continue to invest in education and expand education opportunities. Accordingly, there
has been a substantial increase in public education expenditure since 2012. Total public educa-
tion expenditure more than doubled in nominal terms during the review period. As a share of
total public expenditures, education spending has increased by more than 2 percentage points to
11 percent (or 1.4 percent of GDP), indicating the importance the Government attaches to the
education system.

Despite the increase in education spending, Sudan spends less as a share of total public spend-
ing than do comparable countries. In 2014, Sudan’s education spending as a share of total public
spending was nearly 11 percent. By comparison, other countries with similar dependency ratio
(i.e., school age population as a share of the total population) spent more—including neighbor-
ing Ethiopia, and Kenya.

Student enrollments have grown sharply since 2005/06. Enrollments have increased at all four lev-
els of the education system: pre-school, basic, secondary and higher education. However, basic
education is the level that accounts for the largest absolute increase in enrollments.

However, the education sector faces certain challenges. There are disparities in education among
states. Also, the steady rise in enrollment in basic education is expected to continue and will
generate rising demand for secondary education and exert pressures on education expenditure.
Out-of-pocket spending averaged SDG15 per student for basic education, which is higher than
government spending per student for school running expenses that amounts to SDG12. For the
poorest households, out-of-pocket education spending poses a real barrier to education with
implications for student attendance and drop-outs.

Health. Federal and state expenditures on health have grown reaching around 8 percent of total
public expenditures (or 1.0 percent of GDP). The growth in state health spending is driven by
rising fiscal federal transfers to states, which is in line with the decentralization policy. States’
actual spending on health has doubled since 2012, rising from SDG 2.2 billion to SDG 4.5 bil-
lion (US$789 million) in 2014. Sudan’s level of public spending on health compares to some of
its peers and even exceeds some MENA lower middle income countries. In 2014, Sudan’s health
spending as a share of total public spending was 8.0 percent. Sudan spends more than Kenya,
Senegal, Egypt and Morocco.

Some progress was made in health indicators. The under-five mortality rate (deaths per 1,000
births) improved, dropping from 83 per thousand live births in 2006 to 68 per thousands in 2014.
The maternal mortality rate declined from 534 per one hundred thousand live births in 2010 to
521 per one hundred thousand in 2013. HIV prevalence is low, and the incidence of tuberculosis
(TB) is declining. Prevalence of TB declined to 114 per one hundred thousand in 2012. Malaria
patient’s treatment has improved. Malaria patients’ receiving treatment within 24 hours increased
to 36 percent in 2013, up from 16 percent in 2010.

Water and sanitation. A plan was developed for the water and sanitation sector; the Water, Sani-
tation and Hygiene Sector Strategic Plan for 2011–2016 (WASHSSP) as well as the draft Water
Supply and Environmental Sanitation Policy (2012). The WASHSSP aims to increase per capita
safe water consumption to 20 and 90 liters per day in rural and urban areas, respectively, by
CHAPTER 6 Conclusions 	                                                                            83


2016. The plan targets were to increase household members with access to safe drinking water to
82 percent and household members with access to improved sanitation to 67 percent by 2016.

Despite the commitments and targets defined in the above-mentioned development strategy/plan,
the performance in the sector is still far from reaching the MDGs targets. The percentage of house-
hold members using improved sources of drinking water reached 68 percent in 2014 while the
percent of household members using improved sanitation facilities only reached 33 percent in
2014, necessitating further effort to consolidate and improve progress. Around 50 percent of the
existing basic schools don’t have access to improved drinking water and sanitation facilities. The
large number of internally displaced people adds to this challenge. There is a large variation in
access to water and sanitation among states. Water and sanitation access in West Kordofan State
for example stands at 60 percent and 23 percent respectively, which are below national average of
68 percent and 33 percent.

Social welfare, security and protection. The Social Initiative Program (SIP) is the overarching
program for the social protection, implemented by the Ministry of Welfare and Social Security
and its agencies: Zakat Chambers; Saving Development Bank; Health Insurance Fund; National
Council for Disabled; and Students Support Fund. The social protection is a fairly extensive
program that includes: (i) direct cash transfers to poor families; (ii) National Health Insurance
Fund; (iii) National Pension Fund; (iv) support to poor students safety nets interventions includ-
ing cash and in kind transfers by the Government and Zakat Fund; (v) general support to certain
medical care services like free treatment in emergencies and free lifesaving medicines; (vi) Social
Insurance Fund; (vii) Zakat Fund; (viii) microfinance; and (ix) support programs to special
groups like rural women, DDR programs for ex-combatants, disabled programs, vocational
training centers to enhance youth employment, support to humanitarian crises in war affected
areas, creation of productive opportunities for university graduates and support to returnees
from South Sudan. The Government also runs an expensive general subsidies scheme.

Total public expenditures on social protection (budgetary and non-budgetary) without considering
subsidies increased from 1.4 percent of GDP in 2012 to 1.7 percent in 2014. Budgetary expendi-
tures (federal and states) amounted to 1.0 percent of GDP in 2012 and increased to 1.3 percent in
2014. When the National Social Insurance Fund and the direct food transfers by WFP and nutri-
tion assistance by UNICEF are included, total expenditures on social protection reach 2.3 percent
of GDP, on average, without considering the subsidies. If the subsidies were included, the total
public and non-public social protection spending would increase to 4.7 percent of GDP in 2014
from 4.2 percent in 2012.

It is difficult to undertake cross comparisons with similar countries or regions due to the different
definitions used for social protection and its components. It is estimated that Africa has an average
of social expenditures of 2.8 percent of GDP with wide variations from 12 percent to 0.5 percent.
Low income countries average expenditures on social protection amounts to 3.5 percent in 2011
as noted by the International Labor Organization.

Sudan has made significant increase in coverage for most of the social protection programs but with
large states disparities.

Governance. Strengthening governance and institutional capacity is one of the IPRSP pillars.
Human rights, peace and security, effective public financial management and decentralization
were the essential elements of good governance, which is considered by the IPRSP as critical for
achieving growth and reducing poverty.

Considerable progress was made in the human rights record since 2011. The Government has
adopted a 10-year National Action Plan for the Protection of Human Rights in the Sudan. In Sep-
tember 2013, Sudan voluntarily issued mid-term report on the implementation of recommen-
dations of the Universal Periodic Review. A National Commission for Human Rights (NCHR)
84	                                                                         CHAPTER 6 Conclusions


was established in 2012. A unit of Combating Violence against Women and a Woman Center for
Human Rights were established at the Ministry of Welfare and Social Protection (MoWSS) as
well as the National Council for Child Welfare. A human rights adviser has also been assigned to
the Minister of Education for educational curriculum. Sudan Penal Code of 1991 was amended
to expand and clarify the definition of rape that meets international standards. Elections legisla-
tion was amended to stipulate an increase of women representation in the Parliament to reach
30 percent of total seats in the elections of 2015. The Government continued its massive cam-
paign against Female Genital Mutilation FGM/C; a deep rooted culture in the society (Saleema).
A unit dedicated for combating SGBV was established. A specialized police force was established
in the various states in Sudan to serve Family and Children Protection Units (FCPUs).

Sudan’s efforts in combating human trafficking were recognized by the international community.
Sudan established a National Committee for Combating Human Trafficking. A special prosecu-
tor for human illegal migration and trafficking was established. The Informatics and Organized
Crimes Bureau of the Sudan Police Force (SPF) investigated and reportedly referred cases of
suspected trafficking for prosecution and cases were tried and convicted. Anti-Money laundering
and Combating of Financing of Terrorism Act (AML/CFT) was passed in line with international
standards and in collaboration with the International Monetary Fund (2014). A specialized
Anti-Money Laundering and Combating of Financing of Terrorism Attorney was established to
examine relevant lawsuits in April 2014. The Financial Inquiries Unit was established as an inde-
pendent unit in the Central Bank of Sudan acting as Financial Intelligence Unit. A new section
for CML/CFT was established in several institutions. The UN Anti-Corruption Convention was
ratified in February 2014. Regulations were issued to implement the Security Council Resolu-
tion 1373 (2001) targeting terrorist groups in various ways, and Resolution 1267 (1999) aiming
to take certain measures in connection with any individual or entity associated with Al-Qaida.
A technical committee was formed to ensure the implementation of these resolutions.

Sudan has undertaken several institutional reforms in the financial sector. Work in the computer-
ization of the taxation system has started, and this step will increase transparency of the financial
performance of the government. A new Transparency and Anti-Corruption Commission law was
passed, guiding the operation of the Commission. The implementation of an Integrated Financial
Management Information System (IFMIS) in conformity with international best practices started
in 2014, containing important new elements; and a new budget classification system (GFS). A
new Treasury Single Account System was adopted. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Plan-
ning adopted an electronic receipt voucher as a collection tool for the revenues at federal and
state levels in July 2015, leading to increased revenues and reduced corruption.

There were considerable improvements in the federal system in Sudan since its inception in 1992,
which brought increased devolution of powers and financial resources. These developments were
accompanied by some progress in the service delivery. To further improve the governance sys-
tem, a recent amendment of the 2005 Interim National Constitution legislated for the localities as
a separate level of government was approved. Transfers to states as percent of total government
revenues have increased. On the other hand, these resources are not being efficiently utilized as
more resources are devoted to the increasing wages and salaries bill. Capacities in all financial
management aspects are weak invariably in all states. The weakness of staff capacities is a major
reason for the poor public expenditure management and financial governance. States lack elec-
tronic networking system linking all departments, let alone localities.



Implications for the PRSP
Creating a conducive political and economic environment is essential for poverty reduction. Bring-
ing a lasting political settlement for the conflicts and speeding implementation of the peace agree-
ments is needed. Pursuing high economic growth, being a key factor in poverty reduction, and
ensuring macroeconomic stability is a perquisite. Encouraging a pattern of economic growth that
CHAPTER 6 Conclusions 	                                                                             85


utilizes the most abundant resources available to the poor—labor—would help achieve poverty
reduction.

Along with a higher pace of economic growth, improvements are needed in the quality of growth to
ensure broader participation along with poverty targeting programs:

      (i)	 encourage a diversified pattern of growth that promotes the productive use of labor
           (nearly 60 percent of households below the poverty line live in rural areas, where
           agriculture is the main source of livelihood) through policies that address constraints
           facing the rural/agriculture sector, including harnessing market incentives, social and
           political institutions, and infrastructure and technology;
     (ii)	 invest in human development to build and enhance the capabilities of the poor through
           education and better health, and address state disparities in accessing social services;
           and
    (iii)	 improve the targeting of social protection programs.

The PRSP will be an opportunity to address agricultural constraints. These include transforming
the traditional sector to economically viable commercial businesses; resolving land issues and
land rights in carefully designed manner; providing necessary services for the nomadic livestock
production systems like water, veterinary, education, rangeland rehabilitation and stock route
demarcation, while modernizing the production system in the medium to long term; revitalizing
irrigated agriculture as a strategic choice; addressing the policy choice of food self-sufficiency
and food security; perusing agriculture industrialization and diversification to enhance eco-
nomic growth and poverty reduction; and expanding infrastructure to provide improved com-
petitiveness of Sudanese agriculture giving special attention to roads maintenance.

The education sector faces many challenges that need to be addressed by the PRSP. These include
striking an appropriate balance between current and development expenditure for education is
required; increasing school enrollment rates to achieve universal education; addressing state and
gender disparities despite progress made; according the necessary priority to teachers training;
and paying attention to secondary education, which is expected to rise given the increase enroll-
ment in basic education. Household out-of-pocket spending which is significant and poses a bar-
rier to education, especially for poor households needs to be resolved.

In the health sector some progress was made but Sudan requires more efforts to meet the health Mil-
lennium Development Goals targets. Disparities across states have not yet been fully addressed,
necessitating further effort to consolidate and improve progress.

Specific attention has to be given to the information of the water and sanitation sector as a separate
sector particularly at state and locality levels to allow for better planning. The water and sanita-
tion should be supported with better capacity and training particularly at state level. Efforts to
integrate water, sanitation and hygiene within other sectors—mainly education, nutrition and
health—should continue. Schools, health and nutrition centers are useful entry points for such
interventions. Specific attention is to be given for the water quality. Institutional reform for sus-
tainability of the water facilities is a concern. There should be clarity in defining the roles and
responsibilities between the federal, state and locality levels and communities, in terms of man-
aging and operating projects, and ensuring sustainability. Moreover, the resources in the sector
have to be used efficiently so that the service is delivered at an affordable price for the poor.

The coverage of social protection needs to be expanded and performance of the outlets that provide
the treatment services for the health insurance need to be improved. Targeting mechanisms for the
cash transfers need further improvements and has to be supported by transparent data base and
a monitoring system. There should be more equity considerations among states in delivering
social protection programs. Several institutions are responsible for the social protection network
and coordination needs further improvements. The recommendations to improve the Zakat
86	                                                                        CHAPTER 6 Conclusions


performance in the conference held in Khartoum March 2015 needs to be implemented. The
government social protection system is supported by informal networks including substantial
remittances transferred by Sudanese migrants abroad. However, US economic sanctions and over
compliance by commercial banks severely affected transfers of remittances to Sudan with nega-
tive impacts on poverty.

There is an urgent need to review the vertical and horizontal transfers’ formulas and consider other
options such as blocked and specific purpose grants to address state disparities in certain critical
areas like education. However, this should be accompanied by strict adherence to prudent finan-
cial management by the states. Allocation of resources between wages, running expenses and
development is a concern. Improving service delivery to the poor requires investment in schools,
clinics, roads and so on. The relative emphasis on current spending also leaves meager resources
devoted the running expenses with the consequent result of poor sustainability and maintenance
of development projects. Making development planning more effective through better coordi-
nation between federal and state levels; information sharing (e.g., budget and execution data);
is needed as well as developing guidelines for more streamlined procedures; and strengthening
capacity in budget planning, prioritizing and execution at the state level. The weakness of staff
capacities in the states is a major reason for the poor public financial management (PFM).

Other issues. More attention for the informal sector in Sudan, which seems to have significant
contribution to employment but information about the sector is insufficient to allow for further
analysis. The PRSP needs to examine the role to be played by this sector, particularly in boosting
economic growth and employment.
Annex 1


IPRSP Policy Matrix




   Area/Sector         Objectives and Targets                     Policy Measures/Programs
                      Strengthening Governance and Institutional Capacity Pillar
National             Promotion of national          Establish a transparent process and a national
Reconciliation       reconciliation and unity.      commission for the promotion of national
                                                    reconciliation and unity, with the resources and
                                                    capacity to hold consultations nationwide.
Conflict Resolution Resolution of conflicts.        Strengthen the capacity of the agencies for conflict
                                                    resolution at all levels, linking these to the national
                                                    reconciliation process for capacity building and
                                                    technical advice.
Property Rights      Reduce conflicts associated    Review and revise existing laws and policies including
                     with land and ensure long-     putting in place mechanisms for allocation of land and
                     term land use rights.          resolving land disputes at community levels.
Human Rights         Enhance the protection of      Make operational the Human Rights Commission.
                     human rights.
Decentralization     Improve the effectiveness      Strengthen the autonomy of the governments at
                     of the decentralized           locality levels, including the election of key executive
                     governance.                    officers.
                                                    Promote the participation of the citizens in the
                                                    governance of the localities.
                                                    Establish a transparent and predictable revenue
                                                    sharing mechanism between the three levels of
                                                    government.
Public Service       Effective and improving        Develop a national strategy for enhancing public
Delivery             delivery of public services.   sector technical and institutional capacity.
                                                    Reform the institutions for public expenditure
                                                    management including the introduction of policy-
                                                    based and multi-year planning and budgeting
                                                    framework.
                                                    Adopt the GFMS, a computer-based budgeting and
                                                    accounting application, to strengthen financial
                                                    controls, produce and make public periodic reports of
                                                    budget execution.
                                                    Develop a national strategy for enhancing
                                                    procurement capacity and systems at all levels of
                                                    government.
                                                                                                (continued)

                                                                                                               87
88	                                                                                Annex 1  IPRSP Policy Matrix


      Area/Sector          Objectives and Targets                      Policy Measures/Programs
                    Reintegration of Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) and Refugees Pillar
Eastern Sudan            Invigorate the development       Review the development plans for Eastern Sudan and
                         of Eastern Sudan.                re-launch the implementation.
                                                          Revise policy framework for the reintegration of
                                                          IDPs and refugees, with broad consultations with
                                                          concerned communities and the international
                                                          development community.
                                                          Build a partnership with international relief and
                                                          development agencies for reintegration, with a strong
                                                          coordinating mechanism led by the government.
                                       Developing Human Resources Pillar
Empowerment of           Empower the poor to take         Increase in the level and share of pro-poor public
the Poor                 advantage of opportunities.      spending.
                                                          Set the transfers to the states and localities to be
                                                          consistent with their responsibility for improved
                                                          service provision in education and health.
                                                          Set public capital spending on education and health
                                                          to widen access to services, improve facilities and
                                                          sustain these improvements.
                                                          Provide social protection services in a manner that
                                                          strengthens the capacity of the poor for self-reliance.
Empowerment of           Meet the gender MDGs.            Monitor the implementation of actions and taking
Women                                                     corrective measures to deal with slippages.
                                                          Produce gender-aggregated statistics on labor market
                                                          and employment developments.
                                                          Invest in educational infrastructure to put schools
                                                          within easy reach of girls in the community,
                                                          particularly in the underserved states.
                                                          Establish non-formal adult education classes targeted
                                                          at women and promote vocational and technical
                                                          secondary education for girls.
                                                          Civic education and voter education programs for
                                                          women.
                                                          Introducing gender-based budget to integrate gender
                                                          issues into public resource allocation decisions.
Education                Sustaining improvements          Preparation of a medium-term education sector
                         in the education sector to       strategy (ESS (2012–2016)).
                         meet the related MDGs and        Investments in building schools and classrooms,
                         provide appropriate skills for   particularly in the lagging regions.
                         the labor market.
                                                          Put in place programs targeting school dropouts,
                                                          particularly those in the 9–14 years of age, to increase
                                                          primary school completion rates and ultimately
                                                          literacy.
                                                          Investments in improving educational facilities and
                                                          providing essential supplies and books to teachers and
                                                          students.
                                                          Establishment of additional teacher training colleges
                                                          to increase the output of trained teachers and actions
                                                          to improve the quality of teacher training college
                                                          graduates from new and existing colleges.
                                                          Improve the compensation of teachers and provide
                                                          incentives for teachers to work in rural areas and
                                                          lagging regions.
                                                          Reform technical education at the secondary level
                                                          in relation to preparedness for higher education and
                                                          meeting the needs of the labor market.
Annex 1  IPRSP Policy Matrix	                                                                               89


    Area/Sector        Objectives and Targets                    Policy Measures/Programs
                                                    Strengthen the quality of tertiary education; review
                                                    the financing and fees practices to ensure that the
                                                    poor and underprivileged are not being excluded from
                                                    higher education.
                                                    Rationalize the policies and practices on technical/
                                                    technological education at tertiary levels.
Health               Increase utilization and       Increase in public spending for health services;
                     improve quality of primary     external assistance will be sought, particularly for
                     and first-referral health      expansion of services to rural areas and lagging
                     care; improve equity in        regions.
                     health service coverage,       Develop a health financing policy that, with the
                     reducing geographic, urban/    increase in spending, increases spending on deprived
                     rural, and socioeconomic       regions; explores ways to expand collective prepaid
                     inequalities.                  mechanisms (health insurance) to ensure that health
                                                    care is available to all.
                                                    Investments in infrastructure to enhance service
                                                    coverage, particularly in deprived areas.
                                                    Investments in human resources, incentives for
                                                    qualified personnel to work in rural areas, technical
                                                    assistance to be sought for capacity building in
                                                    areas of policy development and planning, financial
                                                    and human resource management, pharmaceutical
                                                    policies and regulation, and health care information
                                                    systems.
                                                    Build partnerships with the private sector, national
                                                    and international NGOs for the coordinated expansion
                                                    and improvements in health service delivery.
Safe Drinking        Increase access to safe        Construct 15 new small capacity water supply plants
Water and            drinking water and basic       at designated rural towns.
Sanitation           sanitation by 20 and           Rehabilitate deteriorating water supply sources
                     25 percent respectively in     with emphasis on replacement of obsolete and low
                     2011–2015.                     efficiency systems.
                                                    Rehabilitate and extend 15 aging water supply
                                                    stations at country level. Construct new water
                                                    treatment plant in urban areas.
                                                    Introduce simple low cost technologies particularly in
                                                    the rural areas.
                                                    Promote the provision and use of latrines of rural
                                                    areas.
                                                    Improve hygiene education/public awareness by
                                                    integrating sanitation and hygiene education with
                                                    water supply interventions and improved collaboration
                                                    between water and sanitation agencies and ministries
                                                    of education and health.
Social Safety Nets   Assist the poor and indigent   Review the use of the Zakat fund and assess
and Protection       and build their social and     its contribution to poverty reduction and social
                     productive capacities where    protection and how best it can support the new
                     possible.                      poverty reduction strategy.
                                                    Develop a social protection strategy and policy
                                                    framework.
                                                    Expand the successful CDF programs to poor
                                                    communities in other states and use the lessons from
                                                    the CDF to enhance participation of the communities
                                                    and citizens in local governance and improving value
                                                    for money of local government spending.
                                                    Discuss with the humanitarian agencies and NGOs to
                                                    determine how best their assistance would support
                                                    the poverty reduction strategy.
                                                                                                  (continued)
90	                                                                          Annex 1  IPRSP Policy Matrix


      Area/Sector      Objectives and Targets                    Policy Measures/Programs
                     Promotion of Economic Growth and Employment Creation Pillar
Enabling             Restoration of a               Eliminate tax exemptions and revenue earmarking.
Macroeconomic        fundamental basis for          Strengthen revenue and customs administration,
Environment for      sustained macroeconomic        improve control systems and build capacity in both
Growth               stability following the        areas.
                     independence of the South.
                                                    Phase out subsidies including the fuel subsidies.
                     The key targets would be
                     2 percent of GDP for the       Focus capital expenditures on growth and poverty
                     fiscal deficit, 4 percent of   reduction priorities, and reduce capital expenditure
                     GDP for the deficit in the     subventions to public corporations.
                     external current account by    Review expenditures and identify areas where
                     2014, and inflation rate of    expenditures can be scaled back or eliminated from
                     below 10 percent by 2015.      the budget.
                                                    Protect expenditures on key growth and poverty
                                                    reduction priorities from cuts.
                                                    Strengthen financial controls to ensure that spending
                                                    is on priority programs and strengthen procurement
                                                    systems and oversight to enhance value for money.
                                                    Reform expenditure institutions and capacity to
                                                    improve resource allocation the effectiveness of
                                                    implementation and service delivery.
                                                    Streamline and reduce government spending in
                                                    foreign exchange.
                                                    Move to a more flexible exchange rate regime.
                                               Take actions for quick gains in non-oil exports.
                     Appropriate macroeconomic Develop national accounts, trade and public financial
                     analysis for Sudan.       and monetary statistics for the new Sudan to permit
                                               relevant macroeconomic and expenditure analysis.
The Enabling         Promote the private sector     Reform the regulatory environment for doing business,
Environment for      to become innovative,          putting priority on those areas where Sudan is weak
Private Sector-led   productive and competitive     per the Doing Business Survey, namely starting a
Growth               and as source of employment    business; dealing with construction permits; getting
                     creation and non-oil exports   credit, protecting investors; trading across borders,
                     growth and diversification     enforcing contracts and closing a business.
                     of the economy.                Strengthen the “one stop shop” to assist investors
                                                    to reduce the time and cost of meeting regulatory
                                                    requirements.
                                                    Formalize and strengthen the coordination and
                                                    dialogue between the government and private sector
                                                    organizations on policy an regulatory reforms for
                                                    PSD. Integrate the private sector consultations to the
                                                    policymaking process.
                                                    Establish an environment of macroeconomics
                                                    stability, stable exchange rates, and low inflation
                                                    comparable to global average inflation rates and
                                                    competitor countries/economies.
                                                    Use the Government’s diplomatic and other
                                                    international connections to assist the private sector
                                                    to build alliances with foreign centers of excellence in
                                                    innovation and appropriate technologies, and attract
                                                    foreign investment partners.
                                                    Rehabilitate and expand infrastructural services
                                                    to lagging regions and improve peace and security
                                                    to enable the private sector tap into the productive
                                                    resources in those regions.
Annex 1  IPRSP Policy Matrix	                                                                                91


    Area/Sector        Objectives and Targets                     Policy Measures/Programs
                                                     Reform the education sector, particularly in the
                                                     areas of science and technology to provide the
                                                     private sector the skill they need to be innovative and
                                                     competitive.
                                                     Accelerate the restructuring and privatization of the
                                                     banking sector.
                                                     Promote the establishment of non-bank financial
                                                     institutions (insurance, leasing) to complement the
                                                     financial services provided by the commercial banks.
                                                     Strengthen institutions such as collateral legislation,
                                                     judicial systems, creditor’s rights and financial and
                                                     creditor information systems to improve the lending
                                                     environment.
                                                     Adopt legislative and regulatory frameworks for the
                                                     microfinance sector.
                                                     Motivate coordination among the key stakeholders
                                                     in the microfinance sector including the lenders,
                                                     government, NGOs and supporting donors.
Productivity        To revitalize the agricultural   Facilitate the adoption of modern technologies,
and Growth in       sector, increase its             including fertilizers, improved seeds, supplementary
Agriculture         contribution to growth,          irrigation, etc.
                    exports and poverty              Promote the emergence of competitive markets for
                    reduction. The target            agricultural inputs.
                    would be a growth above
                                                     Facilitate access to markets and efficient value chains
                    5 percent.
                                                     by improving main and feeder transport infrastructure
                                                     and promote commodity trading and risk
                                                     management and the linkages of producers to modern
                                                     supply chains and higher value urban markets.
                                                     Adopt and implement a land policy that provides
                                                     farmers with formal and secure tenancy and land use
                                                     rights by pastoralists, enforce of land use regulations,
                                                     research and extension and pest control.
                                                     Efficient management of water by mobilization and
                                                     training of the WUA and rehabilitation of the primary
                                                     canals.
                                                     Provision of basic social infrastructure to support
                                                     small producers.
                                                     Implement the liberalization of the Gum Arabic
                                                     markets and provide support services and improve
                                                     public export inspection of all forms of Gum Arabic.
                                                     Enhance agricultural research and facilities and
                                                     ensure dissemination of research results; Training
                                                     multidisciplinary extension teams and providing
                                                     regular radio information on primary agricultural
                                                     markets to the agricultural communities.
                                                     Protect natural resources by protecting forests
                                                     promoting reforestation, the development of pastures
                                                     and rangelands and the establishment of vegetative
                                                     cover; strengthen efforts to halt and reverse
                                                     desertification.
                                                     Regulate the stocking rates in Sudan’s most
                                                     vulnerable grazing environments such as North Darfur
                                                     and North Kordofan to regenerate that pasture and
                                                     other forage vegetation.
                                                                                                   (continued)
92	                                                                         Annex 1  IPRSP Policy Matrix


      Area/Sector     Objectives and Targets                    Policy Measures/Programs
                                                   Facilitate livestock marketing by improving the
                                                   quality of stock routes and rehabilitating unloading
                                                   and loading for road transport associated with
                                                   movement of livestock and enforce regulation of
                                                   handling and transport to reduce death and weight
                                                   loss.
                                                   Establish new and upgrade old livestock raining
                                                   centers for multidisciplinary extension agents
                                                   and community animal health workers focused on
                                                   rangeland management, feed crop production, animal
                                                   health, animal production and hygiene in domestic
                                                   meat production.
Infrastructural     Rehabilitate and expand        Integrate transport needs into national development
Services            infrastructural services       priorities, growth and poverty reduction efforts;
                    to reduce the costs on         develop a network of rural feeder roads to link areas
                    production activities, open    of high agricultural potential and production to
                    up the country and reduce      markets.
                    isolation and stimulate        Rehabilitate Sudan Railways, particularly over those
                    economic activities in the     sections that travel across conflict areas.
                    lagging regions.
                                                   Rehabilitate and expand river transport, particularly
                                                   rehabilitation of vessels, ports, workshops and repair
                                                   facilities, and the expansion in the use of barges to the
                                                   South.
                                                   Expand private sector involvement in the transport
                                                   sector through further privatization of existing
                                                   activities and the use of PPPs to finance investments.
                                                   Put in place a regulatory framework for the operation
                                                   of mixed transport sector activities.
                                                   Continue to invest in electric power to increase the
                                                   supply to firms and reduce the costs, and steadily
                                                   increase the proportion of the population with access
                                                   to electric power.
                                                   Use PPPs to finance investments in the power sector.
                                                   Conduct environmental assessments for major
                                                   projects and take the results into account in project
                                                   design.
Natural             To meet the MDGs and           Reintegrate the displaced and refugee population in
Resources and the   ensure environmental           permanent and sustainable livelihoods.
Environment         development sustainability     Launch environmental awareness campaigns and
                    involving the reduction        enhance the roles and capacity for community in
                    of the loss of biodiversity    resource management.
                    and the population
                                                   Strict enforcement of environmental laws and
                    affected by environmental
                                                   supporting legislation. Enhance the capacity of
                    degradation, reduce the
                                                   both federal and state governments to monitor
                    risks of vulnerability to
                                                   and enforce land lease conditions on clearing and
                    environmental hazards
                                                   cultivation in areas subject to desertification.
                    such as floods, droughts,
                    desertification, and climate   Comprehensive land reform and security of land use/
                    change.                        title.
                                                   Pilot demonstration of soil and water harvesting
                                                   programs.
                                                   Promote private investment in forestry Gum Arabic
                                                   production.
                                                   Strengthen the institutions and technical capacity for
                                                   environmental and natural resources management
                                                   and enhance cross-sectoral coordination on
                                                   environmental issues.
                                                   Develop a strategy for protecting natural resources
                                                   and the environment, to be reflected in the full PRSP.
Annex 1  IPRSP Policy Matrix	                                                                              93


    Area/Sector        Objectives and Targets                    Policy Measures/Programs
                                      Preparation of the Full PRSP
The                 Open up space for               Identify and engage key stakeholders, raise their
Preparation and     participation of all segments   awareness, and enhance their capabilities and
Implementation of   of the population in the        commitment to contribute to PRSP process.
the Full PRSP       elaboration of strategies,      Identify and mobilize major stakeholders for effective
                    policies and programs for       participation in the planning of the PRSP priorities.
                    the country. This blue print
                                                    A broad assessment of the challenges, opportunities
                    (the PRSP) will guide the
                                                    and prospects and targets for growth, income
                    development of the country
                                                    and poverty reduction in the medium and long
                    during the period of the
                                                    term. In that context and working with the major
                    PRSP.
                                                    stakeholders, review and revise the long-term vision
                                                    for Sudan which will guide the medium-term PRSP.
                                                    Assemble and gather data and information necessary
                                                    for inputs to PRSP; analyze and disseminate such
                                                    inputs.
                                                    Undertake status reports of key sectors and
                                                    crosscutting areas and develop sector strategies.
Annex 2


Explanatory Note
on Pro-Poor Data




T
       he Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning follows Government Financial Statistics
       (GFS) in the budget classification. However there are a few apparent problems with the
       classification used by the Ministry and in the disaggregation of some of the public expen-
ditures components.

Regarding classification, although the majority of the programs and spending units are properly
classified under their subsectors and sectors, few are not. For example, the social programs are
classified under the Administrative and Social sector which includes activities that are not related
to social development and pro-poor expenditures like museums, tourism and religious affairs.
This classification also includes programs like technical education which should be under the
education subsector. Another subsector is the Sovereign sector which includes programs like
Gum Arabic Council that should be under the Agriculture sector. Drinking water organs are
classified under Energy and Mining sector. Environment institutions are under the Adminis-
trative and Social sector. To avoid misclassification, the data used in the report went below the
subsector level by going to the level of spending units and programs under each subsector and
corrections were made accordingly. These corrections were not major.

As for the issue of aggregation, it is limited to the multi sector projects under the state’s devel-
opment transfers by the Ministry of Finance. The expenditures under these funds, namely the
Reconstruction Funds of Eastern Sudan, Darfur and the two areas, are aggregated. These aggre-
gated expenditures include education, health water supply, and so on. Also UNICEF and UNFPA
programs expenditures in the state development budget are not disaggregated by projects or sec-
tors. Expenditures of the Reconstruction funds were disaggregated. Further analysis is needed to
improve the accuracy of disaggregation of these funds.

Localities expenditures of education, health and water supply are not disaggregated. In this
report and based on sample states, the wages and goods and services for the localities were disag-
gregated to basic education, health, social services and water supply.

By and large, all the data problems of a budget sectoral classification nature were resolved for the
purpose of this report. The few remaining problems of public expenditure data due to disaggre-
gation were resolved by informed assumptions. Therefore, the impact of public expenditures data
constraint on the pro-poor expenditures is limited. However, improvement is required to address
the above-mentioned data constraints to increase the accuracy of the pro-poor expenditures.
Particular attention is needed for states and localities public expenditure data.

                                                                                                 95
