                                           1




                              EDUCATION
PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEW
                              GUIDELINES

  Education Global Practice
2   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




            © 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
            1818 H Street NW
            Washington DC 20433
            Telephone: 202-473-1000
            Internet: www.worldbank.org




            This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
            and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of
            Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

            The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
            denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
            part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
            such boundaries.


            3JHIUTBOE1FSNJTTJPOT

            The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
            knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
            full attribution to this work is given.

            Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
            Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-
            mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                                                       i




TABLE OF CONTENTS

ii    ACRONYMS
iv PREFACE
v     USER’S GUIDE
1     PART I: CHECKLIST FOR EDUCATION PER STEPS
      2   Introduction
      3   Public Expenditure Review Steps
16 PART II: CHECKLIST FOR AN EDUCATION PER ANALYSIS
     18   Section 1: Background and Overview of the Education System
     20   Section 2: Overview of Education Financing and Spending
     25   Section 3: Financial Accountability
     30   Section 4: Adequacy and Sustainability
     34   Section 5: Efficiency and Effectiveness
     38   Section 6: Equity

41 TECHNICAL NOTES
85 PART III: EXAMPLES
206 NOTES
21 REFERENCES
ii   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             ACRONYMS

             ACS               Average Class Size               LGA     Local Government Authority
             AY                Academic Year                    LGU     Local Government Units
             BIA               Benefit Incidence Analysis       LLECE   Laboratorio Latinoamericano
             CBA               Cost Benefit Analysis                    de Evaluación de Calidad de la
                                                                        Educación, or Latin American
             CCT               Conditional Cash Transfer                Laboratory for Evaluating the
             CEA               Cost-Effectiveness Analysis              Quality of Education
             CGE               Computable General               LSMS    Living Standards
                               Equilibrium                              Measurement Study
             COFOG             Classification of Functions of   MAMS    Maquette for MDG
                               Government                               Simulations
             CSOs              Civil Society Organizations      MFM     Macroeconomics and Fiscal
             DD                Difference in Differences                Management
             DEA               Data Envelopment Analysis        MICS    Multiple Indicator Cluster
                                                                        Survey
             DHS               Demographic and Health
                               Survey                           MOF     Ministry of Finance
             ECD               Early Childhood Development      MTEF    Medium-term Expenditure
                                                                        Framework
             EFA               Education for All
                                                                NEA     National Education Accounts
             EMIS              Education Management
                               Information Systems              NER     Net Enrollment Rate
             EPSSim            Education Policy and Strategy    NGOs    Non-governmental
                               Simulation Model                         Organizations
             FTE               Full-time Equivalent             NSOs    National Statistical Offices
             GDP               Gross Domestic Product           OECD    Organisation for Economic Co-
                                                                        operation and Development
             GEM-Education     The General Equilibrium
                               Model for Education              PASEC   Programme d’Analyse des
                                                                        Systèmes Educatifs de la
             GER               Gross Enrollment Rate
                                                                        CONFEMEN (the CONFEMEN
             GNI               Gross National Income                    Programme for the Analysis of
             GNP               Gross National Product                   Educational Systems)
             GP                Global Practice                  PCF     Per Capita Financing
             HNPGP             Health, Nutrition, and           PEFA    Public Expenditure and
                               Population Global Practice               Financial Accountability
             IGR               Internally Generated Revenue     PER     Public Expenditure Review
             INESM             Inter-agency Network on          PETS    Public Expenditure Tracking
                               Education Simulation Models              Survey
             ISCED             International Standard           PFM     Public Financial Management
                               Classification of Education      PIAAC   Programme for the
             IT                Information Technology                   International Assessment of
                                                                        Adult Competencies
                                                                                    iii




PIRLS    Progress in International       TVET      Technical and Vocational
         Reading Literacy Study                    Education and Training
PISA     Program for International       UIS       UNESCO Institute of Statistics
         Student Assessment              UNESCO    United Nations Educational,
PPP      Purchasing Power Parity                   Scientific and Cultural
PTA      Parent-Teacher Association                Organization
PTCA     Parent-Teacher Community        WB-MAMS   World Bank’s Maquette for
         Association                               MDG Simulations
PTR      Pupil-Teacher Ratio             WDI       World Development
                                                   Indicators
QSDS     Quantitative Service Delivery
         Surveys                         VFM       Value for Money
RDD      Regression Discontinuity
         Design
SA       Social Assistance
SABER    Systems Approach for Better
         Education Results
SACMEQ   Southern Africa Consortium
         for Monitoring of Education
         Quality
SBM      School-based Management
SDGs     Sustainable Development
         Goals
SDI      Service Delivery Indicators
SERCE    Second Regional Comparative
         and Explanatory Study
SES      Socioeconomic Status
SNA      System of National Accounts
STEP     The STEP Skills Measurement
         Program
STR      Student-Teacher Ratio
SWAP     Sector-wide Approach
         Program
TERCE    Third Regional Comparative
         and Explanatory Study
TIMSS    Trends in International
         Mathematics and Science
         Study
iv   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             PREFACE

             Public expenditure reviews are one of the World Bank’s core diagnostic tools for informing various
             stakeholders about the state of education financing in a country. Such reviews assess the efficiency,
             effectiveness, and equity of expenditures on education and their adequacy and sustainability relative
             to the country’s educational goals. They review not only public spending, but also private and
             donor spending.

             Guidelines for public expenditure reviews in education establish content and quality standards for
             such reviews in the sector, using technical notes and examples to deepen the user’s understanding of
             how to meet these standards. The World Bank prepared the last public expenditure review guidance
             for education in 2004 and revised it in 2009 as part of the Human Development sector-wide initiative.
             The document included a cross-sectoral Core Guidance and a sector-specific Guidance for each
             sector. This Guidance covers both cross-sectoral and education sector-specific issues in one volume.

             The new Guidelines update the contents of the earlier guidelines to reflect recent developments in
             education financing and respond to demands for more hands-on advice, as follows: (i) they adopt
             the World Bank’s new initiative—Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) School
             Finance Framework—as the basis for the analytical dimensions; (ii) they use a decision-tree approach,
             providing step-by-step guidance for conducting public expenditure reviews under different context,
             scopes, and types of analytical tools; (iii) they analyze policy recommendations in completed public
             expenditure reviews, assessing why each is good or weak; (iv) they introduce a new analytical tool,
             BOOST, which converts government budget data into a useful format, makes analysis relatively
             easy, and contributes to the development of the comprehensive education-finance data accounts
             called National Education Accounts; (v) they enhance discussions of governance and public financial
             management issues that partly determine effective spending; (vi) they strengthen technical notes
             by including more details on data sources and definitions of concepts and variables; and (vii) they
             update good analytical examples from completed public expenditure reviews, categorized by topic.

             Sachiko Kataoka led a team under the guidance of Luis Benveniste (Director, Education Global
             Practice) to develop the new guidelines. The team included Sue Berryman, Yulia Makarova, and Aliya
             Bigarinova, and also relied on a number of colleagues who provided insightful comments throughout
             the process. Specifically, the team is grateful to: Dina Abu-Ghaida, Samer Al-Samarrai, Mohammed
             Audah, William Dorotinsky, Kebede Feda, Katia Marina Herrera Sosa, Margo Hoftijzer, Jennifer Klein,
             Shinsaku Nomura, Anna Olefir, Shawn Powers, Holy Tiana Rame, Furqan Saleem, Lars Sondergaard, and
             Ryoko Tomita Wilcox. The team also would like to thank Husein Abdul-Hamid, Melissa Adelman, Jung-
             Hwan Choi, Jennifer Klein, Laura Gregory, and Kirsten Majgaard for helping to compile recent public
             expenditure reviews to develop a database.
                                                                                                             v




USER’S GUIDE

This guidance note applies to all countries, regardless of their circumstances. It seeks to remind the
analyst of the main features that are normally included in an education public expenditure review
(PER). However, analysts should not use it as a checklist to which they must rigidly adhere. Every
review must be selective in what it covers, based on such factors as what is needed for the country
dialogue; what is already known and available elsewhere; and what is able to be accomplished given
constraints of time, data, and funding. Analysts may omit topics, but with a justification in mind.
In addition to agreeing in the concept note on the planned topic coverage, it is useful to convey
to the reader of the full report the reasons for omitting any major themes. Similarly, the depth of
treatment of any included topic will need to be considered, agreed upon, and explained. Conditions
such as fragility, conflict, or violence in the country under review could affect whether a PER can be
conducted at all. Such factors can also affect the quality of the data needed to conduct a review, as
well as the ability of the country to implement any recommendations that the review suggests.

CHECKLISTS

Part I of the Guidelines provides a checklist for steps, from preparation to dissemination, of an
education PER, including cross-sectoral questions, such as the overall budget and potential tradeoffs
between social and other sectors. The PER team will first go through a decision tree to determine
the scope, objectives, analytical tools, and policy questions for a particular review. The next steps will
probably vary for different circumstances.

Part II provides a checklist for an analysis to be completed as part of an education PER, organized by
six key questions:1

       1. Who finances education and how are funds channeled?
       2. How much does the government spend and on what?
       3. Is the public financial management system set up to enhance financial accountability?
       4. Relative to the government’s policies and standards, how much is needed now
          (adequacy), and what can be afforded in the medium and long term (sustainability)?
       5. Are public resources being used efficiently and effectively?
       6. Does public spending promote equity?
vi   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             To keep the checklists as skeletal as possible, three different types of links are used to let review
             teams explore a topic in more depth. Two types of links are internal to this document. They take
             the analyst to in-depth technical notes and examples of good treatments of a PER topic, with red
             for Technical Notes and blue for Examples. The third type of link, in purple, signals a hyperlink
             to an external resource. Users of these Guidelines may also consult Solutions Notes, which
             provide concrete solutions for specific education financing issues, to help them frame good policy
             recommendations. These Notes will be made available at http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/
             education. Examples and Solutions Notes will be regularly updated.

                             Technical Note: A Technical Note elaborates on a concept or provides detailed
                             guidance on analytic methods, indicators, and sources relevant to the topic.

                             Example: An example shows an especially good treatment of a topic. It often
                             includes the description of analytic methods used and other guidance.
                             Examples are taken from recent PERs and will be updated as more good case
                             studies become available.

             If the analyst is working from an electronic version of these Guidelines, clicking on a color-coded
             oval that appears next to a topic in the checklist will take the reader to the material connected to
             that link. For hard-copy versions of the Guidelines, all Technical Notes germane to Part I and Part II
             appear at the end of Part II in numerical sequence. Part III consists of the Examples.
PART I:
CHECKLIST FOR
EDUCATION PER STEPS
2   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




            Introduction

            Why is education ﬁnance important?

            All education systems rely on financing to function. Education finance systems pay for
            the inputs required to implement education policies, such as teachers, school buildings, and
            learning materials. Availability of financial resources does not guarantee a quality education, but
            a quality education is impossible to achieve without adequate resources. Some uses of education
            expenditures can make a marked difference in learning, particularly in the cases of inputs that
            directly benefit students or resources that compensate for challenges arising from low-income
            settings. The same money can be wasted if it is allocated to input factors that only marginally
            affect learning or if policymakers fail to consider the conditions that must be met for factors to
            translate into learning gains.

            Governments are under increasing pressure to use education resources efficiently, but
            often lack guidance on the optimal ways to invest and manage their school finance
            systems. Research findings have shown that learning outcomes are not strongly related to
            spending levels (except in cases where education budget is very small), suggesting that the way
            money is spent—and not simply how much is spent—matters in education finance.

            Meeting the World Bank’s twin goals of poverty reduction and shared prosperity in
            the education sector implies the need to use country and donor resources effectively,
            efficiently, and equitably. A sound PER assesses how resources are used relative to these goals.
            In Part II, Sections 5 (Effectiveness and Efficiency) and 6 (Equity) are especially germane to these
            analytic standards.
                                                                                                    3




Public Expenditure Review Steps

This section provides guidance on steps involved in conducting a PER, from the preparation
to dissemination of results, as summarized in Figure 1. It highlights issues common to such
reviews, regardless of the sector, and addresses shared considerations and such cross-sectoral
questions as the overall budget and potential tradeoffs between social and other sectors.2

Figure 1: Public expenditure review steps


   1        STEP 1: Understanding the context and motivation

            Understand the country context and motivation of the PER. See Figure 2 for seven
            possible scenarios which may direct the PER team to a particular path.

   2       STEP 2: Deﬁning the scope and objectives

           Review key policy documents such as the education strategy, sector analysis, and
           latest PER recommendations to define the possible scope, objectives, and policy
           questions for the review. Agree on them with the client.

   3       STEP 3: Securing access to data and information

           Identify available financing and non-financing datasets as well as policy and legal
           documents. Depending on data availability, the scope may need to be modified.

   4       STEP 4: Analyzing data and information

           Assess the country’s education finance system, financial accountability, adequacy and
           sustainability, efficiency and effectiveness, and equity of education financing.
           PART II will discuss the analysis in depth.

   5       STEP 5: Validating key ﬁndings and policy recommendations

           Discuss and validate key findings and policy recommendations with the client, possibly
           holding separate sessions for technical Ministry of Finance (MOF) and Ministry of
           Education (MOE) staff and for MOF and MOE policymakers. Disseminate the final report
           to various stakeholders.
4   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




            STEP 1: Understanding the context and motivation

            The very first step is to understand the country context and motivation of the public
            expenditure review. Figure 2 suggests seven possible scenarios under which the review could be
            conducted. The scope, objectives, and key questions may vary widely, depending on the scenario.

            Figure 2: Seven scenarios for country context and motivation


                                    What are the country context and motivation?

                       1. (Re)new                                                            7. Capacity
                      engagement                                                               building


                                 2. Emergency                                   6. Governance
                                    support                                       challenges


                                              3. Project              5. Fiscal
                                             preparation            ustainability


                                                      4. Eﬃciency gains


            Scenario (1): (Re)new engagement. We have not been engaged in the education sector of the
            country for a long time or have never been engaged, and need to (re)gain our knowledge about its
            education financing to renew or initiate our engagement.
            • When was the last education public expenditure review conducted for the country?
            • If a review has not been conducted in the last five years, does other sector analytical work exist that
               can inform you about key issues to be addressed?
            • Can those available documents give you a good understanding of key challenges to be addressed?
               • These questions affect the decisions on scope and objectives. To explore key issues, focus on
                    all six sections of the guidelines.

            Scenario (2): Emergency support. The country has recently experienced a crisis (natural, political, or
            economic), and the Bank needs to assess quickly what kind of financial support the government needs.
            • What are the major funding items that need urgent support? Possibilities might include repair of
               damaged schools to restore access, payment of teacher salaries to avoid teacher absenteeism, and
               financing of cash transfers or school meals to avoid dropouts.
            • Can the Bank, in collaboration with other development partners, establish appropriate funding
               mechanisms?
               • Under a crisis situation, the Reference Guide on External Education Financing, published
                   by Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies (INEE), may be more suitable than
                   these Guidelines.
                                                                                                               5




Scenario (3): Project preparation. We want to conduct a public expenditure review to inform the
preparation of a new education project.
• Has the subsector for the new project already been decided?
    • If yes, the review should focus on the chosen subsector, with a thorough examination of six
        key questions for the subsector.
    • If no, the review should analyze existing key documents and overall education spending,
        examine subsectoral allocations, and identify education finance policy issues to be addressed,
        by going through all six sections.

Scenario (4): Efficiency gains. The government is facing budgetary constraints and has asked the
Bank to analyze public expenditures on education to find fiscal space.3
• Does the government (Ministry of Finance) have a budget-reduction target for the education
   sector? How imminent is such a cut?
   • In the short term, there is probably little that the Ministry of Education can do besides cutting
         capital and non-salary, recurrent spending because any reductions in personnel costs usually
         must be phased in.
   • In the medium term, the public expenditure review should explore potential savings across
         the entire sector, including rationalizing human resources. At the same time, the review may
         play a role in defending the education budget if an analysis finds little room for efficiency gains
         without harming access and quality. Focus on Section 5: Efficiency and Effectiveness.

Scenario (5): Fiscal sustainability. The government plans costly reforms, such as an extension of
general education, and needs to know the capital and recurrent cost implications of the plans, as well
as their fiscal sustainability and equity implications.
• A simulation analysis would be essential to inform the government about the feasibility of such a plan
     • Focus on Section 4: Adequacy and Sustainability and Section 6: Equity.

Scenario (6): Governance challenges. The government is concerned that public funding is not
reaching schools and wants to identify possible issues with public-finance management.
• What are major spending problems?
    • It is likely that certain public financial management (PFM) weaknesses are underlying causes of
        the spending problems. Focus on Section 3: Fiscal Accountability.
    • Also consider other analytical instruments such as Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS)
        and Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys (QSDS), provided that there is sufficient budget to
        conduct them. Go to5echnical Note 12: Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS),
        Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys (QSDS), and Service Delivery Indicators (SDI)

Scenario (7): Capacity building. The government would like to strengthen its analytical capacity and
wants the Bank to help it conduct a PER.
• In this case, the main objective is to support the government. The client’s engagement and ownership
   are as important as the final output. This will require more time and budget for close communication
   with the client.
6   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




            STEP 2: Deﬁning the scope and objectives

            There are many factors to consider when defining the scope and objectives of an education
            PER. Such a review is primarily concerned with public revenues and expenditures as expressions of
            public policy and public involvement in the economy. A public expenditure review also examines
            private spending. Rarely can public resources meet all financial needs, and private spending may
            play a major role in providing educational services. Many kinds of analyses can be conducted in a
            public expenditure review, but obviously, such analyses must be aligned with the project’s budget,
            time frame, and data availability, as well as its overall focus and goals. The team needs to:

            •   Review key relevant documents such as the education strategy, sector analyses, and
                recommendations of the last public expenditure review, to identify education finance policy issues
                to be addressed.

            •   Decide the subsector focus. The review can have broad coverage (all subsectors, possibly even
                including adult education) or narrow coverage (a single subsector). State your focus clearly, why
                you decided on it, what has been excluded, why certain issues or subsectors have been excluded,
                and whether or how these exclusions might affect the due diligence purpose of the review. Broad,
                unfocused public expenditure reviews will be less effective than sharply focused ones.

            •   Place education spending within a macro context. Confer with the Bank’s country economist—
                and, as needed, with the Ministry of Finance (MOF)—about the country’s macroeconomic
                situation and its implications for education budgets downstream.

            •   Make sure that your education public expenditure reviewif part of a multisectoral
                (comprehensive) PERfits the purposes of the comprehensive PER, but still respects your
                main objectives. In the multisectoral case, where several sector-specific reviews feed into a
                comprehensive PER, the concept note for the overall review should clarify the objectives of the
                overall PER and the expectations for each of the sector-specific reviews. Although the expectations
                for the sector-specific reviews are often poorly defined, be sure to define the focus of the
                education PER and then clear it with the team leader for the comprehensive exercise.

            •   Work to ensure that a comprehensive public expenditure review is more than the sum of its parts.
                Typically, each sector does its analysis in isolation, and the team leader then combines all sector-
                specific reviews into one document, including three to five recommendations per sector. By itself,
                the education review team cannot create incentives for members of comprehensive PER teams to
                realize the potential synergies within the context of a comprehensive public expenditure review.
                However, the leader of the education review can at least ask the leaders of the comprehensive
                review and of the other sector-specific reviews how the overall team might benefit from this
                specific, comprehensive public expenditure review.
                                                                                                           7




•   Check that the time and budget allocated to you for the education review are in line with
    yourintended scope and its data requirements. Ultimately, the budget and time frame
    available toprepare and undertake a PER will be decisive in specifying its scope and in setting
    priorities. Beaware that resources may be needed for the following:

    ▷ Missions to assemble data and information (travel costs and staff days).
    ▷ Extensive data recoding and cleaning or new data collection. The early childhood
      EFWFMPQNFOU
                    	&$%
UFDIOJDBMBOEWPDBUJPOBMFEVDBUJPOBOEUSBJOJOH	57&5
and higher
      education subsectors PGUFOMBDLEBUBSFRVJSFEUPDPOEVDUBSFWJFX*GUIFTDPQFPGUIF
      SFWJFXJODMVEFTBOZPGUIFTFTVCTFDUPSTUIFUFBNNBZOFFEUPDPMMFDUOFXEBUB
    ▷%BZT required to analyze data, write the draft public expenditure review, and revise it after
      peer reviews.
    ▷.JTTJPOT to discuss results and disseminate them more broadly, such as running a workTIPQ
      for stakeholders (travel costs and limited staff days).
    ▷Follow-up policy discussions.

•   Once you predefine the scope, discuss it with the key counterparts (typically, the Ministries of
    Education and Finance) and agree on the scope, objectives, and policy questions for the review
    during the first mission. Based on the discussion with counterparts, you may need to modify the
    scope or objectives. This process will help enhance the client’s ownership of the report and bolster
    the chances that findings and policy recommendations will be accepted and implemented. The
    following meetings may prove helpful:

    ▷ Connect with high-level policymakers (Ministers of Education and of Finance, their Deputy
      Ministers, or equivalent) to explain the objectives of this work and potential benefits to
      them, and to obtain their approval for this work. Note that since the Ministry of Finance is
      the primary client for a PER, the Ministry of Education may know little or nothing about
      this work. Thus, it is essential to obtain education policymakers’ approval before asking
      their staff to compile and provide data for the project.
    ▷ After you get the decision maker’s go-ahead, set up meetings with (i) the Education
      Management Information System (EMIS) team, finance or accounting team, assessments
      team, and any other unit that has data that you need; and (ii) heads of departments over
      seeing the levels or topics of education that you plan to analyze to ask them what they
      see as the main challenges in their respective areas (e.g., early childhood development,
      secondary education, or teacher policy).
    ▷ Set up meetings and reach out to key players outside the Ministry to get a broader
      perspective. Try to visit at least a few schools (ideally, ones different enough to give you a
      broad picture of the system, e.g., urban and rural, primary and secondary, public and
      private, wealthy and poor). These school visits can be combined with conversations with
      local officials who oversee schools at the subnational level, as well as with principals,
      teachers, and even parents. If you think teacher unions or civil society organizations (CSOs)
      might offer a useful perspective, ask to meet with them as well.
8   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




            STEP 3: Securing access to data and information

            The nature and number of subsectors to be analyzed within the scope of the review helps to
            determine the datasets and documents that the PER team will need; data availability, in turn,
            affects decisions on the final scope of the project. Once there is an overall agreement on the
            scope, the team needs to secure access to reliable data. Good-quality data are accurate, timely, and
            relevant for decision-making.5 Be clear ahead of time about data sources, their availability, and their
            consistency, because they can constrain the scope of the report and its quality. When the education
            review is part of a comprehensive public expenditure review, discuss with the overall team leader how
            to maximize efficiencies, such as hiring a shared consultant or research assistant for data collection and
            analysis. Also determine if the team conducting the macro analysis for a comprehensive review will
            create a government-budget database that the education review team can use (e.g., BOOST). A public
            expenditure and financial accountability (PEFA) country report might be available, which could prove
            useful for an assessment of the Public Financial Management (PFM) system relevant to education. In
            addition, examine the websites of the country’s Ministries of Finance and Education and national statistics
            agency. These websites often post significant amounts of data, or, at the least, alert you to the existence of
            databases to which you can request access.

            Public expenditure reviews use various types of data. Financial data usually come from the Ministry of
            Finance and sometimes from the Ministry of Education’s budget department. If financing is decentralized
            for any subsectors within the scope of the review, financing data may be available by subnational unit
            at the national-level Ministry of Finance. In other cases, you may need to sample subnational units
            to assemble the needed data. If your scope includes autonomous institutions, such as universities or
            technical and vocational schools, you will probably have to obtain financing and expenditure data
            from the institutions themselves. Private and household contributions may be recorded separately,
            or estimated based on household survey data. Non-financial data, such as the numbers of students,
            teachers, schools, or classes, usually come from the education management information systems (EMIS)
            or equivalent, managed by the Ministry of Education. Detailed student assessment data are useful for
            measuring spending against performance. Whether for financial or non-financial data, you should get
            both aggregate data at the national level and data as disaggregated as possible at the school or provider
            level, or at least at the locality or municipality level, for the level(s) of education on which you plan to focus
            your analysis. In sum, public expenditure reviews use the following six types of data (see Figure 3). The
            Technical Notes for these six types of data describe common sources for each type and assess the usual
            quality of each:
                                                                                                                    9




Figure 3: Six types of data that can be used for PER analysis

    Government’s oﬃcial                                                        Cross-national data
    documents (policies, laws,                                                 (international j
    and regulations)                                                           assessment, cross-national
                                                                               statistical databases)


    Country system-level data                                                  Research reports
                                                      PER
    (budget and sectoral data)                                                 (donor reports, academic
                                                    analysis                   research papers)



    National surveys (census,                                                  New data collection
    household surveys)


          • Government’s official documents, such as policies, laws, and regulations governing inputs to,
             and financial arrangements for, the learning process (seeTechnical Note 1).
          • Country system-level data (e.g., BOOST, EMIS, national assessments; seeTechnical Note 2).
          • /BUJPOBMsurveys such as census and household surveys (see Technical Note 3).
          • Cross-national data such as international learning assessment and cross-national statistical
             databases (see      Technical Note 4).
          • Research reports (see      Technical Note 5).
          • New data collection (see       Technical Note 6).

The team also needs data for comparisons. Many indicators, especially various measures of spending
on education, do not carry an intrinsic absolute value. We do not know, for example, what “adequate” 
levels of spending on education would be without situating the PER country within the range of values
associated with other countries. Hence, it is essential that a public expenditure review also analyzes the
following:
• Statistical comparisons with other countries in the same region or at similar income levels, and
     with other countries that serve as aspiration goals for the country, such as those in the
     Organisation or Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). Comparisons can be affected
     by demography (cohort sizes for school-age individuals), participation rates by subsector, unit
     costs by subsector, and cross-country differences in the structures of education systems.6
     Obviously, financing requirements for small school-age cohorts or cohorts with low enrollment
     rates are less than those for large cohorts or cohorts with high enrollment rates (especially in the
     more costly subsectors). These comparisons are descriptive by nature and provide neither
     a diagnosis nor an explanation. Nevertheless, comparisons can show that a country performs
     significantly worse (or better) than “expected.” Such comparisons can help set some “reasonable”
     quantitative targets for policymakers and even provide an incentive to reach them.
          Technical Note 4: Cross-national data

•     Trend data that allow comparisons over time. These are essential for gauging how quickly the
      country may be reaching its target. If improvements are slow in coming, trend data can provoke a
      deeper exploration into the reasons for the lagging performance.
10   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             STEP 4: Analyzing data and information
             These Guidelines provide guidance on how to conduct a public expenditure review to answer
             the following six key questions:




             Key Questions

             1. Who finances education and how are funds channeled?
             2. How much does the government spend and on what?
             3. Is the public financial management system set up to enhance financial accountability?
             4. Relative to the government’s policies and standards, how much is needed now (adequacy), and
                what can be afforded in the medium and long term (sustainability)?
             5. Are public resources being used efficiently and effectively?
             6. Does public spending promote equity?



             The key concepts of each dimension of education finance are briefly described below and discussed
             in more detail in Part II.

             ▶    Questions 1–2: The financing system is the foundation for a country’s public investment in education.
                  These questions ask how the education budget is financed, who spends it, and how it is spent.

             ▶    Question 3: Financial accountability in terms of education finance sheds lights on public
                  financial management (PFM) systems, and assesses whether such systems are set up in such a way
                  that government policies get implemented as intended and achieve their objectives.

             ▶    Question 4: Adequacy of education finance responds to the question of “How much is enough
                  now?”, given the government’s policies and standards. Sustainability of education finance assesses
                  whether planned spending levels on education are affordable in the longer term, given the
                  country’s macroeconomic prospects, sector policies, and demography.

             ▶    Question 5: Efficiency and effectiveness in education finance require that systems invest in those
                  inputs with the largest marginal returns, as measured through outputs and outcomes relative to
                  costs, given a country’s particular stage of development.

             ▶    Question 6: Equity in educational opportunity is a key goal of public education systems.
                  It measures the availability of a quality education to all students, regardless of background.
                                                                                                     11




STEP 5: Validating key ﬁndings and policy recommendations

You want the public expenditure review to impact the client’s policies. Impact usually
increases if the review team respects certain principles.

•   Make evidence-based policy recommendations with an explicit link between the analysis and
    findings and recommendations. Avoid:
     ▷ Findings and recommendations that do not follow from the analysis
     ▷ Analyses that do not lead to any findings or recommendations

•   Prioritize your recommendations. Policymakers will not act on a laundry list of
    recommendations. Identify a limited number of key issues—three to five per sector—where
    getting some traction is most critical. “Nesting” your recommendations in hierarchies can
    be helpful. The main recommendation (e.g., improve equity of access) can be aimed at
    policymakers, with the technical specifics aimed at technocrats (e.g., change the balance
    between programs A and B; improve program C by taking actions 1, 2, and 3). Phasing—short-,
    medium- and long-term—is another way to “chunk” recommendations into digestible form.

•   Make the conclusions and recommendations appropriately specific, not bland and general.
    Place recommendations in a feasible social, political, and administrative context. The World
    Bank’s public expenditure reviews have a tendency to preach the good and the moral without
    an appreciation of the realistic and feasible. Can each recommendation be made operational
    and actionable for the government? If possible, estimate the fiscal costs of any major reforms
    proposed. What political costs and implementation barriers are involved in each?

•   Keep report recommendations short and accessible. It may be difficult to do this when laying
    out the analytical grounds for recommendations in a report that covers multiple sectors. One
    potential way to tackle this issue is to include a main report and a second volume with the
    technical background papers.

•   Discuss the draft of the main findings and policy recommendations with the client to
    validate the findings and assess the feasibility of policy recommendations. While the review
    should present critical observations supported by analytical evidence, it also needs to be
    acceptable to the government to boost the likelihood of policymakers implementing the
    recommendations.

•   Disseminate the final report to various stakeholders in the education community of the
    country, ideally through an in-country workshop.

It is not easy to meet these criteria for good policy recommendations. Good examples
of policy recommendations that meet most of the criteria (being tied to findings, prioritized,
concrete, realistic, feasible, and sometimes costed) can be found in    Example 1: Policy
SFDPNNFOEBUJPOT. Tables 1 and 2 show brief examples and assessments of recommendations
from the universe of completed PERs, with Table 1 focused on relatively useful ones and Table 2 on
less useful ones.
12   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Table 1: Are these recommendations useful? Probably.


                            Recommendation                                        Why is this useful?

               With respect to developing an equalization              The recommendation clearly states the problem
               mechanism, creative solutions are needed to             and describes three concrete options for solving
               ensure adequate financing for schools with low          it. These options vary in their political economy
               capacity to raise private funds. Although public        and budget implications, giving the Government
               funds are distributed in a generally progressive        some flexibility in trading off between fiscal and
               manner, private fees raised by schools flow             political costs.
               overwhelmingly toward the more well-resourced
               institutions. Given the overwhelming share of
               private financing for primary and secondary
               education, an equalization mechanism is clearly
               needed to counteract the regressive nature of
               current funding flows. A wealth of international
               evidence exists on such mechanisms. One option
               could be to examine the current BSP program and
               evaluate whether it can be repurposed to allow
               a small share of school-raised funds to flow from
               more affluent schools to less affluent ones (within
               a district or across neighboring districts). A second
               option could be to revive the defunct Equalization
               Grant that was previously used to provide
               additional resources to underfunded schools.
               A third option could be to increase the relative
               funding coefficients for P3 and S3 schools under
               the Per Capita Grant. One approach currently
               being considered by the MoE is to introduce a new
               Building Levy, which would collect a small amount
               from each SDC budget into a central pool of funds,
               which would then be used to equalize resources
               among schools without increasing the fees
               charged to households. Regardless of the sources
               of funds—whether public or private—the MoE
               needs to ensure that all of the country’s schools
               have at least a basic minimum level of resources
               available to them to provide a quality education.
                                                                                                                            13




                 Recommendation                                                Why is this useful?

  Continue effort to right-size the school network                 This review was done in response to a
  and teaching force. A simple estimation suggests                 request by the country’s Ministry of Finance to
  that if the sector could attain student-teacher                  the Bank for sequenced and targeted advice,
  ratios comparable to the OECD countries over                     during a period of austerity, on fiscal reform
  the medium term, it could save approximately                     options across priority budget areas, including
  11 percent of the education budget, or around                    education. The recommendation shows the cost
  0.6 percent of GDP per annum, in the wage bill                   to the country of its low student-teacher ratios. It
  alone. Additional savings could be achieved by                   suggests a practical way to start the process of
  consolidating the school network (including                      increasing student-teacher ratios. It shows the
  within-schools consolidation of classes). As an                  savings from such a step, and flags the politically
  initial step towards school size optimization, the               attractive possibility that some of these savings
  sector could increase the student-teacher ratio in               could be used to raise the salaries of the
  urban schools to the average OECD level, which,                  remaining teachers. It does not discuss options for
  according to Ministry of Education estimates, could              shrinking the teaching force (e.g., hiring freeze vs.
  result in savings in amount of 0.03 percent of GDP.              early retirement options) or lay out how long it
  These savings could be used to upgrade facilities,               would take each alternative to achieve the
  raise teacher salaries, invest in teacher qualification          cost savings sought.
  and procure other learning equipment, such
  as computers.


  Increase the allocation to the education sector                  This recommendation goes to one of the root
  budget. Many of the key issues facing the education              causes behind the multiple problems besieging
  sector stem directly and indirectly from underfunding            the sector.       Companion recommendations
  of the education budget. The education budget as a               discuss concrete means by which the sector
  share of GDP stands at about 1.8 percent executed                could efficiently ramp up inputs should the sector
  (or 2.3 percent allocated), which is below the                   be better funded. This recommendation does not
  recommended GPE levels as well as the SSA average                discuss how the sector budget could be
  (4.7 percent). Our estimations show that an increase             increased because the country has the required
  to 4.7 percent (in line with SSA average) would be               resources. The problem in this case is political will.
  sufficient to help the sector address three key issues:
  (i) it would cover the estimated cost of absorbing
  the out-of-school children into the education sector,
  (ii) it would allow the full onboarding of all teachers
  who are currently not in the system, and (iii) it would
  allow an additional reduction in fees and other costs
  passed on to households that now operate as barriers
  to schooling for children from poor households. It is
  imperative that the government effectively prioritizes
  the education sector in its budget allocation process
  as outlined in the MTEF. In order to do so, the
  spending on the education sector as a share of
  the total spending should also be revised upwards,
  closer to the recommended 20 percent, almost
  doubling the current allocation share.


Sources: Cited from unspecified, but actual, public expenditure reviews.
14   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Table 2: Are these recommendations useful? Probably not.


                           Recommendation                                       Why is this not useful?

               Expand pre-school education, while carefully            This recommendation is not connected to the
               considering the efficiency and effectiveness of         problem that it addresses. It gives no sense of the
               different models.                                       rate at which the subsector could feasibly expand.
                                                                       It fails to provide any specifics on what constitutes
                                                                       an attractive preschool model, or any data to
                                                                       support its recommendation to expand preschool
                                                                       education, such as the relative cost-effectiveness of
                                                                       such programs.



               Unlike comparators, the sector allocates a relatively   This recommendation is vague. What does
               higher share of its total spending on education to      “analysis of impact of spending” mean? Given
               post-secondary education. After a more detailed         the political costs, what are realistic options
               analysis of the impact of spending at post-             for expanding cost-sharing arrangements? Is
               secondary level, consider introducing cost-sharing      there any reason to think that the sector can
               arrangements at this level so that public spending      retain savings at the post-secondary level in
               can be reallocated to lower levels.                     order to reallocate them to lower levels?



               Reform the curriculum to strengthen foundational        This recommendation is not tied to the problems
               skills at primary level and increase actual hours       that it addresses. It remains unclear whether
               of instruction.                                         the instructional time issue is due to low hours
                                                                       as specified by policy or a gap between policy
                                                                       and provision. The recommendation gives no
                                                                       guidance on fruitful curricular-reform options.
                                                                       If policy changes are needed to address the
                                                                       instructional-time problem, it gives no guidance
                                                                       on the potential costs of increasing instructional
                                                                       time, or advice on how to allocate the additional
                                                                       instructional time among subjects. If the problem
                                                                       is due to a gap between policy and provision, the
                                                                       recommendation fails to propose any incentives or
                                                                       penalties that might be used to close the gap.
                                                                                                                         15




                 Recommendation                                             Why is this not useful?

  Better targeting of vulnerable schools and pupils                This recommendation, although tied to a problem,
  would contribute to reducing inequity in education               is also vague. Are some “additional resources” more
  outcomes. In a context of high inequality in learning            important than others? Does “better targeting”
  achievements, as evidenced by the PISA results,                  indicate that there are now programs in place
  a revised targeting approach seems necessary                     focused on vulnerable schools and pupils, but that
  to ensure that vulnerable pupils and schools                     these resources have been misdirected in some
  are provided with additional resources that can                  way? If so, where are the leakages, and how should
  contribute to improving their learning outcomes.                 they be reduced? If there are no such programs,
  Such targeting would need to be well coordinated                 what options might be pursued?
  with other measures to support vulnerable
  households, which are often managed outside
  of the Ministry.


  Address early dropouts and gender disparity                      This recommendation flags that early dropouts and
  through the development of supply and demand-                    gender gaps are problems whose solution requires
  side interventions.                                              a two-pronged supply-and-demand approach.  It
                                                                   gives no guidance on the types of approaches or
                                                                   tradeoffs among them.

Sources: Cited from unspecified, but actual, public expenditure reviews.
PART II:
CHECKLIST FOR AN
EDUCATION PER
ANALYSIS
                                                                                                       17




Part II takes users through what a comprehensive public expenditure review of the education
sector should examine. There is no standard outline for such reviews. A review may focus on
selected topics or specific subsections, depending on the client’s priorities, the World Bank’s due
diligence concerns, the deadline for completing the PER, and budget. In other words, these
Guidelines address the six key questions discussed in Part I in a comprehensive manner, but most
public expenditure reviews may cover only some of these topics and subsectors.

Part II is structured to respond to the six questions in order. Section 1 starts with background
and an overview of the education system. Section 2 discusses an overview of education financing
and spending (Questions 1–2). Sections 1 and 2 are descriptive and provide a broad picture of
the education finance system. Section 3 reviews financial accountability mechanisms qualitatively
(Question 3). Sections 4–6 are heavily analytical and examine three principles of education finance:
adequacy and sustainability, efficiency and effectiveness, and equity (Questions 4–6).



Key Questions
1. Who finances education and how are funds channeled?
2. How much does the government spend and on what?
3. Is the public financial management system set up to enhance financial accountability?
4. Relative to the government’s policies and standards, how much is needed now (adequacy),
   and what can be afforded in the medium and long term (sustainability)?
5. Are public resources being used efficiently and effectively?
6. Does public spending promote equity?
18   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Section           Background and Overview of the
                    1              Education System

             Background

             A background section should provide the sectoral background information as well as the
             objectives of the public expenditure review.

             •   Sectoral background. Provide a brief summary of sector characteristics relevant to the review.
                 This section should be concise and focused on information relevant to the review.

             •   Major progress and remaining challenges since the last public expenditure review.
                 Acknowledge the client’s reform efforts and achievements, identify why some recommendations
                 have not been implemented, and flag persistent challenges.

             •   Objectives and scope of this review. Define the review’s objectives and scope, including the key
                 policy questions that it addresses. Give the reasons for excluding any important subsectors or topics,
                 and assess how these exclusions might affect a comprehensive analysis of the sector’sfinancing.

            •    Data sources and analytic methods. Describe data sources (see          Technical Notes 1–6) and
                 analytic methods. This section should also address any challenges related to data availability and
                 quality.    Example 2: Data sources


             Overview of the education system
             An overview of the education system should be presented at the outset to provide basic
             information about the system and to set the context.

             •   A diagram of the structure of the country’s education system helps the review team and readers of
                 the completed review understand how it is organized.

                  ▷ Structure. Levels of education by grade and official ages for each grade and level.
                     What are the government’s policies on multiple shifts and multi-grade?

                  ▷ Flows (pathways) among levels and types of education. Allowable pathways usually
                     have implications for equity, efficiency, and learning outcomes. For example, students
                     may not be allowed to enter university from an upper-secondary vocational
                     education program.

                  ▷ Type of schools. What types of education providers manage schools? Schools include
                     public, private (financially dependent on the government), private (privately managed
                     without government financing), and religious. Private providers can include nonprofit
                     entities such as non-governmental organizations, or for-profit groups.
                                                                                                                 19




•   Does the education system require private school students to take the same examinations as
    public school students? How bureaucratically easy or difficult is it for private providers to go into
    business? Does the state have policies to let private providers access capital more easily?

•   The overview should provide basic educational statistics (see   Technical Note 7: Definitions
    and notes on indicators). Internationally comparable indicators are available in World Bank
    EdStats (see    Technical Note 4: Cross-national data). Relevant statistics include:

    ▷ Number of schools by level, location, and type
    ▷ Number of students in school by level, gender, school location, and school type
    ▷ Net enrollment rate (NER) by level; if this rate is not available, gross enrollment rate (GER) by level
    ▷ Number of out-of-school children
    ▷ Dropout rate by grade
    ▷ Repetition rate by grade
20   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Section             Overview of Education Financing
                2                and Spending

             Key Question 1: Who ﬁnances education and how are funds channeled?

             Education funds can come from government or non-governmental and external sources, and
             can be channeled through a variety of agents to a broad range of education providers. It is
             essential to review overall education spending by financing sources, which may include not only
             public funding, but also private and donor funding. Public expenditure reviews traditionally have not
             examined the revenue side of the education budget, but it is important to explore how countries
             raise revenues to finance education. Public funding may be raised at central and local government
             levels, as well as at the school level.

             Consider creating a flow chart of financing sources and channels. Policies on fiscal
             decentralization and school autonomy, together with intergovernmental financing arrangements,
             define how education funding is channeled down to schools or generated at the school level. These
             policies can also result in horizontal and vertical imbalances,7 and define how much of education
             spending is discretionary at each level of government and at the school level. The central government
             may allocate the education budget to local governments conditionally or unconditionally, based
             on a transparent methodology or based on negotiation. Schools may or may not have autonomy
             over budget. Private funding can account for a significant portion of education funding, typically at
             preschool and tertiary education levels, often at the secondary level, and sometimes for technical and
             vocational programs. Household surveys can be used to estimate families’ education expenditures.
             Donor funding may play an important role in financing education in some countries. It could be
             integrated into the government budget or be off-budget.

             •   How much is spent on education in total, and who finances it, i.e., public, private, or international
                 sources?
                     Technical Note 8: Definition of source of funds
                     Example 3: Analysis of source of funds

             •   How does the government raise revenues to finance education?
                 ▷ At the national level, which sources generate revenues for the national education budget
                    by law (e.g., general revenue or taxes, profits from natural resources, profits from
                    nationalized industries, revenue from lottery, dedicated sources, stabilization funds)?
                 ▷ Do local governments raise revenues, or are all taxes collected by the central government?
                         Example 4: Analysis of revenue sources

             •   Which levels of government finance education?
                 ▷ *Gfinancing is split between the central and subnational levels, which levels of government
                    pay for what? Local governments may fund certain levels of education, such as preschool and
                    basic education, but not upper secondary education. They may fund certain inputs, such as
                    school maintenance, but not capital expenditures.
                           Example 5: Analysis of decentralized financing
                                                                                                                 21




    ▷ Are there fiscal transfers from the central government to local governments for
        financing education?
           ■ Are these grants earmarked for education or unconditional—i.e., local government can
                spend the money as it wishes and, in theory, could decide to use none of it on
       FEVDBUJPO 
           ■ How are the grants calculated?
           ■ *s there evidence of vertical imbalances?
           ■ *s there evidence of horizontal fiscal imbalances? If so, do they emerge from variations in
                   Example 6: Analysis of education financing by level PGHPWFSONFOUBOE
                   Jntergovernmental fiscal transfers

•   Do schools receive grants? If yes, how are they allocated? How are allocation formulae defined?

•   Do schools charge parents fees for school? What types of school fees are charged at the primary and
    secondary levels?
        Technical Note 9: School fees and other informal payments

•   Are schools allowed to keep school-generated revenues, such as fees or revenues from
    entrepreneurial activities, the sale of products in vocational schools, or the rental of school space? For
    what purposes can public schools use private or international revenues?
         Example 7: Analysis of school budget by financing source

•   How much do households with children in school spend on their schooling and for what goods and
    services? What share of their expenditures consists of mandatory payments (e.g., tuition fees) versus
    voluntary spending?
         Example 8: Analysis of household surveys on private spending

•   Do households receive cash transfers, including vouchers to attend private schools?

•   Does the private sector, or do other actors, contribute to education spending, e.g., co-financing
    technical and vocational education and training, or cash transfers to households?

•   How much do international actors finance education? What is the nature of this spending? How
    dependent is the government on donors?
       Example 9: Analysis of donor funding
22   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Key Question 2: How much does the government spend and on what?

             Rationale for public intervention in the education sector

             The public expenditure review must scrutinize and justify public intervention in the education
             sector. Assessments of the following issues should be a subtext of your report:

             •   Proponents of government intervention in education cite a need to ensure equity and efficiency
                 in the sector. The public sector has an equity role because markets generally fail to ensure
                 equal opportunities for all citizens—and, in fact, often create inequities. The efficiency concerns
                 emerge from market failures and imperfections that are commonly associated with information
                 asymmetries,8 externalities,9 and economies of scale.

             •   Government involvement can include regulation, the provision of information, financing, and
                 service provision. Although the government always has regulatory and information-dissemination
                 roles, and is almost always involved in financing education, it does not have to provide such
                 services themselves to ensure equitable access and quality programs. In fact, if the private or
                 nonprofit sector provides education to the country’s standards at lower cost, the government
                 may better serve consumers of education services by subsidizing the consumers, the non-public
                 providers, or both.

             •   Opponents of public intervention in education cite governments’ failure to meet the goals of such
                 intervention or to ensure sustainable financing. Worse, critics say, the governmental involvement
                 can crowd out potentially efficient and equitable private investment and activity.

             •   Where government should intervene, the key challenge is to find ways to prevent failure due to
                 bureaucratic inefficiency, rent-seeking,10 elite capture,11 and other abuses.

             Overview of public spending on education

             The public expenditure review first analyzes public spending on education at the aggregate
             level. What is the total public expenditure on education? As a percentage of gross domestic product
             (GDP)? As a share of total public expenditure?

             •   Work with the consolidated budget (central government and local government budgets).

             •   Check for off-budget expenditures.

             •   Work only with executed budgets for the past fiscal years because planned is not executed. If you
                 cannot access recent data for executed budgets and decide to include the preliminary figures, clearly
                 label them as preliminary.

             •   Use real expenditures as opposed to nominal ones if you want to track annual percentage changes
                 in the public funds flowing into the sector.

                 Technical Note 10: Calculating the share of a nation’s resources going to education
                 Example 10: Analysis of total public education expenditure
                                                                              The World Bank Group            23
                                                                                                              23




Public spending on education can be broken down by functional, economic, administrative
(organization), and program classifications.12

Functional classification. A functional classification of expenses organizes government activities
according to the socioeconomic objectives that policymakers want to achieve through various
kinds of expenditure. Many, but not all, countries adopt the internationally comparable Classification
of Functions of Government (COFOG). This classification follows the level categories of the 1997
International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED-97) of the United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO). The UNESCO document breaks down education levels
into pre-primary and primary, secondary, postsecondary non-tertiary, tertiary, education not definable
by level, subsidiary services to education, R&D education, and education services not-elsewhere-
classified (or n.e.c.), such as administration, operation, or support of activities. Note that in countries
that have not adopted the Classification of Functions of Government, subsectors may be defined
differently. Even in countries that have adopted the classification, the length of a given education
program, such as primary education, may vary.

•   Look for anomalies, such as a disproportionate financing share for tertiary education relative to
    basic education.
        Example 11: Analysis of education spending by functional classification

•   Calculate the public expenditure per student as a percentage of per capita gross domestic product
    (GDP), by level of education?

Functional classifications are also useful in analyzing the allocation of resources among
sectors. The review should explore if marginal investments in other sectors can help to further
education goals. For example, investing in rural roads or improved access to clean water can help
to address barriers preventing girls from attending school, and may have more effect on school
enrollment at less cost than direct investments in the education sector. If funding for human capital
development—e.g., for technical and vocational education and training programs—is dispersed
across sectors, other ministries besides the Ministry of Education may provide better value for money.

Economic classification. The economic classification of expense identifies the types of expense
incurred according to the economic process involved. It includes compensation of employees (wages
and salaries and employers’ social contributions), use of goods and services, consumption of fixed
capital, interest, subsidies, grants, social benefits, and other expenses.

•   Consider how education expenditure is allocated by economic factors, such as capital versus
    recurrent expenditures; staff compensation versus non-staff recurrent expenditures; expenditures
    spent on teachers versus non-teaching staff?
        Example 12: Analysis of education spending by economic classification

•   Be alert to important complementarities among inputs. The educational effectiveness of certain
    inputs depends on the simultaneous provision of other inputs. Thus, classrooms need teachers;
    teachers need textbooks. Not infrequently, wages and benefits for labor in the sector crowd out
    recurrent expenditures for items such as textbooks and other learning materials or infrastructure
24   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 maintenance. Capital investments can be paltry relative to the additional school seats required
                 due to increased enrollment in an education subsector. Capital investments can be misallocated
                 among education subsectors. For example, heavy capital investments to build new university
                 campuses can starve the capital budget needed for pre-tertiary education. For vocational
                 education and training, it is important to check whether the budget covers the costs of regular
                 upgrades of workshops and equipment.
                  ▷ Are salaries crowding out the non-salary recurrent budget?
                  ▷ How much is available for routine maintenance per school? How adequate is this amount,
                    compared with estimates of the costs of routine maintenance for the average school?
                  ▷ Considering the government’s textbook policy, is an adequate amount spent per child
                    on textbooks?13
                  ▷ Are teachers given incentives tied to performance and services?

             Administrative (organizational) classification. The administrative classification identifies the entity
             that is responsible for managing the public funds concerned. Public education budgets may be spent
             by various ministries, different levels of governments, as well as on- and off-budget.

             •   Figure out which levels of government are responsible for spending resources on education.
                 This question is different from who finances education. For instance, the central government may
                 transfer (finance) education block grants to local governments, but the latter is responsible for
                 spending the block grants.

             •   Check the budgets of all ministries that might have education expenditures for all types and levels
                 of education addressed by the public expenditure review. For example, sometimes the budget for
                 early childhood education falls under a ministry responsible for the welfare of women and families.
                 All, or some, of the budget for vocational education and training may come under the Ministry
                 for Labor.

             Program classification. The program classification gives detailed costs of every activity or program
             that is to be carried out together with objectives and expected results of a proposed program. Reports
             on program-based budget execution provide extremely useful data on the extent to which education
             policies and plans have been successful, and they can stimulate policy changes and in-year course
             corrections. However, this type of budgeting requires strong expenditure tracking, monitoring, and
             accountability arrangements that are often not in place in our client countries. Transitioning to a
             program-based budgeting system not only requires improvements in the government accounting
             system, but also a shift in internal controls and a shift in accountability from inputs to program outputs.

             •   Are the expected outputs and outcomes specified for each program?

             •   Is the government accounting system capable of providing data on budget execution by
                 programs and sub-programs?

             •   Are the data on actual outputs and outcomes achieved credible?

             •   Do budget-holders and implementers have the flexibility to reallocate among budgetary items in
                 order to achieve expected outputs and outcomes?
                                                                                                               25




  Section              Financial Accountability
     3

Key Question 3: Is the public financial management system set up
to enhance financial accountability?

Effective systems of public financial management (PFM) can contribute to providing better
inputs and improving accountability. The World Development Report 200414 stressed that better public
financial management can ease several key challenges facing the education sector, including inequitable
access, dysfunctional schools, low quality of instruction, low client responsiveness, and stagnant
productivity. More recently, the World Bank Group’s Education Strategy 2020 (2015) recognized the
important link between better public financial management and improved service delivery outcomes.
For instance, equitable allocation of resources can help improve access to education for the poorest
families; performance-based incentives can motivate teachers; and efficient spending can lead to savings
that can, in turn, help pay for improvements in the learning environment. While theoretical links between
improved public financial management processes and service delivery outcomes are well established,
empirical evidence has been more limited in terms of when, and how, such reforms might contribute
to better services (Welham et al. 2013; World Bank 2012). A number of country examples show strong
links between education outcomes and public financial management improvements, but the evidence
remains circumstantial.15

A range of public financial management analyses is available to help users assess whether such a
system established for the education sector is successful in ensuring that government-earmarked
funds are spent on policies as intended. These analyses include the overall Public Expenditure and
Financial Accountability (PEFA) Framework,16 sector-level assessments such as SABER School Finance,
Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS), Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys (QSDS), Service Delivery
Indicators (SDI) surveys, project fiduciary assessments, and audit reports. The PEFA Framework is helpful in
identifying common public financial management issues across sectors. Sector-level and project fiduciary
assessments would provide more details on how issues involving public financial management systems
specifically affect the implementation of the education program. Internal and external audit reports of
the education sector and a walk-through of public financial management processes—all critical business
processes related to management and use of funds and assets—could help identify potential weaknesses
in these processes.
     Technical Note 11: Public expenditure and financial accountability (PEFA) country reports
     Technical Note 12: Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS), Quantitative Service Delivery
      Surveys (QSDS), and Service Delivery Indicators (SDI)
26   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             The public expenditure review team should use a three-dimensional approach to analyze
             potential public financial management weaknesses underlying spending problems, as
             appropriate . Public financial management laws, policies, and procedures determine and regulate the
             behavior of public officials and organizations implementing them (Allen et al. 2013). Where laws and
             procedures are sufficiently appropriate but practices lag, it is also necessary to consider the capacity of
             actors who implement these laws, and the process through which the actors bargain over the design
             and implementation of policies within a specific institutional setting (World Bank 2017). A three-
             dimensional approach to a public financial management analysis considers the following factors:

                  (i) Public financial management legal framework—the adequacy of laws, policies, and
                      procedures. What are the shortcomings and how do these affect education sector
                      spending? Are these laws, policies, and procedures complied with? What are the key
                      reasons for any deviations in both public financial management processes and outputs?
                      Are certain political economy factors at play? Why do oversight agencies fail to pick up
                      these deviations?

                  (ii) Public financial management capacity—capacities at central and decentralized
                       levels. What public financial management training and reform mechanisms are in place at
                       the country level and specifically in the education sector? How well does the Financial
                       Management Information System enable the implementation of the public financial
                       management legal framework?

                  (iii) Institutional setup—who does what and the mapping of public financial management
                        roles of central ministries, decentralized agencies, and other factors. Are financial and
                        transaction authority adequately delegated? What role and impact do civil society, unions,
                        media, and the international community have as pressure groups to influence policy
                        formulation and program implementation? Map the impact of institutional and individual
                        actors’ interests on public financial management.

             Every spending problem is likely to have a unique set of underlying weaknesses in the public
             financial management process. Linking such weaknesses to key spending problems can be
             extremely useful in stimulating necessary reforms. How do public financial management processes,
             such as budget release, funds flow, and internal controls, apply to each of the main spending
             problems? What do the links between PFM arrangements and sectoral spending problems imply about
             the reforms needed? For example, textbook purchases generally require a one-off bulk procurement
             followed by a logistics process of distributing books from central level to schools. Schools then reuse
             these books over several years. In contrast, school grants do not require a bulk procurement or logistics
             involving physical assets. However, the issuance of such grants often entails a long (and often complex)
             funds-flow from central- or provincial-level governments to schools—with the process then relying
             more on local accountability mechanisms to ensure the funds’ effective use. Table 3 summarizes major
             spending problems and potential underlying weaknesses in the public financial management system.
                  Example 13: Issues related to budget formation and execution
                                                                                                                   27




Table 3: Major spending problems and potential underlying PFM weaknesses

 Spending problem         Potential public financial management weaknesses

 Disconnect          •   Financial and human resource data are not used for policy- and decision-making.
 between the         •   Sector plans do not define institutional responsibilities for different levels
 education policy        of the government for each programs and subprogram.
 intent and          •   The government budgeting and accounting system does not track
 implementation          program and subprogram expenditures due to several system and
                         capacity issues, including challenges in apportioning joint costs over
                         multiple (sub)programs.
                     •   The central government (Ministries of Finance and Education) has limited
                         authority over, or capacity to handle, the implementation of sector plans to
                         influence decisions made at subnational and local levels.
                     •   There is limited or no incentives or accountability linked to results at
                         subnational and local levels.
                     •   Budget-holders who are responsible for the best use of the available
                         budget and implementers have limited flexibility to reallocate the budget
                         among input categories for mid-year course corrections.
                     •   Delayed budget releases and mid-year cash rationing with cumbersome
                         funds flow (including of school grants) to lower levels are holding up non-
                         salary and capital expenditures.
                     •   Weak procurement and internal controls result in delayed or cancelled
                         implementation of activities.


 Inadequate          •   Links are weak among target outputs, outcomes, and the budgets allocated.
 budget allocation   •   The multi-year sector plan does not adequately cost out stated education
                         policies or medium-term strategic plans.
                     •   Education resources are diverted to other functions due to weaknesses in
                         the chart of accounts or lack of transparency in financial reporting.
                     •   The sector has budget arrears.
                     •   The sector plan has not fully integrated donor-financed projects.


 Inequitable         •   Block grants to subnational and local governments are inadequate for
 budget allocation       equalizing fiscal imbalances among the localities (i.e. horizontal equalization).
                     •   Education spending results in disproportionate allocations to poor and
                         vulnerable students.


 Poor human          •   Delays in receiving salaries lower the motivation of teachers.
 resource            •   Lack of hardship incentives limits teacher deployment to rural or remote areas.
 management          •   Weak, or lack of, management system for leave record leads to inadequate
                         docking of salaries for absenteeism.

                                                                                  (Table continued on next page)
28   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Spending Problem             Potential public financial management weaknesses

                                       •   Sanctions and other action in response to audit findings are limited, even
                                           in cases of repetitive or permanent absenteeism.
                                       •   Lack of independent oversight of teacher attendance increases the
                                           possibility of collusion with school directors and district education staff.
                                       •   Internal and external auditors, monitors, inspectors, and supervisors apply
                                           duplicate and document-based controls in an uncoordinated manner, with
                                           no, or minimal, unannounced physical checks.
                                       •   Personnel and payroll records for public servants in the education sector
                                           are not reconciled regularly to account for a possible difference between
                                           the two.
                                       •   School directors or teachers cannot perform their duties in school because
                                           they are assigned to administrative functions at the district level or are
                                           given political party duties.
                                       •   Teacher unions are politicized and represent a significant pressure group.


               Lack of school          •   School directors’ inability to make independent decisions about hiring
               autonomy                    temporary teachers results in an inadequate or excess supply of teachers.
                                       •   School councils are not sufficiently empowered to participate in
                                           decisions on the use of school grants, or to monitor teacher attendance.
                                       •   School councils have no, or limited, involvement in monitoring
                                           school performance.


               Insufficient            •   Procurement of textbooks, which is often centralized, is delayed.
               and/or delayed          •   Storage and distribution logistics are poorly managed, resulting in
               availability of             pilferage of textbooks.
               teaching and            •   Controls and incentives that encourage the reuse of textbooks over
               learning materials          several years are limited.
                                       •   Teaching materials are often procured locally, but lengthy and
                                           cumbersome procurement procedures apply.
                                       •   Delays take place in the receipt of school grants.


               Poor school             •   Budget allocation is inadequate for ongoing or planned construction projects.
               infrastructure          •   School construction is not completed as planned, with no return on capital
                                           investment, and with exposure to rapid deterioration and cost escalations.
                                       •   Politicized allocation of funds to schools leads to suboptimal regional coverage.
                                       •   Inadequate technical supervision by the public works staff leads to poor
                                           construction quality.
                                       •   Funding for school maintenance is inadequate and responsibilities are unclear.
                                       •   To simplify contracting, authorities use expensive, standard school-building
                                           designs countrywide, instead of applying climate-suitable adaptations.

                                                                                            	5BCMFDPOUJOVFEPOOFYUQBHF

                                                                                                    29




Spending Problem       Potential public financial management weaknesses

Over-reliance on   •   Policy and capacity to regulate and support private schools (e.g. grants,
public provision       access to finance) are inadequate, not transparent, and not predictable in
                       a way that would incentivize them to provide good services.
                   •   Private schools lack accounting capacity.
                   •   Regulatory authorities for private schools engage in limited coordination
                       with the Ministry of Education.
30   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




               Section             Adequacy and Sustainability
                  4

             Key Question 4: Relative to the government’s policies and standards,
             how much is needed now (adequacy), and what can be aﬀorded in the
             medium and long term (sustainability)?

             Although international and regional benchmarks are useful in terms of advocacy and
             cross-country analyses, the adequacy of the budget for a specific country must be carefully
             assessed. The Third International Conference on Financing for Development (in Addis Ababa, July
             2015)17 set the following international benchmarks for education spending: at least 4 percent to
             6 percent of gross domestic product (GDP), and at least 15 percent to 20 percent of total public
             expenditure to the education sector. Worldwide, the former target has been met, but not the latter:
             In 2012, countries, on average, allocated 5.0 percent of GDP and 13.7 percent of public expenditure
             to education (UNESCO 2015c). However, benchmarking should be used cautiously because
             many factors affect total expenditure in the sector, such as the government’s financial capacity,
             demography, enrollment rates by subsector, quality and prices of basic inputs, geographical
             challenges, and policies on public versus private financing. A comparison with neighboring
             countries may be helpful, but regional neighbors may share the same difficulties as the country in
             question, and hence, may not be appropriate benchmarks.

             Two other concepts are useful for measuring the adequacy of education spending.
             Countries have different education goals and standards, and their cost of achieving them will vary,
             independent of price differences. In the short term, adequacy can be measured relative to the
             costs of the inputs required, if the country meets its own provision standards for monetary and
             non-monetary inputs. These standards include those governing unit cost per student, teacher
             compensation, and the ratios of students to teachers, classrooms, or textbooks. Detailed descriptions
             of inputs are discussed below. The second concept for measuring adequacy is obvious shortfalls,
             as evidenced by arrears in the sector or inadequate expenditures on inputs complementary
             to teachers, such as teaching and learning materials, school maintenance, and needed capital
             expenditures. Teacher compensation is typically the largest expense in the education sector, and
             personnel costs are often met by underfinancing non-salary expenses.

             Key input indicators
             Besides macro indicators such as education spending as a percent of GDP and of total public
             spending, the adequacy of monetary inputs can be measured in two ways. One way is to
             calculate per student spending as a percentage of per capita gross domestic product (GDP), by
             level of education for public and private schools. The second way is to measure variations in per
             student spending among subnational units or schools and between public and private schools.
             Use comparative data to get some sense of whether, as indicated by costs, the country’s provision
             of inputs—on average and as they are distributed across schools—is “out of range,” either in terms
                                                                                                         31




of apparent over-provision or under-provision. Since country- and sector-specific conditions affect
allocations among differently priced inputs, comparisons can only flag if there might be a question to
answer. Several different ways are available to compute per student spending, or unit costs.

    Technical Note 13: Definitions and notes on monetary-input indicators
    Technical Note 14: Calculating unit costs from aggregate and itemized spending
    Technical Note 15: Calculating unit costs when the country’s fiscal year and school year
    do not coincide
    Example 14: Analysis of per student spending
    Example 15: Minimum norms and standards for resource allocation
    Example 16: Analysis of cost of teachers

The adequacy of non-monetary inputs (human resources, classrooms, and infrastructure) can
be measured by scrutinizing government standards and by assessing their actual provision.
Governments, including the Ministry of Education and sometimes parliamentarians, set standards
governing inputs to education. These include standards for where to build new schools relative to
population settlements, construction designs and standards, student-classroom ratios, student-
teacher ratios, student-textbook ratios, annual hours of teacher training, annual instructional time
overall and per subject, annual duration of schooling, and so forth. However, actual provision of
inputs may or may not meet those standards. Therefore, it is important to examine both standards
and actual provision, and identify whether either, or possibly both, may be inadequate to deliver
quality educational services. Both are problems that PERs can address, but their solutions differ.
The former requires changes in policies that define standards; the latter, changes in how inputs are
distributed. Obtain information on input standards by interviewing the Ministry’s policymakers or
the senior technical staff, backed by relevant policy documents. Data on actual provision of inputs
should be disaggregated by level of education or grade (whichever appropriate) and by region,
district, and school (using the smallest unit for which data are available), within a country. They
should also be compared over time within the country, and with data for comparator countries.

     Technical Note 16: Definitions and notes on non-monetary input indicators
     Technical Note 17: Definitions and notes on research indicators

Check these aspects of the three main types of non-monetary inputs:

•   Human resources
    ▷ Student-teacher ratios
    ▷ Percentage of qualified teachers
    ▷ Ratio of teachers to non-teaching staff
    ▷ Non-teaching staff per type of school
    ▷ Organization of teachers’ working time
        Example 17: Analysis of teacher distribution
32   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             •   Classroom inputs
                 ▷ Average class size
                 ▷ Student-textbook ratios for core subjects
                 ▷ Percentage of schools meeting minimum standards requirements for educational inputs
                 ▷ Annual instructional time
                      Technical Note 18: Efficiency of the curriculum

             •   Infrastructure
                  ▷ Average school size (number of students per school)
                  ▷ Unit cost of building a classroom
                  ▷ Standards and schedule for infrastructure maintenance
                  ▷ Percentage of schools that run double and triple shifts
                  ▷ Percentage of schools that use multigrade classrooms
                  ▷ Percentage of schools meeting minimum standards requirements for learning conditions

             Comparing the projected costs of education with the anticipated size of the resource
             envelope can shed light on whether planned spending levels are realistic. Beyond considering
             how much is needed now, it is essential to examine what happens to costs in the medium and
             longer term, given the government’s sectoral goals, demographic projections for the school-age
             population, assumptions about enrollment rates by level, and macroeconomic and budget forecasts.
             Projected costs of education provision are often spelled out in the Medium-term Expenditure
             Framework (MTEF). If the country does not have such a framework in place, a costing exercise will
             be required.
                 Example 18: Cost projections
                 Example 19: Fiscal sustainability analysis

             •   Sectoral goals. Medium- to long-term education goals and targets may include extending the
                 length of compulsory education, increasing education access for the poor, hiring more qualified
                 and, thus, expensive teachers, converting community teachers to regular teachers, introducing
                 computer-assisted instruction, retrofitting facilities to protect against earthquakes, expanding
                 vocational education and training, and introducing cost recovery for tertiary education. It is
                 essential to examine whether these goals are fiscally feasible.

             •   Country’s demographic structure and trends, including urbanization, and projected
                 enrollment rates by subsectors. Rapid urbanization can increase future enrollment rates. What
                 do the trends in the school-age population and assumptions about trends in enrollment rates by
                 subsector imply about the inputs required now and in future?
                     Technical Note 19: Demographic trends and enrollment projections
                     Example 20: Demographic trends and enrollment projections

             •   Country’s macroeconomic projections and government’s strategic priorities. The former
                 affect the total resource envelope available; the latter, the government’s decision on how to
                 allocate resources among different sectors.
                                                                                                      33




If at all possible, do some simple modeling to assess what the joint implications are for
projected costs and revenues and, thus, how realistic the government’s plans are for the
sector. For instance, UNESCO’s Education Policy and Strategy Simulation Model (EPSSim) is a sector-
wide and goals-based generic simulation model that is driven by demographic trends. Enrollment
targets are taken as a priori and the simulation calculates the corresponding financial resource
implications. The World Bank’s Maquette for MDG Simulations (WB-MAMS) is a Computable General
Equilibrium (CGE) model and can help assess the broad, economy-wide effects of alternative
education scenarios. Be sure to work closely with the country economist or the macroeconomist on
the public expenditure review team.
     Technical Note 20: UNESCO’s Education Policy and Strategy Simulation Model (EPSSim)
     Technical Note 21: Simulating the economy-wide effects of alternative education scenarios
34   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Section            Eﬃciency and Eﬀectiveness
                    5

             Key Question 5: Are public resources being used eﬃciently and eﬀectively?
             Resources are scarce, and an important purpose of any PER is determining value for money
             from education investments, regardless of their financing source. The purpose here is similar
             to the “value for money” (VfM) approach that the United Kingdom’s Department for International
             Development (DfiD) has adopted for making aid decisions;18 that the World Bank has pursued for
             decades in its economic analyses of investments; and that studies such as cost-benefit and cost-
             effectiveness analyses and impact evaluations support. The basic value for money concept is that
             of obtaining the maximum benefit over time with the resources available. Value for money is high
             when an optimum balance exists among three elements: when costs of inputs are relatively low,
             productivity is high (or efficient), and successful outcomes have been achieved (or effective).19

             It should be noted that efficiency and effectiveness are not the same. A service or good may
             be efficiently produced, but not effective. Similarly, it may be effective, but not efficiently produced.
             For example, a teacher-training program may produce a large number of graduates at a small cost,
             yielding an efficient cost-output ratio. However, if these teachers’ classroom performances shows
             no discernible improvement, the training is efficient but ineffective. A student-to-qualified teacher
             ratio of 15/1 may result in learning gains. However, if increasing the ratio to 25/1 achieves the same
             learning gains, using qualified teachers is effective, but at the 15/1 ratio, inefficient.

             Output and outcome data
             To assess efficiency and effectiveness, we need input, output, and outcome data. Section 4
             above defined monetary and non-monetary inputs. The primary output and outcome data needed
             are the following, including trend data for the PER country and comparative data:
                  Technical Note 22: Definitions and notes on output and outcome indicators

             •   Participation rates
                  ▷ Gross and net enrollment ratios by level of education
                  ▷ Dropout rate by grade
                  ▷ 3FQFUJUJPOSBUFCZHSBEF
                  ▷ Completion rate for each educational program
             •   Learning outcomes for core subjects
                      Technical Note 4: Cross-national data
             •   Employment and wage rates by level of education
                  ▷ Labor force participation rate
                  ▷ Employmentandunemploymentrates
             Several different types of economic efficiency analyses exist, but those most useful for
             education public expenditure reviews are analyses of allocative efficiency, technical efficiency,
             internal efficiency, and external efficiency.
                 Technical Note 23: Concepts of effectiveness and efficiency
                                                                                                                                       35




                         Allocative eﬃciency
                         Allocative efficiency asks whether the sector is allocating its resources among subsectors “so as
                         to maximize the welfare of the community.” Section 2 asked for an analysis of how public expenditure
                         is allocated among education levels or subsectors. Subsector allocations for the country undergoing a
                         public expenditure review can differ for good or poor reasons from those of countries with which it is
                         being compared. For example, the definitions of education levels can vary across countries. Eliminating
                         school fees usually creates enrollment bulges that require high “catch-up” allocations to the newly “free”
                         subsector. Significant success in obtaining high primary-completion rates usually translates into sharp
                         spikes in demand for secondary school seats that then require major increases in capital budgets for the
                         subsector. However, high and increasing expenditures for tertiary education may crowd out allocations for
                         pre-tertiary-level programs—a trend that ultimately favors the children of wealthier families.

                         Assess the allocative efficiency of the standards themselves, independent of how well the public
                         expenditure review country meets them, to separate inefficient objectives from inefficient
                         implementation. As discussed in Section 4, the sector usually sets standards for inputs, such as student-
                         teacher ratios, teacher compensation schedule, student-textbook ratios, and student-classroom ratios.
                         Comparative data for these variables will reflect, not comparators’ standards, but how comparators
                         implement their own standards. However, these data will give some idea of reasonable ranges for
                         standards in the country undergoing review.

Figure 4: Distribution of student-teacher                        Start with simple histograms to display the distribution
ratios for primary schools in a province                         of an input across regions, schools, or classrooms. Highly
                                                                 variable deployments of inputs always signal allocative
                                                                 inefficiencies. For example, if the sector standard for the
Share of schools (%)




                                                                 student-teacher ratio in a primary class is 35 students per
                                                                 teacher, the hypothetical example in Figure 4 shows wide
                                                                 (but not unusual) variances in these ratios between schools—
                                                                 inherently and relative to the 35:1 standard. Completely aside
                                                                 from whether the standard itself is or is not reasonably efficient,
                                                                 the very uneven deployment of a key resource is inefficient
                                Student-teacher ratio
                                                                 (and inequitable). When significantly variable deployments
                                                                 are observed, the review must try to determine the sources of
                       Note: A hypothetical example
                                                                 the variability.

                         Technical eﬃciency

                         The sector achieves value for money when it gets the best outcomes at least cost. This result
                         can be achieved in either of two ways. The inputs used by a given intervention can be reduced to
                         the minimum required to achieve the outcome sought. Or a different intervention can be used—
                         one with a different combination of resources that achieves, at less cost, the outcome sought, as
                         well as, or better than, the alternatives.
                             Example 21: Technical efficiency of inputs (efficiency indicators)
36   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Analyses of technical efficiency look at costs, input mixes, and results. Cost-effectiveness analysis
             (CEA) relates monetary inputs and non-monetary outputs and outcomes. Cost-benefit analysis (CBA)
             is used when both the costs and the outcomes can be monetized. A public expenditure review is not
             usually expected to conduct either type of analysis. However, the review may use findings of international
             and in-country cost-effectiveness analysis and cost-benefit analysis to help identify instances of
             probable low value for money. For instance, in examining six recent systematic reviews or meta-analyses
             of interventions that improve learning outcomes in low- and middle-income countries, Evans and
             Popova (2015) observed a wide variation in conclusions across the studies, with much of the variation
             driven by variation within categories of interventions. Thus, the specific details of the intervention
             determined its effectiveness. Based on a careful examination of the details of interventions in the six
             studies, they identified three categories of interventions that were broadly supported across the studies:
             “(i) pedagogical interventions that match teaching to student’s learning, including through the use of
             computers or technology; (ii) individualized, long-term teacher training; and (iii) accountability-boosting
             interventions, such as teacher performance incentives and contract teachers” (Evans and Popova 2015,
             3). These findings may help the PER team identify a potentially inefficient area that the sector is strongly
             advised to investigate.
                   Technical Note 24: Cost-effectiveness analysis
                   Example 22: Analysis of unit costs and outcomes
                   Technical Note 25: Cost-benefit analysis
                   Example 23: Cost-benefit analysis

             Use cost data to sense whether the sector may be overpaying for an input relative to the value
             obtained. Especially relevant data are costs of teachers relative to in-country comparators, costs of
             textbooks relative to comparators, and in-country variations in unit costs for classroom construction. For
             example, private school teachers may be considerably cheaper than public school teachers. If learning
             outcomes in private schools are similar to, or better than, those in public schools, controlling on family
             socioeconomic status (SES), the sector may want to consider shifting more provision of education to
             the private sector via vouchers or subsidies. Significant in-country variations in unit costs for classroom
             construction also raise questions about value for money. Theunynck (2009) finds that the most
             efficient designs are ones that can be mass produced at low cost on the local market, using small- and
             medium-size enterprises in the formal and informal sectors. He also alerts us to the fact that alternative
             procurement and contract management arrangements differ in their cost-effectiveness.

             A relatively complex analytic technique called data envelopment analysis (DEA) can be used to
             measure the efficiency of multiple service delivery units by comparing the mix and volume of
             resources used (inputs) and services provided (outcomes) by each unit. DEA is a linear programming
             methodology. The techniques can be used to define and estimate efficiency as the distance from the
             observed input-output combinations to an efficient frontier, which is the maximum attainable output
             for a given input level. It is often used to compare countries relative to an efficiency frontier. For example,
             for a large panel of countries, total government education expenditures as a percent of GDP (or GNI) can
             be plotted against different education outcomes, such as primary completion rates, enrollment rates, or
             learning outcomes.20
                  Example 24: Data envelopment analysis
                                                                                                                  37




Internal eﬃciency21

Internal efficiency measures the percentage of children who complete an educational cycle (e.g.,
primary education or lower secondary education) as a share of those who start the cycle or as
a percentage of those who finish the cycle in the minimum number of years. The first definition
allows the calculation of the dropout rate—i.e., the number of those who start minus the number who
ultimately complete, as a share of those who start. The second definition measures the dropout rate plus
the repetition rate. If the data show either relatively high dropout rates, high repetition rates, or both,
the sector has an expensive internal-efficiency problem. Dropping out imposes costs on individuals and
countries in the form of unrealized human capital. Repetition imposes costs on the sector in the form
of its having to pay double (or triple) the unit cost of a year of school per repeater. In cases of significant
internal inefficiency, the difference between unit costs per completer of an education program and unit
costs per student who completes the program without interruption are better measures of costs than
unit costs.
      Technical Note 26: Calculating the budget costs of one completer and of one Vninterrupted
      completer
      Example 25: Internal efficiency indicators

External eﬃciency22

External efficiency measures the returns to individuals, employers, and the country of public and
private investments in education. It depends on a match between the type and quality of skills and
knowledge that school leavers acquire in school relative to the skills and knowledge needed and paid
for by employers. Does education improve the employability and wages of school leavers? Does public
investment in education and training contribute to the country’s growth and economic development?
Measuring and linking employment and wage returns to education is particularly important for
vocational education and training, and tertiary education.
     Technical Note 27: Estimating private rates of return to education
     Example 26: Rate of returnT to education
38   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




               Section             Equity
                  6

             Key Question 6: Does public spending promote equity?

             A fundamental responsibility of the state is ensuring equity and managing redistribution.
             Public policy, including educational finance policy, can help minimize subgroup differences in
             educational access and achievement. This section explores: (i) how to identify inequity, if any; (ii)
             whether, and how, the government spends its budget to promote equity in education; and (iii) how
             households are responding to public policies and filling the funding gap between their needs and
             public spending.

             Equity in education financing can be assessed in terms of two main principles: horizontal and
             vertical equity.

                  Horizontal equity is defined as the equal treatment of equals and is used to justify similar
                  levels of funding across comparable schools or subnational divisions. Accordingly, a mechanism
                  may operate to equalize education spending across subnational divisions to preserve fiscal
                  neutrality, so that the amount of available resources for education is not positively correlated
                  with the wealth of where a student lives.

                  Vertical equity supports the unequal treatment of “unequals” (Underwood 1995). For example,
                  progressive spending may be necessary to provide equivalent education to students whose
                  native language is different than the language of instruction or to students with special
                  education needs. Other examples include targeted support programs (such as conditional
                  cash transfers and scholarships), or student weights to differentiate spending for certain types
                  of students.

             Vertical and horizontal equity have a special meaning in tertiary education. According to
             Salmi and Bassett (2012):

                  The vertical dimension looks at who enters tertiary education and who graduates from tertiary
                  education.

                  The horizontal dimension looks at what kind of institution they attend, and what labor
                  market opportunities are offered to graduates with various types of qualifications and levels of
                  degrees.

             The first analytical step is to diagnose the country’s trends related to equity in education.
             Disparities in access to education, completion, and learning achievements across different student
             groups indicate existing problems of inequity in education.
                                                                                                                39




•   How do school enrollment rates, completion rates, and learning outcomes vary by gender,
    household income, geographical location, and ethnic or religious group?
       Example 27: Analysis of inequity

•   Do the data assembled for Section 4 on the distribution of inputs by school, district, or region indicate
    substantial variation among geographical areas in terms of children’s opportunities to learn?

•   What is public spending per student by level of education, subnational division, school type, and
    student group (e.g., geographical location, income quintile, gender, ethnicity, language, religion,
    and special needs)?
        Technical Note 28: Per capita financing
        Example 28: Analysis of per capita financing

The second step is to examine what role the state plays in mitigating or exacerbating inequity.

•   What demand-side and supply-side financial interventions does the government adopt to
    promote equity? The most common programs that address equity include:

    ▷ Demand-oriented interventionsTuch as conditional cash transfers, school feeding,
       vouchers, scholarships or student loans, universal and targeted child benefits, and full or
       partial subsidies for school supplies, transport, and boarding
           Technical Note 29: Targeting mechanisms, coverage, and depth of programs
           Example 29: Analysis of cash transfer programs

    ▷ Supply-oriented interventionsTuch as an expansion of the education system to reach
       the poor, and the provision of additional funding for disadvantaged students23

•   How progressive or regressive is the state’s financing of education?
    ▷ What are benefit incidences across different groups of households?
           Technical Note 30: Benefit incidence analysis
           Example 30: Benefit incidence analysis

•   What actions other than financing does the government take to increase parental demand for
    education? If parents fear for their daughters’ safety during travel to school, does the government
    implement measures aimed at protecting girls? For families speaking a minority language, does
    the government publish textbooks and provide teachers who offer instruction in that language?24

•   Does the state finance private education through partial or full subsidies to providers or
    consumers? What are the rules governing these subsidies? For example, what percentage of the
    estimated per student cost for public schools does a subsidized private school receive? Can a
    private school receiving public subsidies also charge fees? Depending on how they are designed,
    public subsidies may implicitly subsidize the wealthy’s preference for private education.
         Technical Note 31: Subsidies
40   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             •   Are there corrupt practices that affect access, grades, or graduation—e.g., bribes to university
                 faculty to secure entry into a particular department, or parental “gifts,” such as new computers,
                 given to gain admission to a prestigious secondary school?25 If so, how widespread are these
                 practices? Has the state taken any actions to stop them? Does the state regulate the practice of
                 the student’s teachers, or teachers within the student’s school, providing private lessons to the
                 student? Bribes, gifts, and private lessons penalize the poor.

             •   What public policies govern students’ progression through the educational system? If tertiary
                 enrollments are rationed, examinations during the pre-tertiary years are often used to “weed”
                 students out of the system. Pathways into tertiary education may be highly restricted. Students
                 may have had to complete the academic program at the upper secondary level, and access to this
                 program may be highly restricted, as well. Such policies favor wealthier families.

             The third step is to analyze private spending. Use household survey data on households’ education
             expenditures to assess whether educational disadvantages are related to private costs for education
             (financial barriers).

             •   What do families in different consumption quintiles pay for education by level of education as a
                 percentage of their average consumption? Consider both formal and informal payments.
                     Technical Note 9: School fees and other informal payments
                     Example 31: Analysis of private spending by income quintile
TECHNICAL NOTES
42   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Technical Note 1: Government’s oﬃcial documents

             Government’s official documents—such as policies, laws, and regulations that specify standards for
             inputs to, and financial arrangements for, the learning process—are necessary to differentiate policy
             intent and implementation. For discussion of inputs, see Section 4: Adequacy and Sustainability. The
             SABER-school finance data collection instrument26 can provide a more detailed list, as needed.

                 Technical Note 2: Country system-level data

             Data generated by country systems include: (i) government budget documents (central government
             consolidated accounts; Ministry of Education budgets; state or provincial budgets, if separate from
             consolidated government accounts; institution-level financing data; medium-term expenditure
             framework documents); (ii) education management information systems (EMIS); (iii) national learning
             assessments; and (iv) sector-specific databases, such as school mapping and teacher databases. It
             should be noted that data generated by country systems tend to be the most problematic and need to
             be treated with caution.

                  (i) It is not easy to obtain reliable financing data from the government. Wherever possible, try to
                      obtain data from the Ministry of Finance, instead of the Ministry of Education.

                      BOOST, a World Bank initiative launched in 2010, draws detailed government expenditure
                      data from government financial management information systems and creates easy-to-use
                      databases. The program strengthens public-expenditure policy outcomes and accountability
                      by improving the quality of expenditure data, facilitating rigorous expenditure analysis, and
                      improving fiscal transparency. Experience indicates that BOOST is most useful if the raw data
                      from the Ministry of Finance is sufficiently disaggregated. The Governance Global Practice’s
                      BOOST team could support the public expenditure review team by creating an education
                      module in an Excel format that combines expenditure data from the BOOST database with
                      education statistics and other information on public institutions, service delivery, and
                      households.27 The ease of access to, and preparation of, analytical reports supports decision-
                      making for the purposes of planning, budgeting, monitoring, and evaluation. BOOST often
                      does not have expenditures by programs and sub-programs because governments typically
                      do not have relevant disaggregated data.

                      In collaboration with the World Bank, more than 70 countries have developed a BOOST
                      government budget database to date. If the counterpart does not yet have a BOOST, consider
                      working with the Governance Global Practice and Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
                      (MFM) Global Practice colleagues to encourage the counterpart to develop a BOOST
                      database. If the education public expenditure review is part of a comprehensive expenditure
                      review, the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management team is most likely to create a BOOST
                      that the education team can then use. However, teams need to be aware that building a
                      BOOST may take a long time. Also, BOOST tends to lack disaggregated data at the local level.
                      If education functions and financing are decentralized, the education team may need to
                      collect disaggregated data separately from local governments.
                                                                                                                    43




    (ii) Especially in low-capacity countries, education management and information system (EMIS) data
         can be problematic in terms of validity and reliability, especially when it comes to recent data.
         The team needs to be alert to incentives in the system that encourage misreporting of the
         numbers. For example, per capita financing creates incentives to inflate enrollment numbers. In
         such cases, the public expenditure review team will have to triangulate among data sources to
         estimate values of school-specific variables, enrollment rates, or teacher absenteeism rates.

    (iii) Designing and administering a good learning assessment is quite technical. Although it is
          generally preferable on quality grounds to use well-established regional or international learning
          assessments, national learning assessments can meet technical design standards. Relative to
          cross-national learning assessments, they can also be better aligned with the country’s
          curriculum. However, confer with the Bank’s country education team on the technical quality of
          these assessments. In using the data, flag concerns raised by the Bank’s team.

    (iv) The quality of other sector-specific databases, such as school mapping and personnel rosters, varies
         across countries. However, if they are of reasonable quality, they are a good source for determining the
         distribution of inputs relative to government standards—for example, infrastructure relative to
         population settlements, or teachers relative to student enrollments.

    Technical Note 3: National surveys
National surveys measure variables important for PERs and can be a goldmine. For example, household
consumption surveys are essential to creating poverty maps and to measuring household payments
for education. Census data are essential for estimating changes in the size of school-age cohorts
that the education system will have to accommodate. Labor force surveys can be used to estimate
employment and wage returns to different levels of education or the educational attainment of the
working-age population or active labor force.

Although the team needs to determine quirks and data-quality problems with any survey, the quality
of national surveys tends to be adequate and may be excellent. The statistics unit of a country tends to
conduct such surveys, although they may use internationally established frameworks and processes.
Data are collected under the same protocol. The staffs of units conducting these surveys benefit from
international experience with the design, administration, and analysis of such surveys. Donors also
often fund technical assistance to help such units professionalize the conduct of the surveys under
their jurisdiction.

Census data and reports. Country-specific estimates and projections can be checked with population
experts in the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice (HNPGP).

Household and other surveys. Household surveys usually collect data on enrollments and
completion by level of education, age, gender, and residential location, and private spending on
education. Country-specific survey data include the following common and highly developed sources:

•   Living Standards Measurement Study (LSMS): The LSMS is a household survey program housed
    within the Survey Unit of the World Bank’s Development Data Group that provides technical
    assistance to national statistical offices in the design and implementation of multi-topic household
44   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 surveys. Since its inception in the early 1980s, the LSMS program has worked with dozens
                 of statistics offices around the world: generating high-quality data, incorporating innovative
                 technologies and improved survey methodologies, and building technical capacity.

             •   The Skills Towards Employability and Productivity Program (STEP) program: The World Bank’s
                 STEP measures skills in low- and middle-income countries. It provides policy-relevant data to
                 enable a better understanding of skill requirements in the labor market; backward linkages among
                 skills acquisition and educational achievement, personality, and social background; and forward
                 linkages among skills acquisition and living standards, reductions in inequality and poverty, social
                 inclusion, and economic growth. The STEP program includes a household-based survey and an
                 employer-based survey. All relevant survey documentation is provided along with the datasets.
                 The “STEP Methodology Note” presents key concepts and describes the STEP survey instruments. It
                 also provides guidance on how to use the data.

             •   Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS): These nationally representative household surveys
                 provide data on a wide range of monitoring and impact evaluation indicators in the areas of
                 population, health, and nutrition. Education is a key background indicator in demographic and
                 health surveys, which help contextualize a country’s health and development situation.

             •   Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS): UNICEF supports governments in carrying out
                 these surveys through a global program of methodological research and technical assistance.
                 Cluster survey findings have been used extensively as a basis for policy decisions and program
                 interventions, and for the purpose of influencing public opinion on the situation of children and
                 women around the world. All available results and datasets from these surveys can be accessed
                 on mics.unicef.org. The results from the most recent MICS-5 surveys, carried out in 2012–15, are
                 becoming progressively available. (MICS-6 was launched in October 2016. It will cover five of the
                 household survey-based indicators for Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 4, Education 2030.)28

             •   EdStat’s Education Equality: Household surveys can provide detailed information on gender,
                 income, and geographic inequalities in education access, progression, attainment, and
                 expenditures. EdStats gives users access to household survey data through the following tools
                 and resources:

                 ▷ The Education Equality Query holds household survey data from DHS and MICS.
                    Indicator names beginning with the labels “DHS” and “MICS” were generated by EdStats
                    using the ADePT Education tool. Indicator names beginning with “UIS” were generated by
                    the UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS) using its stated methodology. Variances may exist
                    in data from differing sources based on methodological differences.

                 ▷ Education Equality Country Profiles are detailed Excel file reports for all available DHS,
                    MICS, and LSMS. They include a series of graphs and a wider variety of indicators than are
                    currently available in the Education Equality Query.

                 ▷ The Education Equality Dashboard is a data visualization tool that allows users to
                    visualize disparities in attendance rates, completion rates, educational attainment,
                    and out-of-school children.
                                                                                                            45




    ▷ The ADePT Education tool allows users to derive education indicators from household
       survey data and create customized reports and graphs. The program contains built-in
       settings for DHS surveys, but also accepts other types of surveys, and determines
       automatically what tables can be built from the available data.

•   University of Oxford’s Young Lives survey: This survey includes a household questionnaire
    with special items focused on the children and a community questionnaire. It covers Ethiopia,
    India, Peru, and Vietnam. It is often complemented by a school survey and the collection of
    in-depth, qualitative longitudinal data on some of the children. The household survey collects
    data similar to the World Bank’s Living Standards Measurement Study. These include information
    on household composition, livelihood and assets, household expenditure, children’s health and
    access to basic services, and education. This is supplemented with additional questions about
    caregiver perceptions, attitudes, and aspirations for the children and the family. The Young Lives
    survey also collects detailed data on how all family members use their time, information about
    the children’s weight and height (and similar information for caregivers), and data on children’s
    learning outcomes (language comprehension and mathematics). It asks the children about their
    daily activities, their experiences, and attitudes towards work and school, their likes and dislikes,
    how they feel they are treated by other people, and their hopes and aspirations for the future.
    The community questionnaire provides background information about the social, economic, and
    environmental context of each community. It covers topics such as ethnicity, religion, economic
    activity and employment, infrastructure and services, political representation and community
    networks, crime, and environmental changes.

    Technical Note 4: Cross-national data

The two main types of cross-national data systems are international learning assessments and
statistical databases that can show where a country sits within the range of practice.

In addition to national assessments of learning outcomes, check to see whether the country has
participated in any of the international or regional learning assessments. EdStats’ Learning Outcome
Dashboard/By Country has a table of the assessments in which each country has participated. These
assessments usually measure the gender composition and characteristics of the home that can serve
as a proxy for socioeconomic status and sometimes other characteristics that indicate subgroup
membership. Cross-national learning assessments also provide comparisons and tend to meet higher
design standards and better-tested administration and data-cleaning procedures than national
learning assessments.
46   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             •   Program for International Student Assessment (PISA)

             •   Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) and Progress in
                 International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS)

             •   OECD’s Programme for the International Assessment of Adult Competencies (PIAAC) and
                 other adult literacy surveys

             •   Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA): Applications and Interventions to Improve Basic
                 Literacy and Early Grade Mathematics Assessment (EGMA): A Conceptual Framework Based on
                 Mathematics Skills Development in Children, developed by the Research Triangle Institute (RTI)

             •   Southern Africa Consortium for Monitoring of Education Quality (SACMEQ)

             •   1SPHSBNNFE"OBMZTFEFT4ZTUÒNFT&EVDBUJGTEFT1BZTEFMB$0/'&.&/	1"4&$
PSUIF
                 CONFEMEN Programme for the Analysis of Education Systems (i.e., conference of education
                 ministers for countries sharing the French language)

             •   Laboratorio Latinoamericano de Evaluación de Calidad de la Educación (LLECE), or Latin
                 American Laboratory for Evaluating the Quality of Education

             The quality of cross-national statistical databases is mixed.

             •   OECD's annual Education at a Glance: These OECD data are of high quality because of the
                 exceptional processes in place that produce them.

             •   UNESCO Institute of Statistics (UIS): Although the Institute works persistently with governments
                 to help them improve the quality of data generated by their education management information
                 systems, it ultimately has to depend on country-specific data with all of their problems. As a result,
                 the quality of Institute data is uneven.

             •   World Development Indicators (WDI): These are the World Bank’s primary collection of
                 development indicators, compiled from officially recognized international sources. They assemble
                 the most current and accurate global development data available and include national, regional,
                 and global estimates. Six themes are used to organize indicators: world view, people, environment,
                 economy, states and markets, and global links. For education, the World Development Indicators
                 cover five types of variables: education inputs (e.g., government expenditure per student,
                 government expenditure on education as a percentage of GDP and as a percentage of total public
                 expenditure, trained teachers, and student-teacher ratios); participation in education; education
                 efficiency (e.g., cohort survival rates, repetition rates, transition rates); education completion and
                 learning outcomes; and education gaps by income, gender, and area (country and region). The
                 data sources for the first four types of variables are almost entirely from the UNESCO Institute of
                 Statistics. As noted above, these must be used cautiously because the data depend on country-
                 specific education management information systems (EMIS) data. The data for the fifth type
                 (gaps by income and gender) depend heavily on demographic and health surveys, and multiple
                 indicator cluster surveys.
                                                                                                                       47




•   World Bank EdStats (Education Statistics): EdStats All Indicator Query holds more than 4,000
    internationally comparable indicators that describe education access, progression, completion,
    literacy, teachers, population, and expenditures. The indicators cover the education cycle from pre-
    primary to vocational and tertiary education. Most EdStats data come from the UNESCO Institute
    of Statistics. EdStats also includes learning outcome data from international and regional learning
    assessments, equity data from household surveys, and projection and attainment data to 2050.

         ▷ Education Expenditures: Education-expenditure data reside in two databases on the
           EdStats website: (i) the EdStats Query–Education Expenditures; and (ii) the World Bank
           Education Expenditure Database, which has been created using data extracted from
           World Bank public expenditure review documents. TBCMF5/ summarizes the
           differences between the databases.


Table TN1: Education-expenditure data base
                                     EdStats Query                              World Bank Education
                                 Education Expenditures                         Expenditure Database
    Use of                    Download core expenditure                     Download detailed expenditure
    Database                  indicators and compare                        data on one country. Data cannot
                              expenditure data across countries.            be used to compare countries.

    Number of
    Indicators                  93                                           More than 800

    Data Source                 UNESCO Institute for Statistics              World Bank PER Documentsa
    a.   The PER documents are available in http://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/wDataQuery/ExpBackground.aspx.



         ▷ EdStats Dashboards: The Key Education Indicators Dashboard presents a broad portrait
           of all levels of a selected country’s education system from pre-primary to tertiary
           education. It includes gender, regional, and income-group comparisons.

         ▷ The State of Education–Expenditure Dashboard: The State of  Education’s  Expenditure
           Dashboard presents a global view of education spending through dynamic maps, charts,
           and accompanying analysis. It presents not only key expenditure indicators such as
           government spending on education as a percentage of gross domestic product, but also
           the correlation between government spending and outputs such as enrollment rateBOE
           MFBSOJOHPVUDPNFT
48   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             •   National Education Accounts (NEA): This tool takes into account multiple education-financing
                 data from different sources, including public, private, and donor funding, in a given country, and
                 seeks to enable international comparisons of education financing (UNESCO 2015a). Drawing a
                 complete picture of education financing in a given country does not necessarily allow international
                 comparisons due to differences in budget classifications. To enable international comparisons, the
                 National Education Accounts methodology (UNESCO Institute for Statistics, UNESCO International
                 Institute for Educational Planning, and IIEP Pôle de Dakar 2016a and 2016b) has been developed
                 on the principles of existing international standards, such as the System of National Accounts (SNA
                 2008), and the International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED 2011). Development of a
                 National Education Account requires a careful matching of country and international classifications,
                 and only a limited number of countries have implemented this tool to date. A long-term goal for
                 the international education community is to enhance the use of this tool to enable international
                 comparisons of education financing across countries.

             •   World Economic Forum annual Global Competitiveness Report: This report has survey data
                 collected from employers in each country. Respondents identify barriers to doing business,
                 including an inadequately educated labor force, and rate the quantity and quality of a number of
                 human-capital measures.

             •   World Bank's Doing Business Survey: This survey is less useful for education than the World
                 Economic Forum survey or the World Bank’s Enterprise Survey. It sometimes assesses labor market
                 regulation.

             •   World Bank’s Enterprise Survey: An Enterprise Survey is a firm-level survey of a representative
                 sample of an economy’s private sector. The surveys cover a broad range of business-environment
                 topics, including access to finance, corruption, infrastructure, crime, competition, labor, and
                 performance measures. The labor module assesses the characteristics of the firm’s employees (e.g.,
                 their educational attainment), the firm’s labor policies (e.g., employee-training programs) and the
                 employer’s views of the extent to which inadequately trained workers constrain their business.
                 Since 2005–06, more than 125,000 interviews in 139 countries have taken place under the Global
                 Methodology. Enterprise Surveys implemented in Eastern Europe and Central Asian countries,
                 conducted jointly with the European Bank for Reconstructionand Development, are also known as
                 Business Environment and Enterprise PerformanceSurveys (BEEPS).

             •   Transparency International: This organization publishes data on perceived corruption by country.
                 In 2013, it published an analysis of the sources of corruption by level of education, including
                 extensive treatment of corruption in higher education.
                                                                                                          49




    Technical Note 5: Research reports

Before starting a public expenditure review, be sure to scan for relevant research reports published
by the World Bank, donor partners, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), or the international
research community. The Bank’s education public expenditure reviews tend to underuse the
international evaluation literature, such as meta-analyses of rigorous evaluations of the effects of
inputs on students’ participation and learning outcomes (Glewwe et al. 2011; Snilstveit et al. 2016).
These studies provide important data on the likely effectiveness of different investments and the
conditions under which effectiveness occurs. As such, they are useful for public expenditure reviews’
analyses of the efficiency and effectiveness of inputs. To locate studies, use these links:

•   World Bank research and publications: Look for Systematic Country Diagnostics, Country
    Economic Memoranda, poverty assessments, earlier public expenditure reviews, Public
    Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS), Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys (QSDS), Service
    Delivery Indicators (SDI) (see    Technical Note 12 for details on PETS, QSDS and SDI), public
    expenditure and financial accountability (PEFA) country reports (see     Technical Note 11 for
    details on PEFA), and other analytical reports.

•   Other sources: Check the websites of international donors and non-governmental organizations
    active in the country in question, websites of the OECD, UNICEF and UNDP, particularly the
    annual Human Development Report.

•   External publications, especially academic research and evaluation studies: Type in JOLIS, scroll
    down, and choose EconLit under “Popular Resources,” then search by topic, author, or title. This
    source of data varies in its quality. Agencies such as the World Bank and academic journals
    have standards and processes, such as peer review requirements, that at least create a floor on
    quality. However, small donor groups, such as non-governmental organizations, may lack such
    processes. Studies conducted by groups such as these can vary widely in quality, depending
    on the individual doing the study. The only way to judge data from these studies is to read the
    original studies.



    Technical Note 6: New data collection

Strongly consider collecting your own data when the topic is important and the data required to
assess it are unavailable or unusable.

•   When new data have to be collected, design decisions by the PER team will define its quality. For
    example, if sampling is required, the team’s choice of its sampling frame and sampling criteria for
    selecting the units to be surveyed will determine if the results can be properly generalized to
    the universe.

•   When new data collection is essential, the team should, as needed, renegotiate the Bank’s budget
    for the expenditure review to cover the costs of new data collection or seek substantial trust
    funding to cover its costs.
50   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             •    If time and budget do not permit new data collection, consider assembling a panel of experts or a
                  focus group to give you a sense of the shape and magnitude of the issue. Methods certainly exist
                  for increasing the validity and reliability of qualitative data collected through expert panels or focus
                  groups. However, the intent here is to determine whether the PER should recommend new data
                  collection if future operations or analytic work must address the issue in question.

             •    If you can do nothing or little about important data gaps, describe them in the review and flag the
                  need for future work. Finesse the data gaps as best you can.



                  Technical Note 7: Deﬁnitions and notes on indicators

                   Core Indicators                                      Definitions / Notes
                 Number of schools                •   By level, location, type
                                                  •   “School” is a service point (or campus that is part of a larger
                                                      educational institution) that provides instructional or education-
                                                      related services to a group of pupils. A school may have a single
                                                      administrative unit with several service points (or group of branch
                                                      schools or satellite school or campuses). An administrative unit
                                                      refers to any school, or group of schools, under a single director
                                                      or a single administration. A service point refers to any location
                                                      that provides a service for pupils or students, whether it is a single
                                                      entity or part of a larger administrative unit (UIS).

                 Number of students               •   By level, gender, school location, school type
                 in school                        •   Total number of students in the theoretical age group for a given
                                                      level of education who are enrolled in that level, expressed as a
                                                      percentage of the total population in that age group (UIS).

                 Number of students in            •   Number of students enrolled in college and university programs
                 tertiary education                   in a given academic year, per 100,000 inhabitants (UIS).



                 Net enrollment rate              •   By level; if net enrollment rate (NER) is not available, gross
                                                      enrollment rate (GER)
                                                  •   Total number of students in the theoretical age group for a given
                                                      level of education who are enrolled in that level, expressed as a
                                                      percentage of the total population in that age group (UIS).

                 Number of out-of-                •   By level
                 school children                  •   Children in the official primary school age range who are not
                                                      enrolled in either primary or secondary schools (UIS).
                                                                                                                                 51




       Core Indicators                                                   Definitions / Notes
   Dropout rate                              •     Proportion of pupils from a cohort enrolled in a given grade at
   by grade                                        a given school year who are no longer enrolled in the following
                                                   school year (UIS) (except for those graduating).

   Repetition rate                           •     Number of repeaters in a given grade in a given school year,
   by grade                                        expressed as a percentage of enrollment in that grade the
                                                   previous school year (UIS).
                                             •     Administrative data usually calculate the number of dropouts
                                                   as those individuals who neither transition to the next grade
                                                   nor are repeaters. But the literature shows that repetition is
                                                   systematically underestimated, producing overestimates of
                                                   dropout rates. Significant internal or external migration also
                                                   poses measurement problems. Students who move are counted
                                                   as dropouts from their school of origin, but this does not mean
                                                   that they do not re-enroll in a school at their new destination.

   Additional Indicators:

   Private educational                       •     Private educational institutions that are controlled and
   institutions                                    managed by a non-governmental organization (e.g., a church, a
                                                   trade union, a business enterprise, or a foreign or international
                                                   agency), or its governing board consists mostly of members
                                                   who have not been selected by a public agency (UIS).

   Net intake rate to Grade                  •     New entrants to Grade 1 of primary education who are of the
   1 of primary education                          official primary school entrance age, expressed as a percentage
                                                   of the population of the same age (UIS).

   New entrants                              •     Students who, during the course of the reference school or
                                                   academic year, enter a program at a given level of education
                                                   for the first time, irrespective of whether the students enter
                                                   the program at the beginning or at an advanced stage of the
                                                   program (UIS).

Note: The UIS Glossary includes terms related to education, science, technology and innovation, culture, and communication and
information, and can be found at http://uis.unesco.org/glossary.
52   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Technical Note 8: Deﬁnition of source of funds

             Sources of funds include public, private, and international sources (UIS). Private entities include
             households, firms and business enterprises, and nonprofit organizations (including religious
             organizations) which, although their principal activity is non-educational, might finance activities in
             the domain of education (UIS).

             A useful source for the relative proportions of public and private expenditure on educational
             institutions by level of education is OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B3.1a.



                 Technical Note 9: School fees and other informal payments

             The burden on households as a result of fee payments can be significant. For instance, the demand
             response in countries that have abolished fees at the primary level (e.g., Malawi, Tanzania, Kenya,
             Uganda, and Cameroon) is strong evidence that tuition fees curtail demand. As Kattan and Burnett
             (2004) point out, in addition to tuition fees, households frequently face a wide range of user fees for
             publicly provided primary education, including textbook fees, compulsory uniforms, parent-teacher
             association (PTA) dues, and various special fees, such as exam fees and community contributions to
             district education boards. In many countries, private tutoring adds to the household costs of primary
             education. Typically, the poorer the family, the greater the burden of education spending. In Thailand,
             for instance, poor households spend 47 percent of their consumption on education, while the average
             for all households is 16 percent.

             The World Bank conducted surveys on user fees in 2001 and 2005, with a focus on fees in primary
             education.29 The 2005 survey included questions about lower secondary education, as well as primary
             education fees. For the primary school level, the Bank collected data for 79 countries in 2001 and 93
             countries in 2005 (out of a total of 144 World Bank client countries). In 2005, it collected data at the
             lower secondary level for 76 countries.

             The 2005 survey results showed that user fees were common at the primary level. Of the 93 countries
             surveyed, only 16 countries had no fees. Five countries had all five types of fees (tuition, textbook,
             uniforms, financial contributions, and other school-based activity fees): the Dominican Republic, Haiti,
             Honduras, Indonesia, and Vietnam. In 59 countries, or 62 percent of those surveyed, national policy did
             not address the elimination of fees. More fees were collected at the lower secondary level (94 percent
             of surveyed countries) than at the primary level (81 percent of countries). In addition, fee levels were
             generally significantly higher in lower secondary than at the primary level. Of the 76 countries for
             which responses were received regarding secondary school fees, 94 percent reported that at least one
             type of fee was collected. Most countries generally had several types of fees; just 10 countries required
             only PTA or community contributions. Fifty-one countries had more than one type of fee in lower
             secondary education, and seven countries had all five types of fees for lower secondary education:
             Bangladesh, Bolivia, Honduras, Indonesia, Lesotho, Mozambique, and Uganda (Kattan 2006).
                                                                                                              53




Informal payments in education are charges for education services or supplies that are meant to be
provided for free or are paid “under the table” directly to public officials or teachers to obtain specific
favors. These are generally measured as the fraction of survey respondents reporting that they made
payments to a public education entity for education services intended to be free of charge. Household
surveys and perception surveys of citizens and public officials are the most common sources of
information. More detailed surveys may also include data on the average value of payments made, the
recipients of the payments, and the specific services for which the payments were made. Types of
informal payments include, but are not restricted to, payments for admission, advancement,
preferential access to resources, and specific grades. Data on informal payments in education are
increasingly being collected, but household surveys vary in whether, and how well, they measure
informal payments (Lewis and Pettersson 2009).



    Technical Note 10: Calculating the share of a nation’s resources going
    to education
Three options are gross domestic product (GDP), gross national product (GNP), and gross national
income (GNI). They differ, sometimes noticeably, depending on the country’s economic
arrangements. All three measures reflect the national output and income of an economy. The main
differences are that gross national product takes into account net income receipts from abroad
(gross domestic product + net property income from abroad). In other words, GNP measures the
value of all goods and services produced by nationals whether in the country or not. Net income
from abroad includes dividends, interest, and profit. Gross national income is based on a principle
similar to gross national product; the World Bank defines GNI as “the sum of value added by all
resident producers plus any product taxes (minus subsidies) not included in the valuation of output,
plus net receipts of primary income (compensation of employees and property income) from
abroad” (see http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GNP.ATLS.CD). The World Bank now uses GNI to
classify economies into income groupings.

Gross national income is possibly a better metric for the overall economic condition of countries
whose economies include substantial foreign investments. However, major comparative databases
for education use gross domestic product in their financial measures, such as unit costs. These
include OECD’s Education at a Glance and UNESCO’s Institute of Statistics. Although gross national
income might be more accurate for certain types of countries (e.g., China), losing comparability to
data in the major education databases is of real concern.
54   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Technical Note 11: Public expenditure and ﬁnancial accountability
                 (PEFA) country reports

             PEFA is a methodology for assessing public financial management performance. It identifies 94
             characteristics (dimensions) across 31 key components of public financial management (indicators)
             in seven broad areas of activity (pillars). The program provides a framework for assessing and
             reporting on the strengths and weaknesses of public financial management (PFM) using quantitative
             indicators to measure performance. The purpose of a good PFM system is to ensure that the policies
             of governments are implemented as intended and that they achieve their objectives. An open and
             orderly public expenditure and financial accountability system is one of the enabling elements needed
             for desirable fiscal and budgetary outcomes. Public expenditure and financial accountability country
             reports provide a snapshot of a country’s performance in this area at specific points in time using a
             methodology that can be replicated in successive assessments, giving a summary of changes over
             time.


                 Technical Note 12: Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys (PETS),
                 Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys (QSDS), and Service Delivery
                 Indicators (SDI)

             Good public expenditure management requires attention to the level of aggregate spending,
             allocation of public funds, and actual service delivery. The Bank’s public expenditure reviews focus
             on the first two issues, but the third tends to receive less attention primarily because of a lack of
             relevant data. Public spending data, irrespective of category, tends to be a poor proxy for actual
             service delivery. Lack of information on actual delivery also creates an identification problem when
             the efficacy of public capital or services needs to be evaluated. The case where public capital or
             services actually created by public funds are highly productive, but the supply system is not, cannot
             be distinguished from the case where the supply system is effective, but the goods and services being
             produced yield few benefits.

             PETS, QSDS, and SDI are designed to provide the missing information from different tiers of
             government and frontline service facilities, using the sample survey approach. The former collect data
             at each tier of government to create a picture of how funds and other resources are flowing and
             where they may be leaking.30 The latter collect a wide variety of information from schools and other
             sources to answer a range of questions about service delivery.


             Methodology

             As their names imply, both of these tools rely primarily on surveys and require the same technical
             expertise as that required by any properly conducted survey. This includes skills in constructing
             sampling; designing and pretesting survey instruments; training and monitoring the performance of
             data collectors; establishing efficient routines for cleaning the data; and analyzing the data. The QSDS,
             especially, also uses public accounts sample data, preferably panel data, on government spending and
             information on outputs of service providers at ministerial, regional, local, and service-provider levels.
                                                                                                                 55




Public Expenditure Tracking Survey

A Public Expenditure Tracking Survey is useful when a resource has to travel from one source to the
beneficiary. An example is the money that a secondary student earns after school to help pay his school
fees, although even here parents can divert the money to buy goods and services for the household,
or even to gamble or drink. Even when the source and beneficiary are close to the same, as when PTAs
raise funds for particular uses by their schools, the money can be diverted through corruption or used
for unintended purposes. As the chain between the initial source and the ultimate beneficiary lengthens,
the chances that the resource will fail to reach the beneficiaries increase. For example, the chain from
the procurement of textbooks by the central level to students in schools can be long, with substantial
loss through poor storage, lack of distribution from subnational storehouses and school storerooms, or
diversion for sale on the private market.31

The first Uganda education Public Expenditure Tracking Survey developed the use of surveys to track
resource flows (Reinikka and Svensson 2004). The survey collected data from central ministries, local
governments (districts), and schools. It tracked the delivery of capitation grants to cover schools’ non-
wage expenditures. Using panel data from a unique survey of primary schools, the study assessed the
extent to which the grant actually reached the intended end-user (schools). The survey data revealed that
during 1991–95, the schools, on average, received only 13 percent of the grants. Most schools received
nothing. The bulk of the school grants were captured by local officials. The data also showed considerable
variation in grants received across schools, suggesting that some schools used their bargaining power
to secure greater shares of funding, rather than being passive recipients of flows from the government.
Specifically, schools in better-off communities managed to claim a higher share of their entitlements. As a
result, actual education spending, in contrast to budget allocations, proved regressive.

The Public Expenditure Tracking Survey for Peru’s “glass of milk,” or Vaso de Leche, program presents an
excellent example of how the flow of complex resources can be traced through multiple levels (World
Bank 2002). This program distributed to low-income families milk in any form, milk substitutes, or other
foods such as soybean, oatmeal, quinoa, and kiwicha. Its main goal was to improve the nutritional level of
infants, small children (school age or younger), and pregnant or breastfeeding mothers, and to improve
the quality of life of the poorest segments of the population.

The project measured leakages through surveys at each level in the transfer process from the central
authority down to the household. Specifically, it traced the flow and leakage of central funds from the
top of the chain to the last link at the bottom, by using survey data at the level of the municipality, at the
level of the local milk-distribution committees, and, finally, at the level of the beneficiary household. The
methodology is very complex, not only because it involved multilevel comparisons, but because the
input itself was transformed from cash to commodities as the funds moved from the top to the bottom,
and as “the commodity” itself actually became commodities, since the program was not limited to milk
or milk products alone. The product was then transformed at the household level, as the food products
were mixed with other foods before being served. Yet, despite this complexity, the survey was able to
determine the relative magnitude of leakages at each level.
56   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             The tracking survey found that targeted beneficiaries received, on average, the equivalent of 29 cents
             of each dollar initially transferred by the Central Government. This does not mean that 71 cents from
             each dollar were fully lost in corruption costs. Rather, the diverted resources leaked away through a
             combination of factors: off-budget administrative costs; expenditure on non-eligible products; in-kind
             deliveries to non-beneficiaries; fees for overpriced items; and, last but not least, sheer corruption.

             Surprisingly, the leakages were much higher at the bottom levels (the Vaso de Leche committees and
             households) than at the top (central government and municipalities). The findings turn on its head
             the conventional belief that every local body is necessarily more accountable than the national and
             public authorities. In addition, the Peru case highlights the importance of good program design and of
             transparent and accountable local organizations.

             The relationship between the direct beneficiaries and the local Vaso de Leche Committees32 has two
             important features. First, final beneficiaries had limited information about decisions made by the
             committees, the amount of resources to which households were entitled, and effective ways to secure
             the resources. Second, the committees operated without transparency or accountability to either the
             beneficiaries or the upper echelons of government. In fact, the committees so dominated the running
             of the program at the local level that they could divert resources from their original purpose, without
             being held accountable or sanctioned for doing so, since neither the higher authorities nor the intended
             beneficiaries knew about it. The committees then distributed the resources at their own discretion and
             sometimes ended up diluting, even unwittingly, the program’s expected effects. These findings highlight
             the design flaws of the program. The local committees were not accountable to the beneficiaries, and
             they were frequently dominated by rent-seeking “representatives” of the program beneficiaries.

             Upon reaching the households, the resources sometimes underwent additional dilution. On average,
             target beneficiaries only received 41 percent of the ration that arrived at the household (not taking
             into account all of the losses associated with earlier leakages). This dilution effect was possible because,
             in most cases, the beneficiaries did not receive their rations directly from the committee; rather, the
             children received the rations through their mothers (or, in some cases, their fathers), who picked up
             the total rations allocated to the household. Consistent with evidence from studies of other nutritional
             assistance programs worldwide, the official distribution criteria are very difficult, if not impossible,
             to enforce. In most cases, it is impossible to exclude non-targeted members of the household from
             utilizing the resources. Furthermore, in about 60 percent of the committees visited, the products were
             distributed in unprepared forms. These unprepared products are frequently mixed into dishes that feed
             the whole family.
                                                                                                                                         57




Quantitative Service Delivery Surveys

A Quantitative Service Delivery Survey examines the efficiency of public spending and incentives, and
various dimensions of service delivery in provider organizations, especially at the level of the service
facility. It measures the resources delivered, such as the actual hours of instruction per day that teachers
provide, the student-textbook ratio at the classroom level, the receipt of fiscal transfers from national
and subnational levels of government, the size and use of the school’s own revenues, and so forth. It also
quantifies the factors affecting the quality of service, such as incentives, accountability mechanisms, and
the relationship between agents and principals. Typically, the facility or frontline service provider is the
main unit of analysis, much in the same way that the firm is the unit of observation in enterprise surveys
and the household in household surveys. In each case, the surveyor collects quantitative data both
through interviews and directly from the service provider’s records. Facility data can be “triangulated”
by also surveying local governments, umbrella non-governmental organizations, and private provider
associations. The compilation of facility-level quantitative data typically requires much more effort
than, say, a perception survey of service users, which makes this type of survey more costly and time-
consuming to implement than its qualitative alternatives.

The Zambia Public Expenditure Tracking Survey and Quantitative Service Delivery Survey
illustrates the types of data (Table TN2) and the range of survey modules (Table TN3) used to
produce a Quantitative Service Delivery Survey.


Table TN2. Data Source

                  Data                                                          Description
   PETS-QSDS 2014                               See sub-section PETS-QSDS 2014

   NAS 2014                                     National assessment of Grade 5 students and teachers

   LCMS 2010 and 2015,                          GER, NER, and out-of-school children
   and  ZDHS 2013-14

   ESB 2013                                     Enrollment and school numbers, repetition and dropout
                                                rates, teacher statistics

   Yellow and Bluebooks                         Government financial statement C and budget

   Interviews and Meetings                      GoZ officials and CPs

Source: World Bank 2015, table 2.1, p.16.
Note: PETS = Public Expenditure Tracking Survey; QSDS = Quantitative Service Delivery Survey; NAS = National Assessment Survey; LCMS =
Living Conditions Measurement Survey; ZDHS = Zambia Demographics and Health Survey; GER = gross enrollment rate; NER = net enrollment
rate; ESB = Education Statistical Bulletin; GOZ = Government of Zambia CPs = Cooperating Partners.
58   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Table TN3: Survey modules, contents, and respondents


                    Data           Primary Respondent/Source                         Description
               Teacher List         Supervisor based on registry     Listing of all teachers (for grades 2, 5, 7, 9
                                    (teacher register)               and 11) and their information.

               Student and          Supervisor                       A list sample students and teachers, and
               Teacher Selection                                     mapping of students and teachers
               Module

               Teacher              Head teacher based on            Basic teacher information and teacher
               Attendance I         registry (attendance book)       attendance for all teachers listed
               (First Visit)

               General School,      Head teacher based on registry   General school information, location,
               Part A               (student and teacher registers   facilities, enrollment, and repetition
                                    and attendance books)

               General School,      Head teacher/financial           School financing, fund flow, expenditure,
               Part B               administrator based on           and decision-making
                                    registry (accounting books)

               Head Teacher,        Head teacher                     Head teacher information
               Part A

               Head Teacher,        Head teacher                     Head teacher personality and motivation
               Part B

               Teacher,             Sample teacher                   Detailed teacher information and
               Part A               (up to three teachers)           characteristics

               Teacher,             Sample teacher                   Teacher personality and motivation
               Part B               (up to three teachers)

               Student,             Sample students                  Detailed student information and
               Part A               (up to 20 students)              characteristics for selected students

               Student,             Sample students                  Student personality and motivation
               Part B               (up to 20 students)

                                                                                           (Table continued on next page)
                                                                                                                            59




           Data                Primary Respondent/Source                                       Description
   Household                     Parents of sample students                      Household demographics, education, and
                                                                                 economics status

   Classroom                     Observer                                        Observation of classroom of Grade 5
   Observation                                                                   sample teachers

   Teacher                       Observer                                        Second unannounced school visit to check
   Attendance II                                                                 attendance of 10 random, sample teacher
   (Second Visit)

   PEO                           Supervisor                                      PEO office information and PETS

   DEBS                          Supervisor                                      DEBS office information and PETS

   Grade 9 Student               Sample students selected for                    Grade 9 student assessment
   Assessment                    interview module 7

   Grade 9 Teacher               Sample teachers selected for                    Grade 9 teacher assessment
   Assessment                    interview module 6
Source: World Bank 2015, table 2.2, p.16.
Note: DEBS = District Education Board Secretaries; PEO= Provincial Education Office.


Another good example of a Public Expenditure Tracking Survey and Quantitative Service Delivery
Survey is Philippines: Assessing Basic Education Service Delivery in the Philippines: Public
Education Expenditure Tracking and Quantitative Service Delivery Study.


Service Delivery Indicators (SDI)

These data are used to assess the quality and performance of education (and health) services
over time. Decision makers can use these data to track progress, and citizens can use them to
hold governments accountable for public spending. The indicators are broken down into three
categories: (i) provider competence and knowledge; (ii) proxies for effort; and (iii) availability of key
infrastructure and inputs. The indicators are quantitative and ordinal in nature (to allow cross-country
and country specific comparisons).33
60   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                Technical Note 13: Deﬁnitions and notes on monetary-input indicators

                    Core Indicators                                 Definitions / Notes
               Public expenditure            OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B4.1
               on education
                                             Public expenditure on education covers direct public
                                             expenditure on educational institutions, as well as public support to
                                             households (e.g., scholarships and loans to students for tuition fees
                                             and student living costs) and to other private entities for education
                                             (e.g., subsidies to companies or labor organizations that operate
                                             apprenticeship programs). It includes expenditure by all public
                                             entities, including ministries other than ministries of education;
                                             local and regional governments; and other public agencies (OECD
                                             2016, 228–9)

               Public expenditure            UIS (EdStats)
               on education as a             OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B4.2
               percentage of total
               public expenditure and        As defined above, “public expenditure on education” includes
               as a percentage of GDP,       public subsidies to households for living costs, which are not spent
               by level of education         in educational institutions. Therefore, the figures presented here
                                             exceed those on public spending on education institutions found
                                             in Table B2.3 below (OECD 2016, 231)

               Government                    (i) Average total general government expenditure (current, capital,
               expenditure per student       and transfers) per student in the given level of education, expressed
               (i) as a percentage of per    as a percentage of per capita GDP (UIS)
               capita GDP; (ii) in U.S.      http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.XPD.PRIM.PC.ZS (primary);
               dollars; and (iii) in local   http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.XPD.SECO.PC.ZS?end=201
               currency, by level of         1&start=2011&view=chart (secondary);
               education                     http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SE.XPD.TERT.PC.ZS?
                                             end=2011&start=2011&view=chart (tertiary)

                                             (ii) Average total general government expenditure (current, capital,
                                             and transfers) per student in the given level of education, expressed
                                             in nominal U.S. dollars at market exchange rates (UIS). Wils (2015)
                                             and UNESCO (2015d) project per student spending by country

                                             (iii) Average total general government expenditure (current, capital,
                                             and transfers) per student in the given level of education, expressed
                                             in local currency (UIS)

                                                                                       	5BCMFDPOUJOVFEPOOFYUQBHF

                                                                                                                61




     Core Indicators                                     Definitions / Notes
Expenditure on                   UIS (EdStats)
educational institutions         OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B2.3.
as a percentage of GDP,
by source of funding
(public and private), and
by level of education

Annual expenditure per           OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B1.1.
student by educational
institutions for all             In equivalent U.S. dollars, converted using purchasing power parity
services, by level               (PPP) for GDP, by level of education, based on full-time equivalents
of education                     Note that this OECD indicator includes private spending on tuition
                                 fees that occur at educational institutions. In reality, it might be
                                 difficult to include private spending at educational institutions when
                                 calculating per student spending

                                 Per student spending can be broken down by subnational unit if
                                 the budget data and education statistics are available at subnational
                                 level. If school-level budget data and education statistics are
                                 available, and schools’ locations (typically, urban or rural) can be
                                 identified, per student spending by geographical locations can be
                                 computed. If schools may be categorized by language of instruction,
                                 or religion, breakdown by those categories can be done

Annual expenditure per           OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B1.4.
student by educational
institutions for all services,   In percentage of per capita GDP
relative to per capita GDP,
by level of education

Relative expenditure per         Per student spending can be expressed relatively between levels of
student (unit cost) by           education. The expenditure for primary is treated as the "base case".
level of education               The expenditure for each other level/type of education is expressed
                                 as a percent of the base case. E.g., primary 1.0; secondary 1.2 (20
                                 percent higher than primary); tertiary 1.5 (50 percent higher than
                                 primary). This indicator can show the relative cost of different levels
                                 of education easily

Public expenditure on            OECD, Education at a Glance (2016),
education by economic            Table B6.1. Share of current and capital expenditure by education level
classification                   Table B6.2. Share of current expenditure by resource category
                                 (compensation of teachers, compensation of other staff, and other
                                 current expenditure)
                                                                               (Table continued on next page)
62   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                    Core Indicators                                  Definitions / Notes
                                             Capital expenditure: expenditure for education goods or assets
                                             that yield benefits for a period of more than one year. It includes
                                             expenditure for construction, renovation and major repairs of
                                             buildings, and the purchase of heavy equipment or vehicles. It
                                             represents the value of assets acquired or created–i.e., the amount
                                             of capital formation–during the year in which the expenditure
                                             occurs (UIS).

                                             Current expenditure: expenditure for educational goods and
                                             services consumed within the current year and which would have
                                             to be renewed if needed in the following year (UIS).

                                             Ideally, salary data should include all “staff compensation” as defined
                                             below: expenditure on teaching staff and non-teaching staff
                                             salaries; contributions by employers or public authorities for staff
                                             retirement and pension programs, and social insurance; and other
                                             allowances and benefits (UIS).

                                             Current expenditure other than for staff compensation: expenditure
                                             on school books and teaching materials, ancillary services, and
                                             administration and other activities (UIS).

                                             Teachers or teaching staff: persons employed full-time or part-time
                                             in an official capacity to guide and direct the learning experience
                                             of pupils and students, irrespective of their qualifications or the
                                             delivery mechanism (i.e., face-to-face or distance learning). This
                                             definition excludes educational personnel who have no active
                                             teaching duties (e.g., headmasters, headmistresses, or principals
                                             who do not teach), or who work occasionally or in a voluntary
                                             capacity in educational institutions (UIS).

                                             Non-teaching staff: persons employed by educational institutions
                                             who have no instructional responsibilities. Although the definition
                                             can vary from one country to another, non-teaching staff generally
                                             include head teachers, principals and other administrators of
                                             schools, supervisors, counselors, school psychologists, school health
                                             personnel, librarians or educational-media specialists, curriculum
                                             developers, inspectors, education administrators at the local,
                                             regional, and national level, clerical personnel, building operations
                                             and maintenance staff, security personnel, transportation workers,
                                             and catering staff (UIS).


                                                                                        	5BCMFDPOUJOVFEPOOFYUQBHF

                                                                                                              63




     Core Indicators                                Definitions / Notes
Salary cost of teachers   OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B7.1.
per student by level of
education                 Teachers’ compensation usually consists of the largest part of
                          education spending, and thus, spending per student.

                          The salary cost of teachers per student is a function of (i) the
                          instruction time of students, (ii) the teaching time of teachers, (iii)
                          teachers’ salaries, and (iv) the number of teachers needed to teach
                          students, which depends on estimated class size (OECD 2015).

                          Differences among countries in these four factors may explain, to
                          a large extent, differences in spending per student. Conversely,
                          a similar level of spending per student may be associated with
                          different combinations of these factors. In other words, governments
                          may be able to improve efficiency by changing combinations of
                          these factors. For a detailed definition of this indicator, see “Box
                          B7.1. Relationship between salary cost of teachers per student and
                          instruction time of students, teaching time of teachers, teachers’
                          salaries and class size” (OECD 2016, 264).


Teacher salary relative   OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table B7.2.
to public sector wages,
per capita GDP, and       This indicator helps judge the adequacy of teacher salary level
those with similar        relative to the country’s economic capacity and context. Data from
qualifications            a labor force or household survey can be used to compare wages
                          among public servants and between similarly qualified individuals
                          in the private and public sectors. It is also important to understand
                          how teacher salaries are set and paid.

                          Teachers’ salary cost per student as a percentage of per capita GDP,
                          by level of education.

Teachers’ statutory       OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table D3.1.
salaries, based on
typical qualifications,   Annual teachers’ salaries, in equivalent U.S. dollars, converted using PPPs
at different points in    for private consumption.
teachers’ careers
                          Teachers' salaries are expressed as statutory salaries, which are
                          scheduled salaries according to official pay scales. The salaries reported
                          are defined as gross salaries (total sum of money that is paid by the
                          employer for the labor supplied) minus the employers' contribution to
                          social security and pension (according to existing salary scales) (OECD).

                          Salaries at starting; after 10 years of experience; after 15 years of
                          experience; at top of scale, by level of education.
                                                                             (Table continued on next page)
64   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                    Core Indicators                                       Definitions / Notes
               Teachers’ actual salaries          OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table D3.2a.
               relative to wages of tertiary-
               educated workers                   Ratio of salary, using annual average salaries (including bonuses
                                                  and allowances) of teachers in public institutions relative to the
                                                  wages of workers with similar educational attainment (weighted
                                                  average,) and relative to the wages of full-time, full-year workers
                                                  with tertiary education.

               Comparison of teachers’            OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table D3.3a.
               statutory salaries, based
               on typical qualifications          Ratio of salaries at different points in teachers’ careers, and
                                                  salary per hour in U.S. dollars converted using PPPs for private
                                                  consumption.
                                                  Ratio of salary at top of scale to starting salary.
                                                  Salary per hour of net contact (teaching) time after 15 years of
                                                  experience (in U.S. dollars).


                 Technical Note 14: Calculating unit costs from aggregate and
                 itemized spending
             Mingat, Tan, and Sosale (2003) identify two basic ways to compute unit costs. Both should yield consistent
             results. In one approach, unit costs are calculated by dividing aggregate spending, such as that reported
             in budget documents, by the number of students. This is easy to implement, but the method can have
             problems. First, the aggregate data may be organized under rubrics that prevent clear-cut attribution
             of spending by level or type of education. For example, administrative expenditures may appear as one
             entry, with no distinction by level of education. A second problem is that the aggregate data may be
             organized according to sources of funds or to the structure of the government bureaucracy. As a result,
             expenditure for a given level of education may appear in several places in the budget, possibly without
             any detail regarding functional categories. For example, in some countries, the budget documents
             show spending supported by external donors separately, even though for analytical purposes, the
             expenditure may belong in the same category as the government’s own spending. In addition, the data
             may not distinguish between capital investments and recurrent spending, making it difficult to compute
             meaningful indicators of costs.

             Given the potential shortcomings and incompleteness of the foregoing approach, it is useful to check the
             estimates against those obtained through another approach, namely, by building up from the constituent
             parts of costs. In this approach, the cost components are identified, evaluated, and then aggregated to
             obtain the desired estimates. In primary education, for example, teachers and pedagogical materials are two
             of the main components of costs. Thus, the unit cost of these components is calculated separately and then
             added together to obtain an estimate of the overall unit cost of primary education. Furthermore, instead of
             dividing aggregate spending on each component by the number of students, other data can be used to
             make the estimates. For example, to obtain the unit cost of teacher inputs, we would use data on teacher
             salaries and pupil-teacher ratios. This approach yields more detailed analysis of education costs and provides
             a basis for simulating the cost implications of alternative choices in the delivery of education services.
                                                                                                                    65




    Technical Note 15: Calculating unit costs when country's ﬁscal year
    and school year do not coincide

Although countries can differ in their definition of their fiscal year, it usually runs January 1 to December
31. The school year is almost always split across fiscal years. The unit cost can be calculated for a school
year or for a fiscal year. However, the school year is usually the desired estimate.

Take this example: The fiscal year runs from January 1 to December 31. The school year is from September
to June (where teachers are paid for 10 months), and September to August (where teachers are paid for
12 months). Assume that in Fiscal 2001, total expenditures in primary education are $100; in Fiscal 2002,
$110. In School Year 2001/02, the total number of students enrolled in primary education is 15 students.
Figure 1 shows how the school year splits across the fiscal years.

Figure TN1: Unit costs for one school year and two ﬁscal years
                                                   MONTH
   1         2        3        4         5        6        7         8        9       10        11        12
 FY 2001 expenditures for primary education: US$100
                                                                              School year 2001/02: primary
 FY 2002 expenditures for primary education: US$110
 Enrollment: 15 students

The unit costs for School Year 2001/02 are:
        - 0.4 of US$100 + 0.6 of US$110)/15 students = US$7.07/per capita (where teachers are paid
          for 10 months a year)
        - 0.4 of US$100 + 0.8 of US$110)/15 students = US$8.53/per capita (where teachers are paid
          for 12 months a year)

    Technical Note 16: Deﬁnitions and notes on non-monetary
    input indicators

       Core Indicators                                     Definitions / Notes
  Human resources inputs

  Pupil/student-teacher              Average number of pupils per teacher at a given level of education,
  ratio (PTR or STR) by              based on headcounts of both pupils and teachers (UIS)
  level, geographical
  location, and group                Governments may have a policy defining a minimum or maximum
  of schools                         student-teacher ratio. If this ratio continues declining, the government
                                     may need to require or incentivize subnational governments or
                                     schools to reduce the number of teachers to maintain the target size

                                                                                   (Table continued on next page)
66   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Core Indicators                                   Definitions / Notes
               Percentage of qualified       A qualified teacher is one who has the minimum academic
               teachers                      qualifications necessary to teach at a specific level of education in a
                                             given country. This is usually related to the subject(s) they teach (UIS).

               Ratio of teachers to non-     Whereas PERs tend to focus on efficiency of distribution of teachers,
               teaching staff                that of non-teaching staff can be also important in countries where
                                             there is a generous supply of non-teaching staff. 

               Non-teaching staff per        Some countries define norms for non-teaching staff per school size
               type of school                (number of students), school area, type of school, etc. Those norms
                                             may be very generous, indicating possible room for efficiency gains.

               Organization of teachers’     OECD, Education at a Glance (2016), Table D4.1
               working time  
                                             The proportion of statutory working time spent teaching provides
                                             information on the amount of time available for non-teaching
                                             activities, such as lesson preparation, correction, in-service training,
                                             and staff meetings. A large proportion of statutory working time
                                             spent teaching may indicate that less time is devoted to tasks such as
                                             assessing students and preparing lessons. It also could indicate that
                                             teachers have to perform these tasks on their own time and, hence,
                                             to work more hours than required by statutory working time.

                                             Actual teaching time is the annual average number of hours that
                                             full-time teachers teach a group or class of students, including all
                                             extra hours, such as overtime. Statutory teaching time is defined as
                                             the scheduled number of 60-minute hours per year that a full-time
                                             teacher teaches a group or class of students, as set by policy, teachers’
                                             contracts of employment, or other official documents. Teaching
                                             time can be defined on a weekly or annual basis. Annual teaching
                                             time is normally calculated as the number of teaching days per
                                             year, multiplied by the number of hours a teacher teaches per day
                                             (excluding preparation time and periods of time formally allowed for
                                             breaks between lessons or groups of lessons). At the primary level,
                                             short breaks between lessons are included if the classroom teacher is
                                             responsible for the class during these breaks.


                                                                                             (Table continued on next page)
                                                                                                          67




   Core Indicators                              Definitions / Notes
Classroom inputs

Average class size        The average class size refers to the number of enrolled students divided
                          by the number of classes for the whole country. To ensure comparability
                          among countries, special-needs programs are excluded. Data include
                          only regular programs at primary and lower secondary levels of
                          education and exclude teaching in subgroups outside the regular
                          classroom setting (UIS).

                          Governments may have a policy defining a minimum and maximum for
                          average class size. If this ratio continues declining, the government may
                          need to require or incentivize subnational governments or schools to
                          consolidate schools and classes to maintain the target size.


Student-textbook ratio    This indicator may be important in countries where textbook
                          supply is an issue.

Percentage of schools     Minimum standards for educational inputs may include standards on
meeting minimum           prescribed textbooks, and access to computers for learning purposes. 
standards requirements
for  educational inputs


Annual instructional      This consists of the required number of hours of instruction per
time                      year. It is not the same as hours in school because those hours
                          may include lunch and inter-class breaks. What is the required
                          number of instructional hours per week for core subjects by grade?
                          For vocational and educational training, what are theoretical and
                          practical instruction hours? 

Infrastructure inputs

Average school size       This indicator may suggest a possible need to rationalize the school
                          network in some parts of the country. It is often observed in countries
                          where the school-age population is decreasing, or where rapid
                          urbanization is taking place so that rural schools are losing students.
                          Factors that influence a decision on whether to build a school
                          include standards for maximum distance that primary- and
                          secondary-level students should walk to school, and for minimum
                          population in the catchment area required to establish a school.
                                                                         (Table continued on next page)
68   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Core Indicators                                   Definitions / Notes
               Unit cost of building         The unit cost is primarily determined by construction materials,
               a classroom                   school design, and equipment. Vocational education and training
                                             programs require occupation-specific workshops and equipment.

               Standards and schedule for    It is essential that the education budget include facility maintenance
               infrastructure maintenance    and is fully disbursed for maintenance purposes.

               Percentage of schools         Multiple-shift schools may be prevalent where there are not enough
               that run double shifts,       school buildings to offer single-shift schools. It is an efficient way
               triple shifts                 of using existing infrastructure, but not ideal, particularly if a school
                                             runs more than two shifts.

               Percentage of schools         Multi-grade schools may be used to manage small student
               that use multi-grade          populations in rural areas. It is efficient to combine grades, but
               classrooms                    teacher training on multi-grade teaching is essential to provide
                                             good-quality teaching. Without proper training, such an approach
                                             may lead to poor-quality education and outcomes.

               Percentage of schools         Minimum standards for learning conditions may include standards on
               meeting minimum               potable water, functional hygienic facilities, electricity, and libraries.
               standards requirements
               for learning conditions


                Technical Note 17: Deﬁnitions and notes on research indicators

                  Core Indicators                                   Definitions / Notes
               Doctorate productivity        The number of doctorate degrees, relative to the number of full-time
                                             equivalent (FTE) academic staff.

               Research publications         The number of research publications attributed to the department
               (absolute numbers)            and that are indexed in the Web of Science Core Collection database,
                                             where at least one author is affiliated with the source university or
                                             higher-education institution.

               Citation rate                 The average number of times the department’s research publications
                                             from the period 2010–13 are cited in other research (published in
                                             2010–15), adjusted (normalized) at the global level for the field of
                                             science, and the year in which a publication appeared.

                                                                                             (Table continued on next page)
                                                                                                            69




   Core Indicators                                Definitions / Notes
Top-cited papers           The proportion of the department’s research publications that,
                           compared to other publications in the same field and in the same
                           year, belong to the top 10 percent of most frequently cited papers.

Interdisciplinary          Percentage of department’s research publications that belong to the field’s
publications               top 10 percent of publications with the highest interdisciplinary scores.

Research orientation       The degree to which research in the field informs the education offered
of teaching                by the institution (based on a survey of students in the program).

Postdoctoral positions     The number of postdoctoral positions relative to the number of
                           academic staff who work full-time or equivalent.

External research income   Revenue for research that is not part of a core (or base) grant received
                           from the government. Includes research grants from national
                           and international funding agencies, research councils, research
                           foundations, charities, and other nonprofit organizations. Measured in
                           €1,000s, using Purchasing Power Parities (PPP). Expressed per full-time
                           equivalent academic staff.

Research publications      The number of research publications indexed in the Web of Science
(size-normalized)          database, where at least one author is affiliated with the university,
                           relative to the number of students.

Publication output         Number of all research publications included in the institution’s
                           publications databases, where at least one author is affiliated with the
                           institution (per full-time equivalent academic staff)

Art-related output         The number of scholarly outputs in the creative and performing arts,
                           relative to the full-time equivalent number of academic staff.

Citation rate              The average number of times the university’s research publications are
                           cited in other research (during 2011–14); adjusted (normalized) at the
                           global level to take into account differences in publication years and
                           to allow for differences in citation customs across academic fields.

                                                                           (Table continued on next page)
70   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                   Core Indicators                                      Definitions / Notes
               Interdisciplinary                 Extent to which reference lists of the university’s publications reflect
               publications                      cited publications in journals from different scientific disciplines.


               Research publications             The number of university research publications (indexed in the Web
               (absolute numbers)                of Science Core Collections database), where at least one author is
                                                 affiliated with the source university or higher-education institution.



                 Technical Note 18: Eﬃciency of the curriculum

             Focused on a few, versus many, subjects. A curriculum fragmented across multiple subjects increases
             the number of different subject-matter specialists required. In this situation, teachers are less apt to
             be deployed efficiently, either because they are assigned classes out of their specialty (competence
             mismatches), or because specialty teachers teach fewer than the usual hours. A fragmented curriculum
             also increases the textbook varieties required, and disperses students’ learning instead of focusing it on a
             few core subjects.

             Focused on a limited, versus large, number of topics in each subject. A curriculum can cover a
             large number of topics in each subject, but inevitably, superficially. This approach usually necessitates
             revisiting the topic over several grades. Or a curriculum can address only a few topics per subject, but in
             depth, and then leave the topic. Studies show that the latter approach is much more efficient in terms of
             the use of instructional time and student's learning.



                 Technical Note 19: Demographic trends and enrollment projections

             A country’s demographic structure and trends significantly affect the sustainability of education
             spending. When examining the demographics data, it is important to understand what trends in
             the school-age population may imply about the inputs required now and in future. If the population
             is trending down, do trend data on the size of the teaching force and number of classrooms in use
             indicate that the government is downsizing inputs into the system—for example, reducing the
             number of teachers, or closing schools or classrooms?

             Population data by single-year or five-year age groups—preferably for male, female, and total between
             0 and 29 years of age, for the last five years and as projected for the next decade—will be useful.
             Population data is usually available in the government’s population census statistics book (typically,
             General Statistics Office), or UN World Population Prospects. EdStats also has this kind of population
             data in the Core Indicator Query.
                                                                                                               71




    Technical Note 20: UNESCO’s Education Policy and Strategy
    Simulation Model (EPSSim)

EPSSim is a sector-wide and goals-based generic model comprising the common features of all
modern school systems, together with a set of optional components to be included or excluded as
required to achieve a first approximation of a country’s education system development. It is driven
by demographic trends; enrollment targets are taken as a priori and the simulation calculates the
corresponding financial-resource implications.

At the national level, EPSSim can accompany countries through all stages of the strategic planning and
management cycle. The model was conceived with a view to providing technical and methodological
support to national administrations and specialists in education ministries in their efforts to formulate
credible education development plans and programs, including in the context of the Education for
All (EFA) goals. The aim of the model is to provide a potentially self-contained package (including
self-training features) that can be deployed by country planners without external support and can be
adapted within a typical range of structural alternatives with minimal expertise. For instance, the model
contains some built-in training modules which provide exercises on the key indicators used in the
model and enable users to conduct a simplified simulation using hypothetical data.

EPSSim starts by computing the projected intake, enrollment, and flow rates on the basis of
population data, enrollment status, and policy objectives. The number of enrollments by level and
type of education, combined with the current and future modalities of resource utilization (teaching
staff, equipment, infrastructure, etc.), enable the estimation of future requirements for teachers, non-
teaching staff, instructional materials, educational facilities, and so forth. These projected requirements,
together with cost-related data and hypotheses, provide information on financial requirements and the
possible financing gaps associated with certain education policy goals.

The EPSSim software can be downloaded from UNESCO’s Inter-Agency Network on Education
Simulation Models (INESM) website.

For EPSSim file downloads, see: http://archive.is/U6qrO. For user guidance and more information on the
model, see: http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0022/002201/220198E.pdf.



    Technical Note 21: Simulating the economy-wide eﬀects of
    alternative education scenarios

Appropriately designed Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) models may be the best tool for
assessing the broad effects of alternative education scenarios. If such a model is used, it is essential
that the Computable General Equilibrium analysis and the rest of the public expenditure review be
closely integrated.

One such model is MAMS (Maquette for MDG Simulations), developed at the World Bank to assess
strategies for achieving the 2015 Millennium Development Goals (MDG) and currently being
broadened for the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).34 In most applications, MAMS divides
72   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             education into three levels (primary, secondary, and tertiary). It considers the impact of private and
             government educational services on educational attainment and views financing of the government
             budget in the context of the projected growth in domestic tax revenues, foreign aid, and non-
             education demands on government resources (which sometimes may be reduced thanks to improved
             government efficiency). The level and distribution of labor market entrants across different educational
             levels influence production in different sectors, wages, trade, and gross domestic product. Such a
             detailed, economy-wide assessment of educational policies may have particularly high payoffs in
             low-income countries that are expected to see sharp increases in enrollment at different levels. In
             those countries, while government spending on education may increase to meet growing demand for
             teachers and other education workers, the actual supply of such workers may increase with a time lag,
             potentially resulting in supply-and-demand mismatches.

             Depending on the country context and data availability, it may alternatively be better to use a more
             macro-oriented model that needs only data that are available for virtually any country. Such a model,
             labeled GEM-Education (the General Equilibrium Model for Education), is currently being piloted.
             The model splits the economy into two sectors (private and public). Then, it assesses the impact of
             alternative scenarios for enrollment and government-education services—which are translated into
             changes in government consumption and investment spending—on a set of key economic indicators.
             These include: household consumption and other final demands, gross domestic product, poverty,
             and the government budget. The channels through which different education scenarios impact the
             economy are: (i) labor productivity (mainly by influencing the educational composition of the labor
             force); and (ii) government spending, which requires adjustments in financing from some combination
             of domestic and foreign sources (taxes, foreign grants, and foreign and domestic borrowing)
             (World Bank 2013).
                                                                                                         73




 Technical Note 22: Deﬁnitions and notes on output and
 outcome indicators

    Core Indicators                               Definitions / Notes
Gross enrollment rate      Number of students enrolled in a given level of education,
                           regardless of age, expressed as a percentage of the official school-
                           age population corresponding to the same level of education. For
                           the tertiary level, the population used is the five-year age group
                           starting from the official secondary school graduation age (UIS).

Net enrollment rate        Total number of students in the theoretical age group for a given
                           level of education enrolled in that level, expressed as a percentage
                           of the total population in that age group (UIS).

Dropout rate by grade      Proportion of pupils from a cohort enrolled in a given grade at
                           a given school year who are no longer enrolled in the following
                           school year, except for those graduating (UIS).

Repetition rate by grade   Number of repeaters in a given grade in a given school year,
                           expressed as a percentage of enrollment in that grade the previous
                           school year (UIS).

Completion of an           Participation in all components of an educational program
educational program        (including final exams, if any), irrespective of the result of any
                           potential assessment of achievement of learning objectives (UIS).

Education attainment       The highest International Standard Classification of Education
rate                       (ISCED) level of education an individual has successfully completed.
                           This is usually measured with respect to the highest educational
                           program successfully completed which is typically certified by a
                           recognized qualification. Recognized intermediate qualifications are
                           classified at a lower level than the program itself (UIS).

Attendance rate            In contrast to the enrollment rate, this indicator sheds light on
                           the frequency with which students attend school or education
                           programs. Attendance-rate data are collected in household
                           surveys such as Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS),
                           Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS), and Living Standards
                           Measurement Study (LSMS).

                                                                        (Table continued on next page)
74   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Core Indicators                                     Definitions / Notes
               Labor force participation        Employment and wage data for recent graduates are often used
                                                to shed light on this question. But be aware that these data reflect
               Employment and                   supply-and-demand interactions, not necessarily the adequacy of
               unemployment rates               the skills developed by the educational system.

               External research                Research revenue that is not part of a core (or base) grant
               income                           received from the government. It includes research grants from
                                                national and international funding agencies, research councils,
                                                research foundations, charities, and other nonprofit organizations.
                                                Measured in €1,000s using Purchasing Power Parities (PPP).
                                                Expressed per full-time equivalent academic staff.

                 Technical Note 23: Concepts of eﬀectiveness and eﬃciency

                 Concept                                              Definition
               Effectiveness       When something is deemed effective, it has met an intended, desired, or
                                   expected outcome. Unlike the concept of efficiency, effectiveness alone is
                                   determined without reference to costs. In popular discourse, effectiveness
                                   means “doing the right thing,” and efficiency means “doing the thing right.” 
                                   When effectiveness is combined with cost, “cost-effectiveness” relates monetary
                                   inputs and non-monetary outputs and outcomes.

               Technical and       Technical and productive efficiency are two closely related concepts that are
               productive          often lumped together under the term technical efficiency. In both cases, we
               efficiency          are looking for the best outcomes at least cost, a result that may be achieved in
                                   either of two ways: (i) by reducing the inputs used by a given intervention to the
                                   minimum required to achieve the outcome sought (technical efficiency), or (ii)
                                   by selecting a different intervention—i.e., one with a different combination of
                                   resources—that achieves at less cost the outcome sought as well as, or better
                                   than, the alternatives (productive efficiency).

                                   Technical efficiency refers to the physical relation between a set of resources
                                   (capital and labor) and an education outcome. A technically efficient position is
                                   achieved when the maximum possible improvement in the outcome is obtained
                                   from the resource inputs. An intervention is technically inefficient if the same (or
                                   greater) outcome could be produced with less of one type of input. For example,
                                   if research shows that a student-textbook ratio of 2/1 results in the same learning
                                   gains as a ratio of 1/1, the higher ratio is technically more efficient. Technical
                                   efficiency cannot directly compare alternative interventions.

                                   Productive efficiency, closely related to the concept of technical efficiency,
                                   directly compares alternative interventions. It asks about the cost benefit or
                                   cost-effectiveness ratios of resource combination A versus alternative resource
                                   combinations. For example, if the objective is to improve teachers’ classroom

                                                                                              (Table continued on next page)
                                                                                                     75




 Concept                                        Definition
             performance, educators can try alternative training regimes. Teachers can attend
             a week of training at a teacher college. They can participate with their same-grade
             or same-subject colleagues in weekly, facilitated training sessions at their schools.
             They can take online courses at home beamed via the government television
             station. What does each option cost, and how well does it improve teachers’
             classroom performances? Since different combinations of inputs are being used,
             the choice between interventions is based on the relative costs of these different
             inputs relative to the same outcome (better teacher classroom performance).
             Productive efficiency enables assessment of the relative value for money of
             interventions with directly comparable outcomes. It cannot address the impact
             of reallocating resources at a broader level—for example, from teacher training to
             infrastructure—because the education outcomes are incommensurate.

Allocative   Allocative efficiency takes account of the productive efficiency with which
efficiency   education resources are used to produce education outcomes and how these
             outcomes are distributed among the community. Such a societal perspective is
             rooted in welfare economics. The World Bank defines the concept of allocative
             efficiency as the capacity of government to distribute resources on the basis of
             how well its public programs meet its strategic objectives (Schick 1998; Shand
             2000). This includes the ability to shift resources from old priorities to new ones,
             and from less- to more-effective programs. Allocative efficiency thus requires
             that governments establish and prioritize objectives, and that they assess the
             actual or expected contribution of public expenditures to those objectives.
             Shand’s (2000) summary of the basic principles of allocative efficiency states
             that expenditures should be affordable in the medium term and be based on
             government priorities and the effectiveness of public programs.

Internal     Internal efficiency measures the percentage of children who complete an
efficiency   educational cycle (e.g., primary education or lower secondary education) as a
             share of those who start the cycle or as a percentage of those who finish the
             cycle in the minimum number of years. The first definition allows the calculation
             of the dropout rate—i.e., the number of those who start, minus the number
             who ultimately complete as a share of those who start. The second definition
             measures the dropout rate plus the repetition rate. Dropping out imposes costs
             on individuals and countries in the form of unrealized human capital. Repetition
             imposes costs on the sector in the form of its having to pay double (or triple)
             the unit cost of a year of school per repeater.
External     External efficiency measures the returns to individuals, employers, and the
efficiency   country of public and private investments in education. It depends on a match
             between the type and quality of skills and knowledge that school leavers
             acquire in school relative to the skills and knowledge needed by the country and
             needed and paid for by employers. Does education improve the employability
             and wages of school leavers? Does public investment in education and training
             contribute to the country’s growth and economic development? Measuring and
             linking employment and wage returns to education is particularly important for
             vocational education and training, and for tertiary education.
76   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Technical Note 24: Cost-eﬀectiveness analysis

             Cost-effectiveness relates monetary inputs and non-monetary outputs and outcomes. An increasing
             number of impact evaluations of various interventions have assessed their cost-effectiveness relative
             to student learning and other outcomes. For instance, to provide comparable cost-effectiveness
             estimates across different policy options, the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL) has
             adopted a standard methodology for conducting cost-effectiveness analysis of randomized trials of
             29 programs.35 The trials found that the effectiveness and costs of numerous strategies to improve
             student learning vary considerably. Some programs achieve learning gains with much greater cost-
             effectiveness than others.

             Be alert to the quality of cost-effectiveness analyses. The risks of correlations being interpreted as
             causal relationships rise substantially when the methodology of the study does not use a randomized
             controlled trial, a difference in differences (DD) regression design, a regression discontinuity design
             (RDD), or matching methods. For example, teachers with formal degrees may increase their students’
             learning more than teachers without such qualifications. However, teachers who obtain formal
             degrees may differ in important ways from those who do not, and these differences may account
             more for their students’ learning gains than the teachers’ formal degrees.

             Most research studies in the development literature do not protect well against bias and cannot
             be properly used to draw causal inferences (X causes Y). At the same time, if these are the only
             studies available, flag the potential for bias, triangulate where possible, and be very careful to state
             conclusions in correlational, not causal, terms. For critical policy questions, suggest that a small,
             randomized trial be conducted to sort out correlation from causation.

             Careful meta-analyses36 of the effects of inputs on participation in school and learning find
             numerous instances where the “common wisdom” about the effects of inputs is either wrong or
             fails to take into account the conditions that have to be in place for those effects to occur. Take the
             example of textbooks. The 3ie study reported a relatively consistent pattern of textbooks having
             no effect on learning outcomes, as measured by math, language, and composite test scores
             (Snilstveit 2016). However, the study found that many of these programs experienced
             implementation challenges—e.g., the books did not reach the students because they were
             locked up for “safekeeping."

             For their methodologically less-rigorous sample of 79 studies, Glewwe et al. (2011) found that
             most studies showed positive effects, and that most of these effects were statistically significant.
             This evidence strongly suggests that textbooks and similar materials (workbooks, exercise books)
             increased student learning.

             However, when the analysis was restricted to the methodologically more-rigorous sample of 43
             studies, the estimated effects of textbooks were far from unanimous. Slightly less than half of the
             estimates showed positive effects, and only three of these were significantly positive (and one was
             significantly negative). Thus, after dropping less-rigorous studies, the evidence that textbooks and
             similar materials (workbooks, exercise books) increased student learning was quite weak.
                                                                                                          77




The one “gold standard” randomized, controlled trial in the Glewwe et al. (2011) sample found no
impact of providing textbooks. However, the authors of that study conducted further analyses to
determine why textbooks did not raise scores. The results of the study did not appear to be statistical
artifacts. The treatment and comparison schools were similar in geographic location, enrollment,
and pre-program test scores. Neither selection nor attrition bias appeared to drive the results.
They found that the effectiveness of textbooks depended on prior conditions: textbooks improved
the scores of students with higher pre-test scores. In other words, there was an interaction effect
between pre-test scores and assignment to the textbook program that had a highly significant,
positive correlation with post-test scores. Initially better students could benefit from the textbooks
much more than initially weak students. The authors also found that the official Kenyan government
textbooks were of limited use to many students. English is the medium of instruction in Kenyan
schools, but it was the third language for many pupils, including those examined in this study. The
study showed that many students could not read the textbooks.

    Technical Note 25: Cost-beneﬁt analysis

Cost-benefit analysis, or CBA, is used when both the costs and outcomes can be monetized.37
Rate-of-return analysis is the type of cost-benefit analysis most frequently applied to education.
Rates of return to investments in schooling have been estimated since the late 1950s. George
Psacharopoulos’s (1973) findings on the rates of return to education—that primary education
ought to be the main focus of national school systems, since its rate of return was found to be
the highest among all education levels—continues to play an important role in the formation of
significant global educational policies. In the intervening 40-plus years, however, the economies
of many developing countries have matured, changing the relative returns to different levels of
education. More recent discussions of the rates of return include Psacharopoulos and Patrinos
(2004) and Montenegro and Patrinos (2014).
78   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Technical Note 26: Calculating the budget costs of one completer
                  and of one uninterrupted completer

             This is a hypothetical example, although it uses real data for dropout rates by primary grade and
             for average repetition rates for primary education. It shows how to calculate what it costs to
             get one completer, who may, or may not have repeated one or more grades, and what it costs
             to get one uninterrupted completer who repeats no grades. The example does not calculate
             the substantial social and individual costs of dropping out of school, although, by making
             certain assumptions, this could be done.

             Table TN4: Progression through primary school of Cohort A that starts with 100
             grade 1 entrants
                           Grade                  1       2       3       4        5       6       7       8       #
              Number of new entrants to grade    100     67       50      37      27      20       15      10     326
              Percentage of cohort who drop
                                                 21      12       11      14      11      11       20      14
              out during year
              Number of students who drop
                                                 21       8       6       5        3       2       3       3       51
              out during year
              Total in class at end of year      79      59       44      32      24      18       12      7
              Using 15% repetition rate,
              number that do not move to         12       9       7       5        4       3       2       1       43
              next grade
              Total who progress to next grade   67      50       37      27      20      15       10      6      232

             Assumptions
                (i) The per capita cost of a year of primary school in constant dollars is $50.
                (ii) The per capita cost, in constant dollars, is the same across grade and across time.
                (iii) The percentage of students who drop out by grade is taken from real data for a SFBMDPVOUSZ
                 (iv) The average percentage of students who repeat a grade are taken from real data for UIFTBNF
                      country.
                 (v) A student who repeats a grade repeats that grade only once, although he or she may SFQFBU
                      one or more subsequent grades once.
                 (vi) All repeaters ultimately complete lower primary.
                 (vii) A student who drops out in a year costs $50, regardless of when he or she drops out JOUIF
                          year, because recurrent costs (e.g., number of teachers) are sunk costs by the UJNFUIF
                 student drops out.
                 (viii)Once a student drops out, the costs of all post-dropout years for that student are as CVEHFU
                          savings to the system.
                                                                                                               79




Table TN5: Costs of one completer and one uninterrupted completer

                              Cost and Savings                                               U.S. Dollars
  If no students drop out or repeat and unit costs are $50 per capita in constant dollars,     $40,000
  then the cost of a primary education (grades 1–8) for Cohort A is 100 × 8 × 50

  Per capita cost of 8 years of education (8 × 50)                                              $400

  Total costs of those who start each of the eight grades, whether or not                      $29,100
  they subsequently repeat or drop out (326 students) + repeaters (43). The
  figure for repeaters includes the additional cost of the repeated year + all
  remaining years of primary education until completion.

  Costs of repetition alone (43 years repeated × $50 ÷ year)                                    $2,150

  Savings from dropouts. Budgetary costs to a system with high dropout rates                   $13,050
  are lower than to a system with no dropout rates if we assume that when a
  student drops out, the system saves his or her full, $50÷year cost in each post-
  dropout grade. Social and individual and household costs, not computed
  here, are obviously substantial.

  Cost for one completer: 29,100 ÷ 49. Total completers = 49 (6 uninterrupted                   $594
  completers + 43 completers with one repeated grade). The cost is about 50%
  more than the cost without repetition, which is 8 × 50, or $400.

  Cost for one completer without interruption ($29,100 ÷ 6 completers who did                   $4,850
  not repeat any grade). The cost of one uninterrupted completion is about eight
  times the cost of a completion that includes repeaters.


    Technical Note 27: Estimating private rates of return to education

The private rate of return compares the costs and benefits of schooling as incurred and realized by the
individual student who undertakes the investment. The models and methods used to calculate private
rates of return to education depend on the policy questions of interest and the quality of the available
data. For example, allowing for heterogeneous returns to education across individuals with the same
level of education--e.g., as a result of variations in cognitive achievements or regional variations in wage
structures--is more data-intensive than assuming homogeneous returns.

In comparisons between countries of returns to education, Montenegro and Patrinos (2014) provide
guidance for calculating private returns to education. Noting that the now-standard method for
estimating private returns per year of schooling is the Mincerian earnings function method, they state
that this means estimating log earnings equations of the form:
80   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                                       -1.                    
                                                      



             where Ln(wi) is the natural log (of hourly or annual, depending on data) earnings for the ith individual; Si
             is years of schooling (as a continuous variable); Xi is labor market potential experience (estimated as agei
             - Si - 6); Xi2 is potential experience-squared; and μi is a random disturbance term reflecting unobserved
             abilities. Therefore, β1can be viewed as the average rate of return to years of schooling to wage
             employment. The list of control variables is kept deliberately small to avoid overcorrecting for factors that
             are correlated with years of schooling. This is also known as the “Mincerian” method (Mincer 1974).

             The earnings function method can be used to estimate returns at different schooling levels by converting
             the continuous years of schooling variable (S) into a series of dummy variables, say Dp, Ds and Dt (where
             p is primary schooling, s is secondary schooling and t is tertiary) to denote the fact that a person has
             achieved that level of schooling. The omitted level is people with no schooling and that dummy is not in
             the equation to avoid matrix singularity. The estimation equation in this case is of the form:
                              -2.                            

             After fitting this “extended earnings function” (using the above dummies instead of years of schooling in
             the earnings function), the private rate of return to different levels of schooling can be derived from the
             following formulas:
                                                               
                                                       -3. 
                                                 -4. 
                                                             

                                                   -5. 
                                                               


             where Sp, Ss and St stand for the total number of years of schooling for each successive level. Care has
             to be taken regarding the foregone earnings of primary school-aged children. In the empirical analysis
             that follows, we have assigned only three years of foregone earnings to this group, following tradition
             (Psacharopoulos 2004).

             The costs incurred by the individual are his or her foregone earnings while studying, plus any tuition fees
             or incidental expenses incurred during schooling. Since schooling is mostly provided free by the state,
             at least at the basic education level, then in practice the only cost in a private rate of return calculation is
             the foregone earnings. The private benefits amount to what a more educated individual earns (after taxes),
             above a comparable group of individuals with less schooling. This more or less refers to adjacent levels
             of schooling; for example, tertiary versus secondary school graduates. Although convenient because it
             requires less data, this method is slightly inferior to the full discount method (Psacharopoulos 2004); in fact,
             it assumes flat age-earnings profiles for different levels of schooling (Psacharopoulos and Layard 1979).

             From equation (1) the return to potential experience is given by:

                                                             -6.     

             which needs to be evaluated at a given value of Xi. For each sample we use the average years of potential
             experience as the evaluation point. It is important to stress that in the empirical part when we refer to
             potential experience we are referring to the estimates based on equation (1).
                                                                                                             81




    Technical Note 28: Per capita ﬁnancing

Per capita formula funding is widely used to help achieve both horizontal and vertical equity by
adjusting a standard unit cost (horizontal equity) with coefficients to provide more funding for the
disadvantaged (vertical equity). Whether per capita financing is in the form of a funding formula or other
funding mechanism, it is important to examine how the unit cost is determined, what factors are taken
into account to address vertical equity (e.g., special needs), and how funding is indeed implemented.38

    Technical Note 29: Targeting mechanisms, coverage, and depth
    of programs

Are there methods in place to identify the needs of disadvantaged students for education transfers
or subsidies, such as scholarships and free textbooks? How are eligible students identified—e.g.,
projection from historical levels, geographic targeting, analysis of household survey data within the
last five years, analysis of individual student data? Is there targeting to certain income, gender, or
ethnic and religious groups? When educational merit is the basis, the subsidy or transfer will tend
to favor wealthier families because of often observed learning gaps at lower levels of education by
income quintile. Per student spending on targeted programs to provide various types of subsidies
for disadvantaged students, such as schoolfee discounts or waivers, free lunch, or scholarships, can
be separately computed. If education spending is allocated based on a formula, we need to assess
whether the formula takes into account vertical equity by setting a higher unit cost (or coefficients)
for special needs students, rural schools, and other types of disadvantages.

    Technical Note 30: Beneﬁt incidence analysis

Benefit incidence analysis (BIA) is an analytical tool that helps examine whether the benefits of public
expenditure are distributed across population groups by wealth or other socioeconomic or geographic
characteristics. This type of analysis can be used to (Narayan 2014):

    (i) inform policymakers about the current incidence of social spending, i.e., the extent to which
          different segments of population (e.g., the poor or the rich) are benefiting from the current
          allocation of social spending, and changes in the incidence of spending over time;
    (ii) establish a benchmark for cross-country comparison of distribution of public spending on
          social services;
    (iii) analyze if specific policy reforms in the past may have accounted for the current observed
          incidence, or changes in the incidence of spending, over time; and
    (iv) demonstrate whether a pro-poor benefit incidence is actually translated into better social
          outcomes for the poor).
82   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                                 Minimum practice—known as average (or simple) benefit incidence analysis—is to report average
                                 public education financing per child or per household by household consumption (e.g., quintile,
                                 decile), or by other socioeconomic or geographic characteristics (urban vs. rural, male vs. female,
                                 etc.). In this type of analysis, benefits are calculated, on average, on the basis of unit costs (aggregate
                                 expenditure divided by the number of beneficiaries), multiplied by the number of users of the service
                                 in a specific group (quintiles or deciles, etc.). In progressive or “pro-poor” public spending, poorer
                                 quintiles or deciles get a disproportionately higher share of the total benefit compared to their share
                                 in the national income distribution; for example, the bottom 40 percent receive more than 40 percent
                                 of the total funds. The choice of quintile definition (household versus population quintiles) may affect
                                 the analysis results due to variation in the numbers of individuals in each quintile. When quintiles are
                                 defined over the population, the population size of each quintile is defined to be equal. However, the
                                 population size of each household quintile varies, depending on the household-size characteristics
                                 of the quintile. Because poor households typically have a larger household size, when the household,
                                 rather than the population, is used for the analysis, the distribution of spending appears more
                                 progressive than it actually is (Demery 2000).

                                 Government subsidies for services may vary significantly by region and across groups. Thus,
                                 aggregating unit subsidies may mask inequality. The best benefit incidence analysis practice involves
                                 more sophisticated analyses as opposed to the average benefit incidence analysis. These include
                                 analyses based on disaggregated unit subsidies (as opposed to average unit subsidies), where specific
                                 costs for specific interventions are accounted for separately. Demery (2000) gives examples of using
                                 disaggregated unit subsidies specified for different geographical areas and education levels.

                                  Figure TN2: Concentration curve: government spending on education and
                                  various benchmarks
          Cumulative share of government spending
                   on education (percent)




                                                                                                             Pro-poor spending
                                                                                                             45-degree line - Equality
                                                                                                             Progressive
                                                                                                             Lorenz Curve of income or consumption
                                                                                                             Regressive (poorly targeted)




                                                                  Cumulative share of population (percent)
                                                    Source: Narayan (2014)
                                                                                                             83




Concentration curve: A concentration curve shows the relationship between the cumulative share of
government spending on education (y-axis) against the cumulative share of the population, ranked by
consumption or income level from the poorest to the richest (x-axis).

Lorenz curve: A Lorenz curve shows the relationship between the cumulative distribution of total
household expenditures against the cumulative population, ranked by consumption or income level.

Targeting: Public spending is pro-poor if the concentration curve for education benefits is above the
45-degree line; otherwise, pro-rich spending.

Progressivity: Public spending is progressive if the concentration curve for these benefits is above the
Lorenz curve for income or consumption, but below the 45-degree line.

The results of a benefit incidence analysis can be presented in two ways: tabular or graphical (Lorenz or
Benefit Concentration Curves). The expenditure Lorenz curve is derived from tracking the cumulative
distribution of total household expenditures against the cumulative population, ranked by per capita
expenditures. It provides a point of comparison against which to judge the distribution of education
spending shown in the concentration curves (Demery 2000).

Public spending on education tends to be more pro-poor at lower education levels (e.g., primary), but
becomes pro-rich for subsequent levels of education. Two main factors account for this phenomenon:
(i) Poorer household quintiles tend to have more children than richer quintiles and may receive a
disproportionately higher share of public education resources, at least at the primary level, and possibly
at lower secondary level; and (ii) any poor children do not progress to secondary or higher levels of
education, where per capita spending tends to be higher and where a disproportionately lower share
of resources goes.

Other types of benefit incidence analysis include marginal benefit incidence analysis, which estimates
the incidence of the last (or the next) unit of benefit, and behavioral benefit incidence analysis, which
estimates behavioral responses to a policy change.

Narayan (2014) and Demery (2003) provide a good basic explanation of some of the issues and
concepts in incidence analysis; Mingat, Tan, and Sosale (2003), in Chapter 7, provide a general
discussion on calculating the distribution of public subsidies for education; van de Walle (2003) offers a
more advanced treatment of some of the methodological approaches.

Other useful information on the topic, including manuals, guidelines and a STATA (data analysis and
statistical software) program, which includes a module to perform benefit incidence analysis, can be
found at the Open Budgets Portal.
84   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Technical Note 31: Subsidies

             Why do we care about subsidies for private schools? There is no obvious efficiency rationale
             for fully funding non-public schools unless they are shown to achieve better outcomes than public
             schools. Paying the full unit cost saves the state nothing, but partial subsidies can create incentives for
             private provision that save the state money because it does not have to pay the full cost of educating
             the child. Depending on how they are designed, public subsidies may implicitly subsidize the wealthy’s
             preference for private education.
PART III: EXAMPLES
86   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Process and criteria for selecting examples

             The World Bank team examined about 80 education and cross-sectoral public expenditure review
             documents published between 2010 and 2016. A complete PER database, which also includes those
             published between 2002 and 2009, is available at http://datatopics.worldbank.org/education/
             wDataQuery/ByExpenditures.aspx. The team adopted the following criteria to identify good
             examples of different topics of reviews:

                         Analysis that is relevant, detailed, and comprehensive
                         Analysis that provides a methodology
                         Analysis that includes international and regional comparisons and benchmarks
                         Analysis based on disaggregated data (if available), including subnational or school-level
                         data, or data on specific student groups
                         Analysis with clear and original presentation of results (graphs, tables, diagrams, etc.)
                         Most recent analysis

             For good examples of policy recommendations, the team selected reviews that provide clear,
             prioritized, specific, and implementable, and costed recommendations.

             The team selected several country public expenditure review documents for more than one example
             because they show a relatively better treatment of a specific topic, compared to other country reviews.
             This section will be updated as more good examples become available.
                                                      Table of Contents
                                                          Examples
               No.    Topic                                                       Example                         Page
                                                                                  Albania (2014); Ethiopia
                1     Policy recommendations                                                                      88
                                                                                  (2015)
                                                                                  Myanmar (2015); Samoa
                2     Data sources                                                                                96
                                                                                  PER Notes (2014)
                3     Analysis of sources of funds                                Nigeria (2015)                  99
                4     Analysis of revenue sources                                 Nigeria (2015)                  100
                5     Analysis of decentralized financing                         Sudan (2014)                    103
                      Analysis of education financing by level of
                6                                                                 Indonesia (2013)                104
                      government and intergovernmental fiscal transfers
                7     Analysis of school budget by financing source               Philippines (2013)              108
                8     Analysis of household surveys on private spending           Mali (2016)                     112
                9     Analysis of donor funding                                   Mali (2016)                     115
                10    Analysis of total public education spending                 Albania (2014)                  117
                                                                                  Honduras (2015);
                11    Analysis of functional classification                                                       118
                                                                                  Kenya (2014)
                                                                                   (Table of Contents: Examples continued)
                                                                                                  87




No.   Topic                                                    Example                     Page
      Analysis of education spending by economic
12                                                             Honduras (2015)             120
      classification
13    Issues related to budget formation and execution         Solomon Islands (2011)      121
14    Analysis of per student spending                         Armenia (2011)              124
15    Minimum norms and standards for resource allocation Belarus (2013);                  126
                                                               Kosovo (2014); Jordan
16    Analysis of cost of teachers                                                         130
                                                               (2016)
17    Analysis of teacher distribution                         Indonesia (2013)            140
                                                               Tajikistan (2013); Jordan
18    Cost projections                                         (2016); Democratic          144
                                                               Republic of Congo (2015)
                                                               Albania Volume II (2014);
19    Fiscal sustainability analysis                                                       149
                                                               Madagascar (2015)
                                                               Guinea (2015); Belarus
20    Demographic trends and enrollment projections                                        154
                                                               (2013); Georgia (2015)
21    Technical efficiency of inputs (efficiency indicators)   Belarus (2013)              161
                                                               Albania (2014); Belarus
22    Analysis of unit costs and outcomes                      (2013); Indonesia (2013);   163
                                                               Madagascar (2015)
                                                               Ethiopia Policy Research
23    Cost-benefit analysis                                                                173
                                                               Working Paper (2008)
                                                               Kenya (2013);
24    Data envelopment analysis                                Democratic Republic of      176
                                                               Congo (2015)
25    Internal efficiency indicators                           Bangladesh (2010)           182
26    Rate of returnT to education                             Sri Lanka (2011)            183
27    Analysis of inequity                                     Costa Rica (2015)           185
                                                               Tajikistan (2013);
28    Analysis of per capita financing                                                     188
                                                               Mauritania (2016)
                                                               Costa Rica (2015);
29    Analysis of cash transfer programs                                                   193
                                                               Indonesia (2012)
                                                               Democratic Republic of
30    Benefit incidence analysis                                                           197
                                                               Congo (2015)
31    Analysis of private spending by income quintile          Madagascar (2015)           199
88   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Example 1: Policy Recommendations

            Overall comment:

            The Albania and Ethiopia public expenditure reviews meet most of the criteria for examples of good
            policy recommendations: clear, prioritized, specific, implementable, and ideally, costed.

            In the Albania example, the recommendations are clear, specific, and prioritized (have a time frame
            for short- and medium-term policy recommendations), and at least part of these recommendations
            are costed. In the Ethiopia example, most recommendations are clear, quite specific, and somewhat
            implementable, but not prioritized, which is a drawback, given their number.

            Democratic Republic of Congo PER (2015) also offers good policy recommendations, but it is not
            included in this section because of its length. It provides a separate table that lays out a proposed
            time frame and identifies the ministry (ies) within whose jurisdiction the policy recommendation falls.

            Bad examples of policy recommendations include:

            •    Recommendations that are not prioritized or sequenced
            •    Vague imperatives that provide policymakers with little or no guidance about available
                 options for fixing the problem
            •    Vague imperatives that fail to acknowledge the fiscal costs, technical complexity,
                 political costs, or time frame required to try to fix the problem
            •    Policy implications or policy directions masquerading as policy recommendations

            For example:

            •   “In a context of a rapid fall in learning outcomes, there is a need for additional public spending
                 Uargeted directly at improving quality.”
            •   “Improve the efficiency of public funding in the education sector.”
            •   “Invest more in education, in line with other countries.”
            •   “Increase the allocation of the public expenditures in Technical and vocational education and
                 training (TEVET) as a share of total government education expenditure because the (private) rate
                 of returns is high and the supply of the TEVET graduates is welcomed by the market butremains limited.”
                                                                                                         89




Albania PER (2014)

Expand Access to Pre-primary Education

One priority is the expansion of access to and quality of preprimary education; the cost can
be offset by savings from declining student numbers in higher grades (short-term). By 2015,
Albania’s preprimary population is likely to stabilize at current levels but the numbers of students
in basic, upper secondary, and higher education will drop significantly. Assuming there will be a 95
percent enrollment rate for preprimary and universal enrollment in basic and upper secondary by
2025, fewer basic and upper secondary education places will be needed relative to 2013. On the
other hand, Albania’s investments in preprimary and primary education are far behind international
benchmarks, especially given studies that confirm robust returns to investment in children’s early
years compared to equivalent investments later in life. Preprimary education will therefore need to
be expanded by approximately 36,000 places. Based on current unit costs, creating the 36,000 places
preprimary education will need in 2025 would cost about 5 percent of the education budget. Using
the same criteria to quantify savings, about 9 percent of the education budget can be saved from
the decline in numbers of basic and upper secondary students, which can redeployed to finance
the expansion in preprimary. Furthermore, since preprimary classes are mainly housed within
primary schools, the places freed by basic education could be used to expand access to preprimary.
In particular, the school mapping data collected by the Council of Europe Development Bank
project (ALB-IPF-TA-10) should be better utilized. Rural to urban migration and expansion of private
education should also be taken into account. For these interventions to produce improvements in
quality of preprimary education, continued teacher training and capacity building is needed.

Improve Governance, Eﬃciency and Equity

Improve management and governance in the education sector (short-term). Sector planning
and coordination across different levels of government could be improved to increase transparency
and accountability in the use of resources and also enhance policy making and education delivery.
Current financing mechanisms and accountability arrangements for pre-university education do not
create incentives for schools and local governments to rationalize spending. Limited capacity and
lack of a clear monitoring framework exacerbate sector inefficiency.

To bring more transparency and equity to education financing, Albania could consider
introducing per capita financing (PCF) to fund pre-university education (short-term).
Currently, expenditures per pupil vary substantially by region; and it does not seem that regions with
poorer results or a higher incidence of poverty receive more funding. Furthermore, schools depend
on the REDs and local governments for financing major inputs and meeting maintenance needs,
which impairs their ability to sustain a high-quality teaching environment. The introduction of a
well-designed PCF mechanism could not only improve transparency around what regions receive
and how that relates to student population, but also efficiency and accountability. It could also help
provide additional funding to the disadvantaged and hard-to-reach populations.

As PCF is phased in, in the medium term both school autonomy and accountability should be
heightened (short-term). Currently, schools have only minimal financial autonomy. The PISA 2012
90   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             school questionnaire shows that only 20 percent of principals reported formulating their school
             budgets and less than 10 percent said they had autonomy over teacher hiring, firing, and salaries.
             Albania should consider giving schools more autonomy on both HR and financial management;
             but this shift will need to be accompanied by investment in building capacity at the local level
             and greater accountability for results. While this shift is unlikely to have significant budgetary
             implications, it will require a cultural shift whereby schools, REDs, and EOs will have to perform new
             roles. In a more decentralized setting, for example, REDs and EOs should act as advisors to schools.

             Cost-effectiveness of sub-sector investments could be examined as a basis for reallocating
             funds. Vocational education students cost the government three times as much per year as general
             education students, but there is no evidence that there is a concomitant return on the investment
             in terms of greater learning. Given the tight fiscal space, investment decisions should be driven
             by benefits that can accrue to both individual children and to society as a whole. For example,
             preprimary investments can be leveraged to produce positive effects on female labor participation,
             reach marginalized populations, and reduce the intergenerational transfer of poverty.

             Consider Increasing Education Spending over the Medium Term

             In the short term, given the lack of fiscal space and the fiscal consolidation plan in place for the
             period 2014-16, Albania should carry out reforms to make the sector more efficient and do more
             with the same level of budgetary resources. In the medium to long term, particularly after 2016,
             Albania should consider increasing public spending on education. Albania’s small budget envelope
             for the education sector should be raised gradually from about 3 percent of GDP to 4.0 percent of
             GDP, closer to the Eastern European average of 4.6 percent of GDP. While there is agreement that
             more public spending will not guarantee better education quality, Albania ranks at the bottom with
             respect to both learning outcomes and public spending on education as a share of per capita GDP.
             Even after exploiting all efficiency gains, there is likely an additional need for budgetary resources to
             increase the quality of education and learning outcomes over the long term. The additional public
             spending could be channeled to several areas in which Albania still needs investment, such as: (i)
             teachers’ professional development; (ii) learning materials and school supplies; (iii) quality of school
             facilities; and (iv) more time on tasks and activities in schools. While the cost of basic investment
             in pre-primary education can to some extent be offset by the savings from the declining student
             population, it also requires well prepared educators, learning materials and school supplies for which
             additional resources are needed.

             Improve Quality of Education

             The government could ensure that tertiary education is not expanded at the expense of
             quality (short-term). The government should strengthen the regulation guiding the expansion
             of higher education—largely through the implementation of the 2010 law on tertiary education—
             both to assure quality and to guarantee alignment with population trends. In the last decade,
             Albania has seen much higher enrollments in tertiary education, both public and private, in line with
             the government’s commitment to providing access to all who wish to continue beyond secondary
             education. Now it is necessary to direct attention to quality—with a view to ensuring that standards
             articulated in the 2010 Tertiary Education Law, itself aligned with the Bologna Process and overall
                                                                                                                 91




principles of Europe 2020 Strategy—are complied with. It also means that financing has to keep pace
with the increase in the number of students, so quality is not jeopardized.

Quality data must be generated and disseminated to the wider public to build evidence and
inform policy making (short-term). Currently, there is little evidence on which policies might improve
student learning in basic education. Unfortunately, the unreliable household data from PISA does not allow
for analysis of determinants of learning outcomes, and causal links have not yet been established between
various policy reforms and student achievement. To avoid making policy decisions in the dark, Albania
should immediately finalize the design of the EMIS and, once it is in place, use the data in making decisions.
This will also help strengthen school accountability. Albania should also seek evidence on policy reforms
that have improved student learning in other countries, such as investments in preprimary education,
improving teacher and principal effectiveness, and increasing school autonomy and accountability.

Ethiopia PER (2015)

Resource reallocation to improve equity
If the role of public finance is to counteract the inequality in access to education, resulting from
unequal income distribution, the government ought to be directing more than 20 percent
of public resources towards the lowest income quintile, whereas it is currently directing
only 13 percent towards the poorest quintile, less than even the 14 percent share of out-of-
pocket expenditure on education contributed by this quintile. At the other pole, 39 percent of
the benefits of public education spending goes to the highest income quintile, which contributes
31 percent of out-of-pocket spending. Correcting for this anomaly calls for a reallocation of public
education spending, from higher education (which caters largely to the top quintile) to lower primary
education (which caters to all classes and disproportionately more to the poorest quintile).

The case for such a reallocation of resources from the highest to the lowest level in the
education ladder is made stronger by the following facts: (i) more than half the recurring public
expenditure on higher education is on provision of free food and lodging to all students in residence,
many of who can afford to bear at least part of this cost; (ii) serious classroom and teacher shortages
exist in primary schools in particular regions and districts, addressing which will have high marginal
impact on efficiency and school performance; and (iii) improved efficiency at lower primary level will
increase the access of pupils from poorer households to higher levels, thereby also contributing to
improved equity in the distribution of benefits.

The provision of free higher education services is based on the rationale that the beneficiaries
will pay back after graduation and finding employment, through the “graduate tax”. However,
actual level of cost recovery through this instrument is negligible and is not even being reported
in any official publication. Moreover, while the graduate tax is in theory a suitable instrument for
recovering the academic cost of providing higher education, the non-academic recurring costs need
to be, and can be, recovered more quickly. While it may not be politically feasible to withdraw or cut
down on subsidies being provided to university students, it should be possible to at least freeze the
aggregate amount of subsidy in nominal Birr, and gradually shift a part of the non-academic recurring
cost onto the students, complemented by financial assistance to the few students from lower income
households who gain admission in higher educational institutions.
92   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Resource reallocation to improve eﬃciency

             Additional resources for non-salary recurring inputs, provided through GEQIP, have not had a
             visible impact on average efficiency in primary education, even though efficiency has improved
             in better equipped woredas and schools. The average has been pulled down by a lagging quarter
             of the woredas, where efficiency has declined in spite of additional non-salary funding, in the absence
             of addressing the binding constraint, i.e., teacher and classroom shortages.

             The persistence of acute shortages of teachers and classrooms in lower primary education
             in the case of the lagging quartile of woredas shows that the existing structure of
             intergovernmental grants is unable to address such shortages, which are concentrated in a
             few regions and woredas. Formula-based general purpose grants from federal to regional and from
             regional to woreda governments cannot address such concentrated shortages. Nor can the existing
             GEQIP school grant in its present design, being distributed to all schools proportional to enrolment.

             Some mechanism for transferring teachers from one woreda to another has to be worked out.
             It should ideally be done in a way that makes it gainful for both parties involved in the transfer, and at
             minimum additional cost to the public exchequer per transfer. An exchange system could be created
             wherein woredas that have large teacher shortfalls can post their needs/demands—and those that
             have extra teachers can choose to offer some on transfer. Suppose a rule is established whereby the
             donor woreda is required to transfer 90 percent of the budget for Remuneration of Transferred Teachers
             to the recipient woreda (it could be a time bound contract), on the condition that the latter allocates
             10 percent and commits to take on all future increases in salary and allowances. For the Donor, the
             benefit is the 10 percent immediate saving, plus further saving in the future since the continuing
             commitment towards the lent-out teachers remains fixed in nominal Birr. For the Recipient, the benefit
             is the ability to hire additional teachers with minimal initial cost and longer time to mobilise internal
             financing. For the nation as a whole, the benefit is better utilization of available teacher capacity and
             hence improvement in efficiency at lower cost (than if all woredas simply keep going after desired PTR
             targets, as fast as their financing capacity permits).

             Ensuring essential inputs and processes to improve quality

             Minimum school resources including infrastructure (electricity, water, sanitation), learning resources
             (textbooks and reference materials) and discretionary funds should be ensured at every school as
             these are factors that have positive impacts on student learning. Schools should monitor the teaching/
             contact time and reduce the time teachers being in school but not teaching. Teachers’ increased efforts
             in monitoring student attendance will reduce their absenteeism. Teacher professional development
             should address teachers’ pedagogical challenges and increase their knowledge. Strengthening the
             system quality assurance capacity will likely bring long-term improvement in learning.

             Leveraging additional resources for education

             Ethiopia’s ambitions to become a middle-income country (MIC) by 2025 and its education
             sector development targets (ESDPV) are admirable, but the achievement of these targets
             depends on the commitment of all stakeholders: government, families, communities, schools,
                                                                                                             93




educators, and administrators. The resources required are very large, necessitating that all key
financiers of the system: the government, families and development partners to step up their efforts.

Given that a steady 20 percent share of the government budget has been allocated to education
over the past decade and the medium-term fiscal framework implies a constrained envelope for
government spending as a whole, public resources for education are unlikely to rise above the
current level of around 4 percent of GDP. However, the relatively low share of education in private
household expenditures indicates that additional resources could be leveraged from private sources.
Such potential could be tapped in the case of secondary, TVET and higher education.

Analysis of the results of the 2011 Household Income, Consumption and Expenditure Survey
shows that a majority of households who send their children to public secondary school have
the same spending power as households that send their children to private secondary schools.
Yet non-government providers account for less than 5 percent of enrolment in grade 9, and the growth
of aggregate supply has failed to keep pace with the growth in demand for general secondary (grades
9-10) education. These facts suggest that it is worthwhile to tap the unused potential for expanding
private provision of general secondary education, so as to fulfil the unmet demand with least additional
public spending. Higher enrolment of pupils from higher and middle income households in private
secondary schools will enable public resources to benefit larger numbers from lower income families.

A subsector where demand has apparently declined due to unfulfilled expectations is TVET,
where employment and earnings prospects do not seem worth the investment to many
households. Low external efficiency, meaning too few among TVET graduates finding the jobs they
aspired for, has been the main reason for the recent decline in enrolment. Developing a partnership
with the potential employers could perhaps be a more effective way to address technical training
needs and at the same time leverage additional resources from the private sector. A public-private
partnership approach is also an option for further expansion of higher education in the future, having
already created a significant number of publicly funded universities in the country.

Strengthening credibility of EMIS data

The grade-specific enrolment, repeater and readmitted numbers reported by many of the
woredas do not fulfil even a simple consistency criterion, namely, that the drop-out rates
implied by the reported data must not be negative. Of a total of over 800 woredas for which EMIS
data is available for the five successive years, 2008/09 to 2012/13 (EC01 to EC05), only 37 percent of all
woredas in the country are credible and can be used for analysing output efficiency of schools and its
determinants. Data submitted by the remaining 63 percent of woredas are not suited for such analysis.
Data submitted by schools and woredas need to be checked for consistency and reliability.

Realistic planning and target setting

Education sector goals and targets need to take into account not only the constraints on supply
but also on the demand for education. For instance, the fact that enrolment drops as one moves
from lower to upper primary education is, to a significant extent, influenced by the opportunity cost
of sending 10-14 year old children to school when they could be doing some work and contributing
94   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             significantly to family income. While the first milestone of getting all children (or at least 95 percent)
             to enter primary education in time is within reach in the majority of regions, this is not the case
             with respect to the second milestone of getting more than 95 percent to complete the primary
             cycle. Achieving the latter requires not only improvements in service delivery but also easing of the
             economic constraints on poor households.

             Additional primary teacher recruitment needs to be carefully regulated to ensure that it is
             targeted at those schools/woredas where teacher shortage is clearly a binding constraint to
             improving efficiency and effectiveness. It is possible to use EMIS data to generate simple indicators
             of adequacy/inadequacy of (i) teachers and (ii) classrooms, and establish simple guidelines that woreda
             councils could use while allocating scarce resources. The ratio of Teachers per Section (TPS) = PSR /
             PTR is a useful indicator. If PTR is much worse than desired target (in a school or woreda) AND TPS is
             way below 1, then it clearly means that teacher shortage is a binding constraint and of HIGH priority to
             address. On the other hand, if PSR is much worse than target and TPS is way higher than 1, classrooms/
             sections are the most binding constraint and of top priority.

             Reform options

             The following are some reform options for addressing the problems highlighted above:

             •   Safeguard the financing for the educationally disadvantaged areas and groups to improve their
                 access to education. This should cover:
                  ▷ ECD/pre-schools (to improve the school readiness)
                  ▷ Grade 1-4 (increasing enrolment of the last 10% and reducing drop-outs)
                  ▷ Grade 5-8 (increasing the supply and addressing the demand constraints for the bottom half)
                  ▷ Grade 9-10 (increasing the supply and addressing the demand constraints in rural areas)
                  ▷ Preparatory schools (Grade 11-12), universities and TVET programs: ensure that financial aids
                    are available and used to increase their access to these types and levels of education
             •   Introduce a cap on the amount of subsidy to cover non-academic costs (on food and lodging)
                 incurred by higher educational institutions
             •   Reallocate savings on higher education recurring expenditure to initiate a new Special Grant from
                 federal via regions to woredas, targeted at those woredas with most acute shortages of primary
                 teachers and classrooms’
             •   Establish an appropriate mechanism for transfer of teachers across woredas to reduce the wide
                 inter-woreda variance in PTR
             •   Establish and publicize guidelines for regions/woredas to ensure that additional teacher
                 recruitment is targeted at those woredas/schools where teacher shortage is clearly a binding
                 constraint
             •   Within secondary education, shift the emphasis of additional investments from teacher
                 recruitment to the creation of additional classroom space
             •   Conduct an in-depth study of the demand and supply of TVET training and explore the possibility
                 of a public-private partnership approach to leverage additional resources as well as to improve
                 external efficiency
             •   Encourage families to invest in learning materials (in addition to their current investment in
                 uniforms, bags and transport)
                                                                                                          95




•   Develop a conducive policy framework for expansion of non-government provision in secondary
    and higher education, thereby leveraging additional resources
•   Ensure that data reported by schools and woredas through the Education Management
    Information System (EMIS) are subjected to adequate and effective consistency checks
•   Monitor and analyse the sector financing using unit cost approach. Items within the recurrent
    expenditures that are deemed essential for the efficiency/quality of delivery should gradually be
    funded domestically to ensure sustainability
•   Build capacity building to analyse several sources of data (administrative reports, census, surveys
    and in-depth studies) to analyse, triangulate and interpret the data and identify system challenges
    and potential solutions
•   Strengthen the system quality assurance including
     ▷ assessing students regularly (classroom assessment) and use examination and national (and
       international) assessment data to provide feedback to schools and policy makers
     ▷ strengthening teacher training programs (both pre- and in-service) and developing teacher
        competency validation processes (accreditation, licensing and career development)
     ▷ using school inspection data to inform school improvement planning, teacher and school
        leaders’ development; and
     ▷ conducting school effectiveness analysis using student/teacher/school characteristics
96   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Example 2: Data sources

             Overall comment:

             Myanmar (2015) flags challenges associated with data availability and quality for different types of data.
             Few public expenditure reviews address such data challenges in depth. Samoa PER Notes (2014) has an
             annex dedicated to detailed information on budget-data sources.



             Myanmar PER (2015)

             The government would benefit from investing early in better data and analysis on coverage,
             quality and equity to prioritize spending towards the 10 Points Policy. Data gaps pose challenges for
             effective policy-making, especially because most important decisions are made at the Union level
             rather than at the subnational level where officials would be better informed of local needs and issues.
             Establishing a solid framework for data compilation and analysis that feeds into policy-making is a long
             term endeavor (Box 4.2). In the short to medium-term however, the MoE could enhance the capacity
             for policy analysis by maintaining three critical databases: (i) Education Management Information
             System to electronically record administrative data, which is currently collected in paper format; (ii)
             student learning outcomes, and (iii) budget and expenditure data.



             Box 4.2: Data Challenges

             •   Education Management Information System: MoE [Myanmar] currently collects monthly and
                 annual administrative data (e.g. number and type of schools, teachers and students), compiled
                 in a Statistical Yearbook published with 12 months delay. An MIS would improve quality,
                 timeliness, and accessibility of this important information.

             •   Household surveys: These are important sources of estimates on enrollment, drop-out rates,
                 household spending on education, and returns to education among other things. Existing
                 surveys are dated (2009/10) and do not cover the entire country. Census data and new
                 household survey data will become available in 2015. These data provide invaluable information
                 on enrollments and dropouts. To be useful, though, staff in MOE need training to be able
                 interpret and use these data for policy making.

             •   Accounting for different education levels: Many schools that integrate multiple levels (i.e. primary,
                 middle and high school) do not account for spending at each tier (e.g. nearly all middle schools
                 are also primary). Going forward it will be important to separate cost of each tier to accurately
                 assess costs per student at each level.
                                                                                                         97




•   Assessment of student learning outcomes: There are currently no regular reviews of whether
    schooling translates into learning at different stages of the education cycle. The Early Grade
    Reading Assessments (EGRA) and an Early Grade Mathematics Assessments (EGMA) could be
    instituted to start the process for grades 1-3.

•   Government spending: Key to monitoring the effectiveness of links between policy and
    government spending is timely, relevant, and accurate fiscal data. This will involve review of
    budget classification and broader FMIS. As part of the writing of this PER, data were compiled in
    a consolidated BOOST database to facilitate analysis. However, this database need to be updated
    and actively used by budget staff in MOE – a process which will require training and experience.




Samoa PER Notes (2014)

Data Annex

The PER is primarily based on analysis of disaggregated public financial data covering the seven year
period between FY06 and FY12, taking advantage of the FinanceOne FMIS system that has been in
place since FY06. This analysis represents the first time that the FinanceOne data has been used to
produce a consistent public expenditure analysis. To facilitate the analysis of expenditure based on
consistent functional and economic classifications some adjustment to the data were made for the
purposes of the analysis. While in more recent years, FinanceOne has full coverage based on GFS
classifications, these were not fully in place in FY06 and FY07, so the team remapped expenditure
by line item using GFS86 as a guide. While the data from FinanceOne has full coverage of domestic
expenditure, externally-funded expenditure was recorded most consistently in other systems held
by the Ministry of Finance, so data on estimated grant and loan utilization by ministry was added
separately to the analysis. Because this information was only available at a higher level, an analysis
of donor-funded expenditure by economic classification or detailed functional classification was
not possible.

Some further adjustments were made to the FinanceOne data to treat expenditure classifications
consistently over the period, to help to illustrate the underlying trends. Firstly, tax expenditure
incurred by government ministries that was subsequently rebated was netted off both expenditure
and revenue, as it’s treatment in the financial accounts changed over the period which would
otherwise give the impression both expenditure and revenue has risen. Secondly, some capital items
that were recorded above the line were moved into financing in the budget frame. Thirdly, and
most significantly, newly incorporated public beneficial bodies, the National Health Service and the
Land Transport Authority were reincorporated into the public accounts. This was necessarily since
their new status as corporate bodies meant that halfway through the period, their accounts were
no longer consolidated in the public accounts ledger, but instead expenditure was in the form of a
public grant. The team used the bodies’ corporate accounts to reintegrate disaggregate expenditure
trends for the period since they became corporatized. The South Pacific Games Authority was also
reincorporated into the public accounts to smooth out a temporary spike in transfers to that agency
relating to the hosting of the South Pacific games.
98   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             The analysis of the public wage bill combines FMIS data with data from the payroll system. It also
             incorporates payroll data from the accounts of the largest public agencies to present approximate
             estimates of payroll trends for the whole government for the first time. Similarly, the health analysis
             represents the first time that unified data for the public healthcare sector has been presented since
             the creation of the National Health Service as an autonomous agency.

             For the education analysis, the data was adjusted for the spike in trends relating to the South Pacific
             Games in FY07 and for lumpy tax expenditures to establish the underlying structural expenditure
             trends. The outcome data are mostly based on the Ministry of Education’s statistical database.
             Changes are presented in real terms taking FY06 as the base unless otherwise stated.

             In some cases, additional data has been collected from official government sources including the
             annual Budget Statement, the World Bank’s World Development Indicators are used for international
             comparisons and outcome data and other documents.
                                                                                                                    99




     Example 3: Analysis of source funds


Nigeria PER (2015)


Overall comment:

The Nigeria example provides a comprehensive breakdown of education-sector financing by source,
including public sources by level of government, private sources, and donor funding.


In Nigeria, 40 percent of the education sector is funded by private households’ out of pocket
contributions while local government constitutes the second highest share (25 percent). Figure 8
presents the sources of finance by origin. Overall, in 2013, the total cost of the education sector (all
levels of education) in Nigeria amounted to 2,329.4 billion Naira (14.6 billion US$). The breakdown
of the education sector finance was as follows: federal government (18 percent), state government
(13 percent), Local Government Authority (LGA) (25 percent), household out-of-pocket payment
(40 percent), Universal Basic Education Commission (UBEC) initiative (3 percent), and donors: the
remaining 0.4 percent.

Figure 8: Sources of education sector ﬁnance, 2013


                                            9 | 1%




                                                 426 | 18%
                                                                                    Federal Government
                                                                                    State
                              936 | 40%
                                                          295 | 13%                 LGA
                                                                                    UBEC
                                                                                    Household
                                                                                    Donors
                                              587 | 25%


                             76 | 3%




Source: Authors’ estimate from CBN, OECD, Nigeria, State Budget, Federal Government Budget, and General Household
Survey Panel 2012/13
100   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                   Example 4: Analysis of revenue sources


              Nigeria PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              This example provides a detailed and comprehensive summary of the sources of revenues at all
              administrative levels in Nigeria and explains the revenue-sharing formula.


              Figure 12 shows the structure of basic education financing since the enactment of the 2004
              Universal Basic Education Act (UBE). The law preserves the constitutional responsibility of states and
              local governments in Nigeria to provide basic education and expands the federal government’s
              responsibility in ensuring it is free and compulsory.

              The proceeds of the Federation Account are shared among the federal, state, and local governments,
              in accordance with a revenue-sharing formula and the funding is tracked from the source to the
              service delivery point. The current formula for dividing up total revenues to government allocates
              52.68 percent to the federal government, 26.72 percent to state governments, and 20.6 percent to
              local governments (Figure 13). The UBE Act was developed based on constitutional mandates, and
              clearly demarked the financing sources between salary and non-salary.
              Figure 12: The structure of basic education ﬁnancing
                                           Internally           Federal                  VAT             Independent             Devp’t
                 Fund                      Generated            Account &
                 Sources                   Revenue              Derivatives              Pool            Revenue                 Partners


                                                                                                                                Federal
                                                                                                                                Ministry of
                                                                                                                                Finance
                                          LGA     SJGA                                           Federal
                                                                   State                         Con. Rev.

                 Responsibility                                                                                                  Federal
                                                                                                                                 Budget

                                                                                                UBFC (2%)

                                                                                                                                   FMF


                                           Salary Non-Salary Salary Non-Salary Salary Non-Salary                 Salary Non-Salary
                 Education
                 Finances                       Primary          Lower             Lower                               Unity
                                                School           Secondary         Secondary                          College
                                                                 SUBEB

              Source: Author’s sketch following funding allocation arrangements in UBE following UBE Act of 2004
              Note: Each State shall maintain a special account to be called “State Joint Local Government Account (SJLGA) “into which shall
              be paid all allocations to the local government councils of the state from the Federation Account and from the Government of
              the State” (Section 162 [6], 1999 Constitution of Nigeria).
                                                                                                                               101




Education finance depends to a large extent on federal revenues and the ability of the states to
finance education expenditures is directly linked to the availability of federal revenues. Figure 13
shows a summary of the sources of revenue for the three tiers of government. Internally generated
revenues for LGAs stand at 1.6 percent while allocation from the state government to LGAs only
represent about 0.7 percent of their total revenue. This implies that about 95.3 percent of the LGAs’ total
revenue comes from statutory allocations, excluding the grants and revenues from the stabilization
fund which accounts for the remaining 2.3 percent. Given that salaries are automatically deducted
from the statutory transfers at source, this implies that LGAs have, in reality, very little say in education
finance, and their role is more symbolic than anything else, given that there is no financial planning or
budgeting on their part for the basic education level. At the state level, internally generated revenue
(IGR) represents 19 percent of total revenues indicating some potential fiscal space for spending on
education based on IGR. In particular, given that the states are responsible for capital and non-salary
spending, states’ ability to generate more revenue may suggest variations in resource availability across
states for basic education spending.

Figure 13: Sources of overall revenues at all administrative levels, 2013

                                      Federal Government             State Governments               Local    Grand
              Source                                                                              Governments Total
                                    FG’s Share   PCT    Sub-Total   States    13%     Sub-Total
         Statutory Allocation         2,777.4    53.5    2,830.8    1,435.8   615.0     2,050.9       1,107.0       5,988.7
           Augmentation 1/            351.3      6.8      358.1      181.6    101.6      283.2         140.0         781.3
       Share from Excess Crude        208.7      4.0      212.7      107.9    60.3       168.2          83.2         464.2
            NNPC Refunds                 -        -        0.0       44.9     11.9       56.8           34.6          91.4
               SURE-P                 191.8      3.7      195.5      99.2     55.5       154.6          76.5         426.6
             Share of VAT             106.9      7.6      114.6      381.9      -        381.9         267.3         763.8
      FG Independent Revenue          274.4       -       274.4        -        -         0.0            -           274.4
     Internally-Generated Revenue        -       11.0     11.0       574.9      -        574.9          29.3         615.2
      Less State Allocation to LG        -        -        0.0       12.8       -        12.8            -            12.8
Net Internally-Generated Revenue         -       11.0     11.0       562.2      -        562.2          29.3         602.4
                Grants                   -        -        0.0       69.7                69.7           43.0         112.7
      Share of Stabilization Fund        -        -        0.0        1.3                 1.3           16.4          17.7
        State Allocation to LG           -        -        0.0         -        -         0.0           12.8          12.8
                Others                 45.7       -       45.7        8.7                 8.7            -            54.4
                Total                3,956.2     86.6    4,042.8    2,893.2   844.3     3,737.5       1,810.0       9,590.3

1/
 Includes share of the difference between provisional distribution and actual budget. Note IGR is noted for 12 billion naira
and FCT included in state level which make some difference.

Source: Cited from CBN annual report with source from “Federal Ministry of Finance (FMF), Office of the Account-General
of the Federation (OAGF), and Fiscal returns from state and lovely governments Survey
102   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Given that the vast majority of basic education salaries come from the federal allocation, which in turn
              heavily depends on oil, factors that affect oil revenue also directly affect basic education finance. The
              share of IGR varies greatly by state, and some tend to depend entirely on federal allocation due to low
              IGR levels. Figure 14 shows (i) total revenue breakdown by IGR; (ii) revenue other than IGR; (iii) the share
              of internally generated revenues out of total revenue; and (iv) the per capita allocation of non-IGR. The
              figure shows that share of IGR revenue varies from a low of 1 percent in Benue state (2 % in Borne state)
              to a high of 41 percent in Lagos. Overall, only four states including Lagos have an IGR share of revenue
              more than 15 percent of their total revenue—Rivers (22%), Ogun (21%) and Kano (20%). Edo ranks a
              distant fifth with 14 percent. In addition to Lagos and Kano, five of the 9 Niger Delta states have higher
              revenue. In general, revenues across states hover around 100 billion Naira, except for the 6 states where
              it is substantially higher (Lagos, Kano, Rivers, Delta, Akwa-Ibom and Bayelsa). However, since Nigeria has
              developed an allocation formula justified by rights enshrined in the constitution such as the right of
              the Niger Delta states to receive 13 percent of oil revenue prior to allocation; resource availability at the
              state level clearly depends not only on IGR but also on what is being allocated from the federal level.

              Figure 14: Sources of educational sector ﬁnance, 2013

                              Federal Allocation From All Sources
               450                                                                                                                100
                              Internal Generated Revenue (IGR)
               400            Share of IGR (right axis)                                                                           90
                              Per Capita Revenue (right axis)
                                                                                                                                  80
               350
                                                                                                                                  70
               300
                                                                                                                                  60
               250
                                                                                                                                  50
               200
                                                                                                                                  40
               150
                                                                                                                                  30
               100                                                                                                                20
                50                                                                                                                10
                 0                                                                                                                0
                              Borno
                             Taraba

                             Bauchi




                           Zamfara
                           Kaduna




                         FTC Abuja




                          Anambra
                         Adamawa

                               Yobe
                            Gombe
                            Jigawa


                            Katsina
                              Kebbi
                            Sokoto
                               Kano
                             Benue
                              Niger
                                Kogi
                         Nasarawa
                            Plateau

                              Kwara
                             Enugu
                                Imo

                            Ebonyi
                               Abia
                            Bayelsa
                        Akwa Ibom
                               Delta
                        Cross River
                                 Edo
                              Rivers
                              Ondo
                                Ekiti
                               Osun
                                Oyo
                              Ogun
                              Lagos




                          North East         North West       North Central     South East     South South      South West

              Source: Calculated from CBN Annual report 2013 and Per capital allocation from Monthly Shares of Distribution from The
              Federation Account By State, Nigeria Economic Report, World Bank Group (2013)
                                                                                                            103




    Example 5: Analysis of decentralized ﬁnancing


Sudan PER (2014)

Sudan State-level Public Expenditure Review Meeting the Challenges of Poverty Reduction and
Basic Service Delivery Synthesis Report, Vol. 1, Summary for Policymakers, May 2014

Sudan State-level Public Expenditure Review Meeting the Challenges of Poverty Reduction and
Basic Service Delivery, Vol. 2, Background Papers, May 2014.




Overall comment:

These volumes focus on the strengths and challenges of Sudan’s decentralization arrangements. They
do not focus on education per se, although this function is decentralized to subnational units and enters
into analyses of decentralization processes. As is often the case in studies of decentralization, these
studies had to be based on new data collection in the form of case studies of four of Sudan’s 17 states.



Sudan highlights several lessons to which education PERs need to be alert.

1. PEFA issues become particularly salient under decentralization because subnational
   governments tend to vary significantly in the quality of their public financial management. The
   opportunities for corruption expand accordingly.

2. Subnational governments usually vary, sometimes significantly, in their capacities to raise own
   revenues. This reality leads to varying gaps between financing responsibilities and resources
   and the potential for substantial horizontal imbalances between subnational governments that
   central government should but may not address.

3. Subnational governments often try to collect cost-ineffective taxes—ones that raise little or no
   revenue, are costly in terms of tax administration, or that are virtually impossible to enforce.
104   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




               Example 6: Analysis of education ﬁnancing by level of government
             and intergovernmental ﬁscal transfers

              Indonesia PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              The Indonesia example provides a focused and detailed analysis of the intergovernmental transfer
              system and an overview of the education-funds flows in the country.



              In Indonesia, district governments are responsible for managing the two main assets at the primary
              and secondary education levels: schools and teachers. Legally, primary and secondary schools
              are owned by district governments. In fact, when it comes to budgets, the school’s legal status is
              similar to that of a district government department. Similarly, civil service teachers are legally district
              government employees, although the hiring process, like that of other civil servants, depends on a
              number of central government ministries. Provincial governments have very limited authority when
              it comes to schools, mostly coordinating districts at the basic and secondary levels of education,
              including with regard to staff development and the provision for education facilities. The central
              government formulates policy, issues regulations/guidelines and standards at the national level, and
              still directly controls higher education.

              Schools have considerable autonomy over operational, budgetary and programmatic decisions.
              Since 2003, School Based Management (SBM) has applied to all stages of formal education. A degree
              of decision-making power and management have thereby devolved to the school level, taking
              account of local norms and encouraging community involvement.

              The funding system for the education sector is complex, involving multiple sources and transfers
              across various levels of government. Expenditures for education come from central government
              funds, transfers to subnational governments, subnational governments’ own-source revenues, and
              central government spending at the subnational level that is not recorded in subnational budgets.
              Currently, schools receive funds from eight different sources and four different budgets, including the
              national, provincial, district and school budgets (Figure 3).
                                                                                                                                        105




Figure 3: An overview of the complexity of transfers and fund ﬂows, 2012




       Fund Originated from MoD
       Fund Originated from MoEC Sectoral Budget
       Fund Originated from Provincial Budget
       Fund Originated from District Budget
Source: Elaboration based on Permendagri 13/2006 on Guidelines of Subnational Financial Management, World Bank (2009) and Law 22/2011
on AP3N 2012 Note: Adjustment Fund also includes the local incentive grant (Dana Insentif Daerah, or DID)


Central government transfers are the main source of revenue for district government budgets
(APBD). Central government transfers to subnational governments have more than doubled in
real terms since decentralization, accounting for 88 percent of district budgets and 44 percent of
provincial budgets in 2009. While the majority of transfers are not earmarked – making it impossible
to determine exactly what they are spent on – transfers are estimated to finance about 90 percent of
subnational spending on education, and 60 percent of the total national education budget.

Subnational governments receive many types of transfers for education spending. The main transfer
to subnational governments is the General Allocation Fund (Dana Alokasi Umum, DAU) block grant,
which provides funding for the salaries of district civil servants, including civil service (PNS) teachers.
DAU transfers represented about 60 percent of district and 20 percent of provincial budgets in 2009.
The DAU is allocated through a two-part formula consisting of the “Basic Allocation” and the “Fiscal
Gap” (See Box 1 for details on each transfer type). The Basic Allocation, which is calculated largely
based on the salary bill for civil servants in the district or province, implicitly incentivizes civil service
hiring. Covering about 72 percent of the salary bill, it accounts for about 45 percent of the total DAU.
106   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              In 2009, districts accounted for 50 percent of total national education expenditures, while provincial
              governments accounted for only 8 percent. Salaries are a major component of district spending.
              When salaries are excluded, education spending is still largely centralized. The central government
              controls the majority of the non-salary budget at all levels of education, from the 70 percent in
              ECD to 99 percent at the university level. Even in basic education, almost 90 percent of non-salary
              spending still occurs at the central level. What brings down the overall average to 67 percent is
              unclassified spending at the district and provincial levels.


              Figure 12: Spending by level of government, 2001-2009
                                         250
                                                                                                                                       4      7      6       6     5      5      4      6      8
                                                                                                                                100
                                                                                                                                 90
                                         200
                                                                                                                                 80
              IDR TRILLIONS (2009=100)




                                                                                                                                 70
                                         150                                                                                          65     66     59      65    55     48     55     59     50
                                                                                                                                 60




                                                                                                                      PERCENT
                                                                                                                                 50
                                         100                                                                                     40
                                                                                                                                 30
                                          50                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                 10
                                                                                                                                      31     28     35      29    40     47     41     34     41
                                           0                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                      2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007   2008   2009
                                               2001   2002   2003     2004     2005   2006   2007   2008     2009



                                                                                         Central           District              Province
              Source: World Bank staff estimates based on state budget data and Regional Financial information system data (Sistern
              Informasi Keuangan Daerah, SIKD), Ministry of Finance



              Figure 13: Non-salary education expenditure by programs and level of
              government, 2009




                                                                    Central           Central-80S                                             Central              District            Province
              Sources: MoF                                          District          Province
                                                                                                                         107




Box 1: An Overview of Current Transfer Mechanisms in the Indonesian
Education System From the Central to Subnational Governments
This box provides a brief description of the objectives and means by which the various transfer mechanisms
from the central government to subnational governments within Indonesia are determined. These transfers
represent the major source of financing for subnational governments and thus, to a large extent, explain the
level and composition of their spending.

General Allocation Fund (Dana Alokasi Umum, DAU)
The DAU, according to Law No. 33/2004 Article 1 (21), is a discretionary block grant sourced from the Central
Budget (APBN) and aims to equalize the fiscal capacities of subnational governments. It is transferred monthly
and directly from central to subnational governments. The DAU is allocated based on a national formula and
is the sum of a basic allocation (a portion of the subnational budget for public servant salaries) and the”fiscal
gap” (the difference between the estimated fiscal needs and fiscal capacity) of the subnational government.
The basic allocation accounted for about 45.5 percent of the DAU in 2010. Fiscal needs are based on regional
variables such as population, area, GDP per capita, and the human development index. Fiscal capacity is
measured by a region’s own-source revenue and a fraction of total revenue-sharing. Based on Government
Regulation No.55/2005, provinces only receive 10 percent of the total DAU, while districts receive 90 percent.

Specific Allocation Fund (Dana Alokasi Khusus, DAK)
DAK is an earmarked grant allocated to finance specific investment expenditures that are aligned with national
priorities and carried out under the jurisdiction of subnational governments. The DAK cannot be used for
research, training, administration, or official travel. In 2011, 19 economic sectors received DAK allocations
including education, health, agriculture, forestry, trade and various infrastructure sectors (road, irrigation, water,
sanitation, rural electricity, housing and local government and remote areas infrastructure). Education is a key
priority for DAK spending, with about 40 percent of DAK transfers allocated for education and used primarily
for school rehabilitation and quality improvement. The DAK allocation has a formula component that takes into
account the fiscal gap and has a 10 percent matching requirement. DAK is transferred in three tranches: the first
is allocated after the budget is submitted to the central government; the next two depend on the depletion
of the previous tranche. Although DAK is earmarked to fund capital spending, the government allowed some
routine maintenance expenditures.

Revenue Sharing Fund (Dana Bagi Hasil, DBH)
Unlike DAU, which is a horizontal equalization grant, DBH is a vertical equalization grant which consists of
revenue sharing from natural resources and taxes. Local governments are obliged to use 0.5 percent of their
receipts from the natural resources part of DBH on basic education.” DBH represented approximately 20 percent
of total subnational government revenues in 2009.

Special Autonomy and Adjustment Funds
Special Autonomy Funds include specific grants for Papua, Papua Barat and Aceh (Dana Otsus) and Special
Adjustment Funds (Dana Penyesuaian) which include additional allowances for teachers, such as professional
benefits for certified teachers and for uncertified civil service teachers, a School Operational Assistance program
(Bantuan Operasional Sekolah, or BOS), and local incentive grants (Dana Insentif Daerah, or DID) for education.

Central government spending at the subnational level not recorded in subnational budgets (APBD)
De-concentration (Dekon) and Co-Administered Tasks (Tugas Pembantuan, TP) Dekon and TP funds originate
from the central government’s budget (APBN), and are administered by the provincial Dinas. The funds
cover a variety of projects and activities, including school and classroom reconstruction and school quality
improvements, social assistance programs (which included BOS until 2011) and capacity building programs for
civil servants.

Sources: MoF and various laws
108   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 7: Analysis of school budget by ﬁnancing source


              Philippines PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              This PER investigated the effects of school-based management (SBM) in basic education in the
              Philippines. Among other questions, it used survey data from three provinces to assess whether SBM
              alters the resources available at the school level. Using the school-level financing data generated by
              the survey, the analysis addressed these questions: How has the resource situation at the school level
              changed in recent years? What is the financial resource situation of schools and what use is made
              by schools of SBM grants? What resources are schools able to mobilize in addition to Department
              of Education (DepED) transfers? Does the SBM grant act as a catalyst for the school to access other
              resources? What uses are made by the school from existing sources? What is the variation in pattern
              of uses from different sources? What is the relationship between resource allocation and school
              performance, and what can be done to improve the efficiency and equity of resource allocation?
              What has been the resource allocation trend in the past few years? What do we know about the equity
              of resource allocation across schools? What factors contribute to inequality in resource distribution?
              What is the role of Local Government Units (LGUs) in supplementing the financial resources available
              to schools?


             Conclusions assembled from the PER

                 The analysis of school survey data collected in three provinces shows several interesting
                 observations related to the improved availability of financing at the school level. First, the
                 proportion of budget raised by LGUs and communities has been increasing in our sample schools,
                 which is consistent with the expansion of SBMs. There does appear to be some evidence of the so-
                 called ‘fly – paper effect’ where central grants stick to the recipient and overall resource position of
                 the school improves. Parent-Teacher-Community Association (PTCA) funds appear to be higher
                 in the year following a school receiving a SBM grant. Second, the gap between planned and actual
                 budgets looks smaller among schools that perform well in SBM.

                 Financial decentralization to schools has doubled, but at PHP 450 per pupil per year for
                 elementary schools and PHP 965 per year for high schools, school level funds account for
                 only about 5% of overall basic education spending. The sample survey data from 2010 indicates
                 that high schools received about PHP 500,000 from various sources and elementary schools
                 received an average of PHP 134,000 pesos. About 60-70% of these resources come from DepED in
                 the shape of annual capitation grants for maintenance and operational expenses and occasional
                 SBM grants. DepED should consider accelerating the pace of resources transferred to the school level.
                                                                                                                     109




Analysis behind the conclusions

Survey data reveals that school level resources have increased indicating growing school
financial empowerment but not substantial school level financial decentralization. An increased
share of resources is managed at the school level compared to total national government spending
on basic education in the last five years. Funds managed at the school level have grown in absolute
and per pupil terms during the last five years. School level resources were almost double among the
sample high schools at PHP 965 per student in 2010 when compared with only PHP 449 per student
among the sample elementary schools (in nominal terms). Average real per student school-level
managed funds doubled from just under PHP 200 in 2007 to nearly 400 pesos in 2010 in the survey
sample schools (in constant 2005 prices). Nevertheless, compared to the national average spending
per pupil, school level managed resources remain a small proportion of 5.4 percent in 2010.

In the sample schools, the overall size of school managed funds has grown from 2006 to 2010
even as Department of Education (DepED) share of school level resources has not increased
substantively in the survey schools. It is important to understand how much of these increases
in school level managed resources represent a deliberate trend towards financial decentralization
by DepED versus a voluntary increase in contributions towards capital expenditures, teacher salaries
and various Maintenance and Other Operating Expenses (MOOE) by local government units (LGUs),
Parent Teacher Community Association (PTCA) and the community. If this trend were to represent the
results of a deliberate strategy by DepED to give increased financial autonomy to schools, the role of
DepED grants including school MOOE, School Based Management (SBM) and School Based Repair and
Maintenance Scheme (SBRMS) grants would increase over time.

Table 3.3 illustrates that DepED resources have hovered around 70% of total school level resources.
While the share of resources the school is able to mobilize from local and community sources as
compared to what it receives from DepED in terms of MOOE, SBM and SBRMS grants has fluctuated
slightly in the last five years, it has always been between 25 to 30 percent of total school resources
(except 2010).

Table 3.3 Sources of school level funds (mean values in constant 2005 PHP)
                          2007              2008                 2009                2010              2011*
     DepED         53,000        70%   71,000      76%      98,000      73%     124,000     59%    119,000   73%
      PTCA         15,000        20%   15,000      16%      21,000      16%     31,000      15%    21,000    13%
      LGU           2,000        3%     3,000      3%       6,000       4%      28,000      13%    12,000     7%
   Community          -           -     1,000      1%       2,000       1%       7,000      3%      6,000     4%
     Others         5,000        7%     2,000      2%       9,000       7%      20,000      10%     4,000     2%
    Total (%)      76,000     (100)    93,000     (100)    135,000    (100)    209,000     (100)   162,000   (100)

Source: 3D-SFSD. *2011 data not complete. ** Figures have been rounded off to the nearest ‘000
110   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              The financial role of LGUs in basic education has been growing in keeping with DepED
              policies to enable deeper partnerships between DepED and local government units. Table
              3.3 indicates that in 2010, the share of non-DepED school level funds rose to a high of 41 percent of
              total school managed funds. This was driven by LGUs contributing a substantially greater amount
              of 8.9 percent of per pupil school level funds (up from 6.6 percent in 2007). A possible hypothesis
              to explain this is that 2010 was an election year, causing local governments to spend more on basic
              education as a strategy to win votes. It remains to be seen whether LGU funding for basic education
              as a whole and as a share of total basic education funding continues to increase in real terms post
              2010. Of the four major sources of funds that the school can manage, funds contributed by the
              parent-teacher association (PTCA) form the highest share every year, although the percentage
              varies between 33 to almost 75 percent of school mobilized non-DepED funds. Nevertheless, about
              one-third of the sample schools either did not receive any PTCA funds or did not maintain records
              of these funds in 2010. Further investigation is required to determine if this is an effect of the no-
              collection policy issued in 2009 which was strictly enforced by DepED from 2010.

              The surveyed schools did receive some in kind resources in 2011 but the estimated value
              of these resources was very small at only 0.7% of total funds received by the school. Data
              on in-kind resources were collected only for the year 2011 and the analysis shows that the only
              source from which in kind resources form a bigger portion of their contribution was donors, where
              in kind resources were 18% of total donor contributions. When data about municipal per capita
              income is included, we find that the richest municipalities received significantly more at 4.5 times
              the amount in terms of the value of in kind resources as compared with the schools in the poorest
              municipalities. However, the value of in kind resources received by schools with higher SBM levels of
              implementation was not significantly different from that received by schools with lower SBM levels
              of implementation.

              The proportion of schools that receive the SBM grant annually is growing but still remains
              small. In 2011 only 20 of the 150 survey schools received the grant (only 2 schools received it in
              2007). Three of the 150 schools received the SBM grant in two years. No sample school received the
              grant more than twice. The percentage of funds represented by SBM grants for those schools that
              did receive the grant has remained at about one-third of total school level funds in the last three
              years. The number of schools that received school MOOE grants has increased substantially in the
              last five years from merely 13 in 2007 to 115 schools in 2011. The percentage of funds represented by
              school MOOE grants for those schools that did receive the grant has remained at about 60 percent
              of total school level funds in the last three years. All the schools have school MOOE allocation,
              and the allocation per school is posted in the DepED website. However, during school visits in the
              implementation support for National Program Support for Basic Education (NPSBE2-SPHERE), it was
              observed that there were still schools which: a) opted not to get their MOOE allocation but instead
              requested their Division Office to provide the Division-procured supplies based on their list of
              requirements or requested Division to pay their utility bills directly; b) did not request their allocation
              because of large unliquidated cash advance; or c) the Division decided not to provide the allocation
              for the same reason.
                                                                                                         111




An analysis of the sources and uses of funds data for 2011 shows that a greater proportion of
school level resources for survey schools that ever received a SBM grant was from LGUs and
PTCAs. We can see from Figure 3.2 below that schools that ever received the SBM grant received an
average of 26,331 pesos from LGUs in 2011. The average LGU funds in 2011 received by schools that
were never SBM grant recipients were much lower at about 7,000 pesos. SBM grant recipient schools
were also significantly more likely to raise higher resources from PTCAs in 2011- an average of 49,700
pesos compared with an average of 17,000 pesos for schools that never received the SBM grant.
However, SBM grantees mobilized fewer resources from community and other sources compared
with non-SBM grantees.


Figures 3.2: Sources of funds: 2010
100
                                                                              6.9
                            16
                                                                              10
 80
                            15
                                                                              29
 60                         20



 40


 20                         48                                                54



  0
                    Non SBM Grantee                                   SBM Grantee

                                               PTCA           LGU
Source: 3D-SFSD                                Others         Community
112   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 8: Analysis of household surveys on private spending


              Mali PER (2016)


              Overall comment:

              This example provides a comprehensive and broad overview of household spending on education.
              It includes information on the share of household spending as part of total education expenditure
              in Mali; international comparisons on private spending in education (as a share of gross domestic
              product) based on UNESCO Institute of Statistics data; share of household budget spent on education
              by region; and the composition of household spending on education by region and socioeconomic
              group. The analysis at subnational level reveals significant variance in how much households spend
              on education and how they allocate this budget.


              Household data suggests that in 2014, households in Mali spent approximately CFA 28 to 31 billion
              on education expenditures, or approximately 8 to 10 percent of all education expenditures.a Private
              spending on education, estimated in this manner, is roughly equivalent to 0.6 percent of Malian GDP
              (and this estimate is identical to UIS estimate from 2009). To put this number in context, UIS reports
              private sources account for 2.4 percent of GDP in Benin, 2 percent in Burkina Faso, 1 percent in Burundi,
              0.3 to 0.4 percent in Malawi and Niger and 1 percent in Guinea.

              Households generally spend about 1 percent of their budgets on education, and 65 percent of this
              expenditure goes to pay for tuition and school fees. How much households spend on education
              and how they allocate this budget varies greatly from region to region, reflecting both income
              disparities and disparities in access. Households in Bamako collectively account for half the private
              spending across entire Mali; households in Mopti, Gao, and Tombouctou incur only 6 percent of all
              private expenditure, when combined together (Appendix Figure 29). This skewed spending is the
              result of many disparities including more children, more schools and more income in Bamako. The
              disparities are also apparent in the share of household spending on education. In Bamako, households
              allocate 1.75 percent of their budgets to education (twice the national average) whereas in Mopti and
              Tombouctou, this share is only about one tenth of a percent.
                                                                  2%

              Appendix Figure 29:
              Share of total household
                                                          15%
              expenditures, by region                                                  50% Bamako          2% Mopti
                                                                                       2% Gao              11% Segou
                                                  11%
                                                                       50%
                                                                                       10% Kayes           15% Sikasso
                                           2%                                          10% Koulikoro       2% Tombouctou
                                                    10%


                                                            10%
              Source: EMOP 2014
                                                                                                       113




Figure 52: Share of household budget spent on education, by regions, 2014




                                                               TOMBOUCIOU .13%




                                                                                  GAO .41%




                                 KOULIKORO .51%
                                                                 MOPTI .11%



                    KAYES .50%                    SEGOU .63%
                                   BAMAKO
                                   1.75%




                                     SIKASSO .79%




Source: EMOP 2014




Tuition and fees constitute the largest share of household education expenditures. In 2014, this
category accounted for 62 percent of all education expenditure. Books follow at 29 percent. All
other education expenditures (tutoring, supplies, transportation, etc.) account for less than 10
percent. Books and supplies are a much higher share of household expenditures in rural areas
(where school fees are lower and private schools are rare. Across rural Mali, households allocate
nearly half of their budgets to books and supplies whereas the similar share in urban areas is only
26 percent (Figure 53).

Not only urban Malians spent nearly twice as much on education (in nominal terms) they also
allocated a much larger share of their income on tuition and fees. Once again, this is an indicator
of not just household capabilities, but also availability of schooling. The urban households include
114   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              private schools as well as upper secondary and tertiary schools that tend to have higher fees. The
              same thing holds true for households under the poverty line (they spend half their education
              budget on tuition, and other half on books and supplies) compared to households above poverty
              line (for which, tuition and fees are 64 percent, see Appendix Figure 30).

              Figure 53: Distribution of household spending on various education items

                                     Mali                                             Rural                                          Urban


                                   4%                                                                                                   3%

                                                                                      8%
                                              29%                                                                                                  21%

                                                                                                44%                                                      5%
                                                                                44%
                                                5%
                               62%
                                                                                                                                  71%
                                                                                           4%




                                                                  Tuition & Fees                Tutoring & Other
                                                                  Books                         Supplies
              Source: EMOP 2014




              Appendix Figure 30: Household expenditures in education, size and share, diﬀerent
              socioeconomic groups

                  Below Poverty Level                Above Poverty Level

                        2%
                                43%                          5%

                                                                                                                        Tuition & Fees
                                                                     26%
                                                                                                                        Books
                  52%
                              4%                                           5%
                                                                                                                        Tutoring & Other
                                                       64%
                                                                                                                        Supplies



                     No Education                    Complete Primary                           Complete Secondary                 Complete Post-Secondary

                        6%
                                                             3%
                                        33%                           26%                                   2%                                     1%
                                                                                                                 12%                                     9%
                                                                                                                   5%                                     3%
                                                                           5%
                                                                                                      71%
                                                                                                                                             77%
                                                     66%
              56%                       5%


              a
               This estimate is based on the estimated average household expenditure on education from the most recent Enquête Modulaire
              et Permanente Auprès des Ménages (EMOP) data (2014 last quarter), which covers all parts of the country except for Kidal.
                                                                                                                115




    Example 9: Analysis of donor funding


Mali PER (2016)


Overall comment:

This provides a good example of how to address financial sustainability issues related to donor
funding fluctuations. It provides analysis of donor funding before and after the political crisis in the
country, examines the role of donor funding (donor activities), and mentions issues related to finding
good international or regional comparisons on this source of funding, due to lack of a consistent
definition of official development aid (ODA).


Mali relies on funds provided by international donors, especially for capital investments. Through
2010, international funding had accounted for nearly a quarter of all budgeted education
expenditures. Several international and bilateral donors and NGOs supported the education sector,
and the focus of support was largely on school construction, school canteens, teacher training and
quality improvements in general, with a strong focus on the south (Table 9).


Table 9: Summary of main pre-crisis donor activities

               Agency                      Domain of Intervention                 Geographic Area
  The Netherlands, CIDA                     Quality improvement (reading        Kati, Koulikoro, Segou, Mopti
  (Through NGOs and Firms)                  and writing; textbooks)

  UNICEF                                    Teacher training, early childhood   Bamako, Segou, Mopti, San,
                                            development (ECD) support,          Kati, Kayes
                                            School construction

  Save the Children, Plan Mali,             School canteens, support to         Countrywide but inadequate
  Handicap International, Aga Khan          CGS, school construction, ECD       to meet all the needs
  Foundation, Right to Play, Islamic
  Relief, CRS, BIT, GARDL, JICA


  World Food Program (WFP)                  School health and feeding           Bamako, Segou, Mopti, San,
                                            program                             Kati, Koulikoro

  USAID                                     Scholarships                        Tombouctou, Gao, Kidal

Source: Emergency Basic Education Program PAD
116   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Since 2004, donor funding, on average, equaled 0.8 percent of Mali’s GDP. Because there is no
              consistent definition of official development aid (ODA), it is hard to provide international comparisons.

              One study puts the average official development aid for education at 5.6 percent of total government
              expenditures in education across Sub-Saharan Africa but the proportion of ODA in public education
              resources varies greatly across the region (UNESCO, 2013). For example, in 2008, 72 percent of total
              education funding in Liberia was financed externally; the comparable share was 42 percent in Ethiopia,
              35 percent in Eritrea and Burundi, 26 percent in Niger, 24 percent in Central African Republic, 9 percent
              in Togo, and 3 percent in Democratic Republic of Congo (all very low income countries like Mali).

              Donor funding could be unreliable. It completely disappeared in 2012 due the political crisis. Before
              the crisis, donors had committed upwards of CFA 350 million to PISE III, but according to budget
              records, only CFA 262 billion, or 85 percent of these funds were received (See Box 4 on the importance
              of external funds in Mali’s capital improvement plan). After the coup d’état and suspension of aid,
              donors support to the sector was channeled mainly through UNICEF, NGOs and other direct financing
              interventions for short-term humanitarian and recovery response. Donor support in education has
              resumed since the end of 2013, but is not back to normal yet. 2014 and 2015 budgets once again
              include donor funding, which is expected to pay for approximately 3 to 6 percent of budgeted
              expenditures (Figure 45).


              Figure 45: Importance of donor ﬁnding, over time




                   Domestic Funding
                   External Funding


              Source: International Donor Funds, in 2015 CFA
                                                                                                                                                     117




                                   Example 10: Analysis of total public education spending


                              Albania PER (2014)


                              Overall comment:

                              This analysis of education expenditure as a share of gross domestic product, total government
                              spending, and per capita spending, provides good international benchmarks based on similar
                              demographics, such as similar shares of school-age populations.


                              Public spending on education is particularly low considering the composition of Albania’s
                              population. About one-third of Albanians are 19 or younger. Table 2.7 shows that Albania
                              compares unfavorably with most other countries with similar shares of school-age population.
                              Even poorer countries like Morocco and Vietnam invest more of their income on education.
                              Public spending per student is among the lowest in Europe even taking into account Albania’s
                              income level.

                              Table 2.7: School-age population and public spending on education
                                                        Share of     Public expenditures on Public expenditures on education
                                                   population below education as share of     as share of total Government     GDP per
                                    Country                                                                                  capita (PPP)
                                                    19 years old (%)         GDP (%)                expenditures (%)

                                                           32.5
    Europe and Central Asia




                                   Albania                                         2.9                             9.5                       9,403
                                 Kazakhstan                33.5                    3.1                              -                       13,667
                                 Azerbaijan                32.7                    2.4                             7.2                      10,125
                                  Armenia                  29.1                    3.1                            13.7                       8,417
                               FYR Macedonia               25.0                     -                               -                       11,834
                                     Serbia                23.7                    4.4                            10.6                      11,801
                                   Croatia                 21.0                    4.9                             9.9                      20,964
                                   Mexico                  39.7                    5.3                            19.4                      16,734
                                     Chile                 30.8                    4.1                            19.4                      22,363
                                New Zealand                27.8                    7.3                            18.7                      32,219
    OECD




                                    Ireland                27.5                    6.5                             9.8                      43,683
                                United States              26.9                    5.6                            12.7                      51,749
                                      Peru                 39.8                    2.6                            18.1                      10,765
                                  Morocco                  38.3                    5.4                              -                        5,220
                                  Colombia                 38.2                    4.4                            15.8                      10,436
Countries
 Other




                                     Brazil                33.9                    5.8                            18.1                      11,716
                                   Vietnam                 33.6                    6.8                            20.9                       3,787

                              Source: World Development Indicators, UN DESA Population Projections and UNESCO Institute for Statistics
                              Note: Population figure are 2010 estimates. Expenditures are 2010 or latest available and GDP per capita is
                              from 2012.
118   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 11: Analysis of functional classiﬁcation


              Honduras PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              This analysis examines education expenditures by functional classification--i.e., level of education
              or subsector. It provides comparisons with countries at similar stages of economic development
              and provides international benchmarking for changes in the composition of spending by level of
              education as the country develops.


              In Honduras, primary education takes up the bulk of public spending on education, but this share
              is expected to fall as the country develops. Pre-primary and primary educationa alone represents 51
              percent of all educational expenditures, while, on average, a quarter of the budget is devoted
              to secondary education and around 15 percent to tertiary education. This distribution is in line with
              countries at similar stages of economic development, such as Guatemala and Nicaragua (Figure 14).

              However, countries with a higher level of economic development tend to show more balanced
              spending across levels, with their spending on primary education ranging between a minimum
              of 20 percent and a maximum of 35 percent. Therefore, as Honduras develops, international
              benchmarking suggests that public spending on primary education should decrease in relative
              importance compared to other educational levels, even if public spending on primary education
              increases in absolute terms.

              Figure 14: Public spending on education by level, selected countries sorted by
              GDP per capita (circa 2013)
                                                                         1
                  0
                           13
                                   7
                                                                 12                                             10         Pre-primary and
                  0                       16
                                                  19     19             21
                                                                                19
                                                                                               22                          Primary
                                   15                            10                                                   32
                  0                       12                                            39
                                                                                                                17
                                                                                                                           Secondary
                           31                                    9
                  0                                                             26                                         Tertiary and Post-
                                          12
                                                  32
                  0
                                   27                    26
                                                                        36
                                                                                               32                          Secondary
                  0        8                                                            19                      38         Other
                                                                                                                      42
                                                                                22
                  0                                              69
                                          61                                            18
                  0                51
                           48                     48     46                                    46
                                                                        42
                  0                                                             33                              35
                                                                                        23                            26
                  0
                  0
                                          a                                                                     ep
                                        al
                                                                                                                      nd
                                                             a

                                                           ile
                          a




                                                Co bia

                                                          ica
                                                             a
                         as




                                                           ay

                                                Co or




                                                         m
                        gu




                                                         gi




                                                                                                            R
                                                       ad




                                                                                                         a,
                       ur




                                                       Ch
                                                       gu




                                                                                                                    la




                                       m
                                                      aR
                                                       or




                                                       m



                                                      na




                                      e
                      ra




                                                                                                                 Fin
                     nd




                                    at                                                              re
                                                     lv
                                                    ra




                                                    lo
                                           Ge




                                                   Pa
                    ca




                                                   st
                                                  Sa




                                  Gu                                                           Ko
                                                 Pa
                  Ho
                  Ni




                                               El




              Source: World Bank/ICEFI social spending database for CA countries; EdStats for the rest of the countries.
                                                                                                                                    119




Kenya PER (2014)


Overall comment:

A functional analysis shows that Kenya’s university subsector receives a disproportionally large share
of the current sectoral budget in contrast to primary education. These relative shares raise serious
questions about equity and almost certainly about efficiency.


Intra-sectoral composition in the education sector can benefit from rationalization in order to
enhance efficiency and equity. The education budget allocation in 2014/15 is skewed in favor of
tertiary education at over 40 percent of the total sector budget, which compares unfavorably to 26
percent allocated to primary education.

A functional analysis shows that Kenya’s university sub-sector receives 39 percent of the current
sectoral budget in contrast to 26 percent for primary education (grades 1-8). These relative shares
raise serious questions about equity and almost certainly about efficiency.

Figure 1.21: Current expenditure composition in education could undermine
eﬃciency and equity
Total education sector budget, 2014/15




                                                                                Primary Education
                                                                                Secondary Education
                                                                                University Education
                                                                                TIVET
                                                                                Other




Source: Staff computation based on the National Treasury data

a
 In this report, due to reasons of consistency and comparability, primary education includes the first two cycles of basic
education, and secondary education includes the third cycle of basic education (lower secondary education) and high school
(upper secondary education). The Honduran educational system is structured according to the following levels: pre-primary
education (ages 3 to 5), basic education (1st cycle, ages 6 to 8; 2nd cycle, ages 9 to 11; 3rd cycle, ages 12 to 14), high school
education(ages 15 to 17) and higher education (ages 18 to 22).
120   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                                            Example 12: Analysis of education spending by economic classiﬁcation


              Honduras PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              This example shows analyses of education expenditure by economic classification (with a particular
              focus on spending on wages) and provides regional and international benchmarking on the wage bill.


              The wage bill, accounting for almost 90 percent of the total public spending on education,
              is strikingly high in Honduras when compared to similar countries. A large wage bill is partly
              attributed to the high average level of teachers’ salaries, especially after the significant increase
              in the minimum wage in 2009 (by 63 percent). Figure 16 shows that Honduras spends
              considerably more on the wage bill than its neighboring CA countries or even other LAC
              countries with higher income, such as Chile or Colombia. The share of expenditures going to
              salaries is also much higher than countries with top-class education systems such as Finland and
              Korea. In 2012, only 2 percent of the total public spending on education went to construction,
              renovation, rehabilitation and/or non-routine maintenance of the facilities. Other recurrent
              expenditures accounted for the remaining 8 percent. This picture is quite similar for higher
              education. Between 2008 and 2011, the share of wages averaged 83 percent of total higher
              education expenditures. Nevertheless, universities devote a larger share of its budget to capital
              expenditures, averaging 7 percent for the same years.

              Figure 16: Wage bill as a percentage of public education spending, circa 2013
                                            100
                                             90   88         87
                                                                          82          81      80         79          79
              % PUBLIC EDUCATION SPENDING




                                             80
                                                                                                                              73
                                             70                                                                                             68
                                             60                                                                                                        57
                                             50                                                                                                                 49        49

                                             40
                                             30
                                             20
                                             10
                                              0
                                                  Honduras




                                                                                                                                            Paraguay
                                                             Costa Rica

                                                                          Guatemala

                                                                                      Chile

                                                                                              Colombia

                                                                                                         Nicaragua

                                                                                                                     Jordan

                                                                                                                              El Salvador




                                                                                                                                                       Panama

                                                                                                                                                                Finland

                                                                                                                                                                          Korea, rep




             Source: SEDUC (2012). Official data for El Salvador (2011). EdStats for the rest of the countries.
                                                                                                            121




    Example 13: Issues related to budget formation and execution


Solomon Islands PER (2011)


Overall comment:

This example describes and analyzes issues of budget formation and execution in the Solomon
Islands. It assesses accountability for the use of resources and results achieved, and recommends
options for addressing the identified problems.


The PER team found three main issues related to budget formation: a) policy priorities, plans, and
budgets are not well linked or integrated; b) budgetary allocations are made with little consultation
with the line ministries or citizens and without a feed-back process to facilitate corrections; and c)
there is a general lack of consistency over time in allocations to public services.

It is not clear how budgets support SIG policy and plans. The Ministry of Planning requests that
each ministry develop a four year corporate plan. Ministries are also asked to prepare an annual or
operational plan for each year of the corporate plan. These plans lay out in more detail, what will be
achieved from the implementation of each activity. These plans typically include a large number of
goals, often far more than could feasibly be achieved under present human and budget constraints.
National plans set targets for outputs and/or outcomes but these are not generally accompanied
by cost estimates. By contrast, the national budgets are organized in terms of inputs and do not
include clear expectations for service delivery targets. National plans and budgets are not linked: the
budget does not show clearly and consistently what activities are to be delivered and how spending
contributes to government policy priorities.

Consultations with line ministries have been poor. The only portions of a ministry budget that
are systematically deliberated upon are a small fraction of the recurrent budget set aside for new
activities,a and the development budget.b Decisions regarding most of each ministry budget are
largely incremental, meaning that the bulk of the allocation decisions are percentage increases
over the previous year’s baseline allocations – decisions are made with insufficient regard for what
ministries should achieve or how much their goals would cost.

There are few mechanisms for consultations with citizens. Consultations with citizens and provincial
governments are not used well in forming and prioritizing national plans and line ministry corporate
plans. The budget process includes no formal processes for hearing citizen input and encouraging
debate regarding allocations of resources. Unlike in many other poor countries, there is very limited
discussion within media or civil society regarding resource allocation decisions included in the budget.

There may be a need to better align budgetary allocations with ministry requirements. There is a
general lack of consistency over time in allocations to large, priority public services such as policing,
health, or education.
122   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Actual spending does not resemble approved allocations. While execution across some Ministries
              has been relatively close to what was approved by Parliament, there are more ministries where
              actual expenditure has very substantially exceeded or fallen short of budgets. This is shown in Table 3
              below. In 2009 for example, 6 of 30 budget heads were spent within plus or minus 10 percent of their
              original approved recurrent allocations. Execution of the development budget is very weak. While SIG
              contributes only a fraction of the funding for the development budget, Table 3 shows that fraction
              has been underspent in most ministries. In 2006-09, for example, no more than two ministries spent
              within plus or minus 10 percent of their approved allocation from the consolidated portion of the
              development budget. The majority of ministry allocations were under-spent. This is partially the
              consequence of SIG placing a higher priority on recurrent obligations (notably the wage bill) but it
              may also a reflection of generally weak capacity for project implementation throughout SIG.

              Table 3: Budget execution, 2006-09

                                                                                             2006        2007         2008         2009
                  Deviation in SIG Controlled Resources (% of Budgeted Amount)                0.3          4.8        -11.9        -13.6
                                         a
                  Recurrent Spending
                   Good Execution (Number of budget heads withing ±10%)                       10           14           16           6
                   Poor Execution (Number of budget heads)                                     5           15           14          24
                      Over +10% of approved allocation                                         2            8           2            4
                      Under -10% of approved allocation                                        3            7           12          20
                      Spent without allocation                                                 0            0           0            0
                   Total Budget Heads with Allocations or Expenditures                        15           29           30          30
                  Development Spending, Consolidated
                   Good Execution (Number of budget heads withing ±10%)                        0            2           1            0
                   Poor Execution (Number of budget heads)                                     9           13           25          26
                      Over +10% of approved allocation                                         1            1           0            1
                      Under -10% of approved allocation                                        8           12           25          25
                      Spent without allocation                                                 0            2           0            0
                   Total Budget Heads with Allocations or Expenditures                         9           17           26          26
                  Development Spending, Non-appropriatedb
                   Good Execution (Number of budget heads withing ±10%)                        3           10           4            5
                   Poor Execution (Number of budget heads)                                    14           13           23          20
                      Over +10% of approved allocation                                         6            6           10           3
                      Under -10% of approved allocation                                        8            7           13          17
                      Spent without allocation                                                 7            2           1            2
                   Total Budget Heads with Allocations or Expenditures                        24           25           28          27
              a
                Excludes sector budget support for health and education.
              b
                The outcome in 2009 reflects changes in the accounting of support for police and justice programs as well as some under-
              counting in other ministry programs rather than actual under-spending.
              Sources: MOFT and World Bank staff calculations using most recent database from January 2011.
                                                                                                                                123




There has been little accountability for the use of resources and results achieved. The public has not
been able to see what activities and programs the government was using money for, nor the results
achieved, because of the way the budget is presented and because of delays in reporting actual
outcomes. Line ministries have not been held to account by Ministers, in part because there is little
information about what activities they will deliver or results they will achieve.

It is important to deal with the formation, execution, and accountability problems together because
they are mutually reinforcing. The incentive to budget well increases when three conditions are
met: i) line ministry officials have confidence that they will be consulted; ii) ministry officials have
confidence that allocations provided will match what was agreed during consultations; and iii) the
approved budget is the final word -- ministers cannot press for changes except in clear cases of
emergency. Similarly, the incentive to execute each budget faithfully improves when line ministry
officials believe it meets their needs and when they are held accountable for their decisions.




a
  The process also makes it is difficult to know with certainty whether bids for alleged new activities represent genuine new
activities or instead represent inflated costs for ongoing activities.
b
  The public expenditure review team received mixed reports as to how much scrutiny development budget expenditures get.
124   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 14: Analysis of per student spending


              Armenia PER (2011)


              Overall comment:

              This offers a good example of examining the distribution of educational inputs (including per
              student spending, average class size, average school size, and student-teacher ratio) by school
              location and community type. The analysis points to inefficiency in the utilization of educational
              inputs across schools.


              The main contrast in educational efficiency within Armenia is between small rural schools and
              large urban ones. In 2009/10, rural schools had an average of 174 students, with an average class
              of 13.6 and a student-teacher ratio of 8.0. In contrast, urban schools educated an average of 450
              students, grouping them 21.8 per class and 11.4 per teacher. Rural schools have been able to
              flourish with smaller classes because they have ample funding (rural schools receive 53 percent
              more per student than urban ones) and do not run into infrastructure constraints (nationwide,
              rural schools utilize less than half of their building capacity). Similar trends are evident when
              comparing schools in mountainous/highly mountainous locations to non-mountainous ones, as
              well as the only schools in small communities versus all other ones (Figure 4.5).

              The pattern of potential inefficiency is even more evident when viewed through the lens of school
              size. Nearly two-thirds of Armenia‘s schools have 300 or fewer students. These institutions receive
              42 percent of all PCF funding and employ 43 percent of staff in general secondary education. Yet
              the utilization of educational inputs in these schools is strikingly inefficient. For example, among
              the 369 schools with 100 or fewer students (27 percent of all schools in Armenia), the average
              class size is 5.6 with 3.7 students per teacher. These schools utilize only 27 percent of their available
              building capacity, compared to 56 percent nationwide.
                                                                                                                                                    125




Figure 4.5: Distribution of educational inputs by community type, 2009/10
                                                                         Republic of Armenia
       (a) Average PCF Allocation per Student                                                      (b) Average School Size
                    (000s AMD)                                                                      (Number of Students)

 300                                                                              500
 250                                                                              400
 200
                                                                                  300
 150
 100                                                                              200
  50                                                                              100
   0                                                                               0
            ra
              l                       us                                                     l                        us
                      n




                                                        nt us




                                                   0 m y
                                                                us




                                                          en ity
                                                                                           ra




                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                       nt us




                                                                                                                                   0 m y
                                                                                                                                               us




                                                                                                                                         en ity
                                    no
                   ba




                                               40 om nit


          Ru                                                                                                        no




                                                                                                  ba




                                                                                                                              40 om nit
                                                     ou ino
                                                            no




                                                                                         Ru
                                                       ud n
                                                             ts
                                  ai




                                                                                                                                             o
                                                                                                                                           no




                                                                                                                                      ud n
                                                                                                                                            ts
              Ur




                                                                                                                  ai
                                                            u
                                                     St u




                                                                                                                                  m tain
                                                                                                Ur




                                                                                                                                           u
                                 t




                                                                                                                                    St u
                                                          ai


                                                         m
                                               n- nta




                                                                                                                 t




                                                                                                                                         ai


                                                                                                                                        m
                                n                                                                               n
                                        w ol i om




                              ou




                                                                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                       w ol i om
                                                                                                              ou
                                             No ou




                                                                                                                            No ou

                                                                                                                                    ou
                                             < aC
                                                     C




                          M
                                                    M




                                                                                                                            < aC
                                                                                                                         ho in C
                                                   m




                                                                                                          M




                                                                                                                                   M
                       ly
                                                l in




                                                                                                     ly
                                          ith n




                     gh




                                                                                                                                 -




                                                                                                                         ith n
                                                                                                   gh




                                                                                                                              n
                                             oo




                                                                                                                               l
                    i




                                                                                                                            oo
                  H                                                                              Hi
                                  On Sch

                                          ho




                                                                                                                On Sch
                                       Sc




                                                                                                                      Sc
                                       y




                                                                                                                      y
                                    nl

                                    ly




                                                                                                                   nl

                                                                                                                  ly
                                        tO




                                                                                                                tO
                                     No




                                                                                                                    No
                      (c) Average Class Size                                                     (d) Student-Teacher Ratio

                                                                                  12
 25                                                                               10
 20                                                                                8
 15                                                                                6
 10                                                                                4
   5                                                                               2
                                                                                   0
   0
                                                                                          ra
                                                                                            l                       us
                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                    nt us




                                                                                                                                0 m y
                                                                                                                                            us




                                                                                                                                      en ity
                l                         us                                                                      no
                                                                                                 ba




                                                                                                                             40 om nit
              ra
                           n




                                                                                        Ru
                                                            nt us




                                                       0 m y
                                                                    us




                                                              en ity




                                                                                                                                 ou ino
                                                                                                                                        no




                                                                                                                                   ud n
                                                                                                                                         ts
                                        no                                                                      ai
                      ba




                                                   40 om nit




                                                                                            Ur




            Ru


                                                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                                                 St u
                                                         ou ino
                                                                no




                                                           ud n
                                                                 ts




                                      ai                                                                       t
                                                                                                                                      ai


                                                                                                                                     m
                                                                                                                             n- nta
                    Ur




                                                                u
                                                         St u




                                     t                                                                        n
                                                              ai


                                                             m
                                                   n- nta




                                                                                                                      w ol i om
                                    n                                                                       ou
                                                                                                                           No ou
                                            w ol i om




                                  ou
                                                 No ou




                                                                                                                           < aC
                                                                                                                        ho in C
                                                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                M

                                                                                                                                m




                                                                                                     ly
                                                 < aC
                                                         C




                             yM
                                                        M

                                                       m




                                                                                                   gh                   ith n
                                                    l in




                           hl
                                                                                                                              l
                                                                                                                           oo


                                                                                                  i
                                              ith n
                                                 oo




                         ig                                                                     H
                                                                                                                On Sch




                     H
                                     On Sch

                                              ho




                                                                                                                     Sc
                                                                                                                     y
                                           Sc




                                                                                                                  nl

                                                                                                                  ly
                                           y




                                                                                                                      tO
                                        nl

                                       ly
                                     tO




                                                                                                                   No
                                        No




  (e) Non-Teaching Staff as % of All School Staff                                        (f) School Capacity Utilization
                                                                                          (Student Enrollment as % of
                                                                                              Total Builing Capacity)
 33%
 32%                                                                             70%
 31%                                                                             60%
 30%                                                                             50%
 29%                                                                             40%
 28%                                                                             30%
 27%                                                                             20%
 26%                                                                             10%
               ra
                 l                         us
                           n




                                                           nt us




                                                      0 m y
                                                                   us




                                                             en ity




                                         no                                       0%
                         ba




                                                  40 om nit




             Ru
                                                        ou ino
                                                               no




                                                          ud n
                                                                ts




                                       ai
                     Ur




                                                               u
                                                        St u




                                      t                                                      l                        us
                                                             ai


                                                            m
                                                  n- nta




                                                                                           ra
                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                   nt us




                                                                                                                               0 m y
                                                                                                                                           us




                                                                                                                                     en ity




                                     n
                                                                                                                    no
                                                                                                  ba




                                                                                                                             40 om nit
                                           w ol i om




                                   ou                                                    Ru
                                                                                                                                ou no
                                                                                                                                       no




                                                                                                                                  ud n
                                                                                                                                        ts
                                                No ou




                                                                                                                  ai
                                                                                                Ur




                                                                                                                                       u
                                                                                                                                St u
                                                                                                                              -m tai
                                                < aC




                                                                                                                 t
                                                        C




                              yM
                                                                                                                                     ai


                                                                                                                        ith n mm
                                                       M

                                                      m




                                                                                                                n
                                                   l in




                            hl
                                                                                                                                   n




                                                                                                              ou
                                             ith n




                                                                                                                           No ou




                                                                                                                                 o
                                                oo




                          ig
                                                                                                                            < aC
                                                                                                                        ho n C




                                                                                                         M
                                                                                                                               M




                      H                                                                               ly
                                     On Sch

                                             ho




                                                                                                                      Sc ol i




                                                                                                    gh
                                                                                                                             n
                                          Sc




                                                                                                                       w li




                                                                                                   i
                                          y




                                                                                                                           o

                                                                                                                           o
                                       nl




                                                                                                 H
                                       ly




                                                                                                                 On ch
                                     tO




                                                                                                                      yS
                                         No




                                                                                                                   nl

                                                                                                                   ly
                                                                                                                 tO
                                                                                                                    No




Source: World Bank calculations based on data from the National Statistics Service (NSS), the National Center for
Education Technology (NaCET), the Assessment and Testing Center (ATC) and MOF.
126   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 15: Minimum norms and standards for resource allocation



              Overall comment:

              The Belarus and Bosnia public expenditure reviews provide examples of education sector spending
              norms and standards for resource allocations. In Belarus, these include minimum, per student
              allocation by level of education, facility conditions, and equipment, etc. The Bosnia example provides
              specific norms and standards related to staffing.



              Belarus (2013)

              In Belarus, several sectoral spending norms and standards govern resource allocation. In particular,
              services of education institutions should meet approved social standards (Box 4).

              In addition, the MOE issues certain standards and spending norms. While some of these norms are
              linked to the number of students, some are related to inputs. For example, in schools with indoor
              swimming pools, an additional janitor (0.5 of full-time equivalent) is introduced for each 250 square
              meters of the area of swimming pool subject to cleaning, irrespective of the number of students in
              the school. These norms further constrain discretion in spending decision at the facility level, while
              not necessarily leading to better learning outcomes, as shown in the subsequent sections of the PER.




              Box 4. Social Standards in Education

              In 2003 the Government adopted social standards for services, including in the education sector.
              These define the minimal requirements that should be met by educational institutions. Compliance
              remains an issue in some areas. For example, the number of seats in the pre-school institutions in
              Minsk rayon of Minsk oblast is still below the standard.

              Resolution of the Council of Ministers 724 of May 30, 2003, and revision 47 of January 13, 2013 specify
              the following standards in education:

              •   Number of seats in pre-school institutions to the number of children of pre-school age (85
                  percent)
              •   Net enrollment rate of 5 year-old children in pre-school education (100 percent)
              •   Minimum per student allocation in pre-school education (2,050,000 BYR per year)
              •   Minimum per student allocation in general secondary education of all types (1,370,000 BYR per year)
                                                                                                                         127




•       Minimum per student allocation in special education institutions for children with disabilities
        (5.5 million BYR per year)
•       Minimum per student allocation in vocational schools (3.5 million BYR per year)
•       Minimum per student allocation in out-of-school training institutions (200,000 BYR per year)
•       Minimum area of general educational institution per student (8 sq. m)
•       Areas equipped with facilities for sports (1.62 sq. m per student)
•       Premises for sports activities (0.5 sq. m per student)
•       Minimum number of personal computers in general secondary, special and vocational schools
        (one computer per 30 students or at least one computer lab per school)



Bosnia (2012)

The Republika Srpska (RS) and each canton in Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBH) set standards
and norms on staffing, defining the minimum, optimal, and maximum class sizes, the number of
teaching hours, the number of support staff primarily based on the number of students, recurrent
expenses by different teaching system.

Table 6.9 shows the staffing standards and norms, which in turn define school budgets in RS. If these
norms are strictly applied, for instance, schools with 60 students are expected to form only two classes
with 30 students each, instead of three classes with 20 students each. However, the guidelines also note
that in exceptional cases, the Ministry can permit a class with less than 18 pupils, if it is the only class
in one grade and a combined class has more than the norms. Without detailed analysis of school-level
data, it is difficult to form a clear picture as to how these norms are applied in practice, but given that the
average school size for RS is very small at 144 (or 16 students per grade on average) (see Table 6.9 below),
it is likely that many schools are given an exceptional status.

Table 6.9: Factors determining school budget for primary schools
    1   No. of classes                                               2. No. of puplis
                        1/
    2   No. of pupils                                    1. No. of
                                                         classes
        a   No. of pupils in classes                     1           18-32
                                                         2           33-60
                                                         3           61-90
                                                         4           90-120
                                                         5           121-150
                                                         6           151-180
                                                         7           181-210
                                                         8           211-240
                                                         9           241-279
        b   No. of pupils in combined classes            1           merging two grades up to 18
                                                         2           merging three grades up to 12
        c   No. of pupils in special education classes   1           up to 10

                                                                                        (Table continued on next page)
128   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




               3    No. of lessons in a class in accordance with the         No. of teachers = Class hours (curriculum) / Teacher’s
                    curriculum                                               weekly work hours (40 hours)
               4    No. of lessons planned per class
               5    No. of working hours of non-teaching staff in line
                                                                                                     Coefficients
                    with the
                         Pedagogue                                           1 for school with 16 or more classes
                                                                             0.05 per class < 0.5 for school with 16 or less classes
                         Psychologist                                        1 for school with 24 or more classes
                                                                             May be combined with special education teacher / logo-
                                                                             pedist, or social worker
                                                                             0.05 per class <0.5 for school with 24 or less classes
                         Assistant principal                                 0.025 per class exceeding 24 classes or 8 or more branch
                                                                             classes
                                                                             0.5 for school with 2 or more nine-grade branch classes
                         Librarian                                           1 for school with 16-32 classes and 5,000 units of literary
                                                                             and non-literary
                                                                             0.05 per class <0.5 for school with 16 or less classes
                         Assistant librarian                                 0.05 per class exceeding 32 classes and 10,000 units of
                                                                             literary and non-literary
                         Secretary                                           1 for school with 16 or more classes
                                                                             0.05 per class <0.5 for school with 16 or less classes
                         Accountant                                          1 for school with 16 or more classes
                                                                             0.05 per class <0.5 for school with 16 or less classes
                         Administrative-finance worker                       1 for school with 24 or more classes
                                                                             0.05 per class exceeding 24 classes
                         Janitor                                             1 for school with 16 or more classes and an ara between
                                                                             2,000-5,000m2
                                                                             0.05 per 100m2 or per each class below 16<0.5 or less
                                                                             than 2,000m2
                                                                             0.05 per 100m2 or per each class exceeding 32<1 or
                                                                             more than 5,000m2
                         Night watchman                                      1 per school facility
                         Heating maintenance mechanic                        1 for school with central heating for up to 2,000m2
                                                                             2 for school with central heating for more than 4,000m2
                         Transportation                                      1 for school with no organized transportation
                         Hygiene                                             0.25 per class
                         Maintenance                                         1 per school facility
               6    Years of past work experience of employees
               7    Salary coefficients
               8    Labor cost
               9    Increase according to working conditions

              Source: Ministry of Education and Culture of the Republika Srpska, Rules on Primary School Funding.
              Notes: 1/ In exceptional cases, the Ministry can permit a class with less than 18 pupils if it is the only class in one grade
              and a combined class has more than the norms.
              2/ Schools in mountainous areas and extremely undeveloped municipalities may form smaller class sizes if formed in the
              “most cost-effective manner”.
                                                                                                                                       129




Table 6.10 summarizes the minimum, optimum, and maximum class sizes and teaching loads by
subject in six cantons in FBH. There are three important issues to be addressed. First, it is interesting
that all cantons (where data are available) specify the optimum class size, in addition to the minimum
and maximum sizes. This custom seems to discourage schools from forming classes beyond the
optimum size even if they are below the maximum size. Since there is no clear evidence to suggest
that these optimum sizes result in better education than anywhere between the optimum and
maximum sizes, by removing the optimum sizes, schools may form slightly larger classes efficiently
without harming quality. Second, there is no clear rationale for the wide variations in the minimum
class size from 16 (Bosnian Podrinje Canton) to 22 (Tuzla Canton). Cantons which set the minimum
class size lower than others could increase it, unless there is clear justification such as geographical
constraints. Third, teaching loads are almost the same for all cantons except for Tuzla Canton. By
increasing the teaching hours by one or two hours, other cantons would be able to reduce the
number of teachers, and therefore the wage bills for teachers, by 5-10 percent. In order to analyze
the correlations between costs and quality, more detailed school-level data such as per student
spending, wage bills, and student performance are needed.



Table 6.10: Standards for class sizes and teaching loads by canton, 2011
                                                                                          Teaching loads (hours),
                      Class size (regular with no combined classes)
                                                                              excl. preparation, correction, evaluation hours
                                                                                        Foreign
                                                                                                                          History,
                                                                       National       languages,          Biology,
                          Min.           Optimum             Max.                                                        geography,
                                                                      languages          math,          informatics
                                                                                                                         music, etc.
                                                                                       chemistry
 Una-Sana                  18                27               35         18                19               20                  21
 Posavina                  17                25               33         18                19               19                  20
 Tuzla                     22                28               34         20                20               21                  22
 Zenica-Doboj              18                26               36         18                19               20                  21
 Bosnian Podrinje          16                24               32          -                 -                -                  -
 Central Bosnia             -                -                 -          -                 -                -                  -
 Herz.-Neretva              -                -                 -          -                 -                -                  -
 West Herz.                 -                -                 -          -                 -                -                  -
 Sarajevo                  18                24               32         18                19               20                  21
 Canton 10                  -                -                 -          -                 -                -                  -

Source: Ministry of Education of the respective cantons.
Notes: - indicates that data are not available.
130   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 16: Analysis of cost of teachers



              Overall comment:

              The Kosovo example provides analyses and policy recommendations related to the government
              reform on differentiated teacher pay scales, which aimed to improve teacher quality in Kosovo. The
              Jordan case presents a comprehensive analysis of teacher compensation system and provides good
              examples of different ways to assess whether teacher pay is adequate.



              Kosovo PER (2014)

              In Kosovo, spending on wages under the education budget increased by over 25 percent in real
              terms between 2009 and 2012, taking wages from 85 percent of total spending on basic education
              (grades 0-9) in 2009 to 92 percent by 2012. Spending on non-salary recurrent items was low in
              2012 compared to OECD or regional countries. On average, OECD countries spent 22 percent of
              education budget on non-salary recurrent items, and about 8.7 percent on capital expenditures.a In
              Europe, Slovenia spent 19 percent of total expenditures on non-salary items and 8 percent on capital
              expenses, while Bulgaria and Romania spent 26 percent on non-salary items, and 6 and 4 percent on
              capital expenditures respectively.b In Kosovo, increases granted to the education sector have been
              devoted almost entirely to salary increases, and for the most part have not been directed to other
              quality enhancement investments.

              Figure 5.11: Education expenditures by economic category, % GDP

               4.5%

               4.0%                                              0.3%      0.2%
                                                                 0.1%      0.1%
               3.5%                          0.3%      0.4%
                                             0.1%      0.1%      0.4%      0.4%
                                      0.2%
                            0.1%
               3.0%                   0.1%   0.4%      0.5%
                            0.1%                                                  Capital Outlays
                                      0.5%
                            0.5%                                                  Subsides & Transfers
               2.5%
                                                                                  Utilities
               2.0%
                                                                                  Goods & Services
               1.5%                                              3.3%      3.3%   Wages & Salaries
                                             2.9%      2.8%
               1.0%         2.5%      2.6%


               0.5%

               0.0%
                        2007       2008   2009      2010      2011      2012


             Source: Kosovo BOOST.
                                                                                                                                                  131




Recent changes to the teacher salary structure aimed to improve teacher quality. In October
2008, the pre-university “teachers’ differentiated salary system” came into effect. This was part of a
comprehensive teacher licensing and professional development effort intended to improve the
teaching system’s ability to attract and retain qualified staff. Prior to the reform, teacher salaries were
uniform, differentiated only by the grade taught (i.e., with different salaries for teachers at pre-primary,
primary and secondary grades). Under the reform, differentiated pay scales were introduced based
on qualifications, grade level and experience. As a result, all teaching staff, other than those who were
unqualified and those with less than one year of experience, received a pay increase.c

The reform of teachers’ career development and remuneration was a welcome development;
however, the politically-motivated increases that followed in 2011 distorted the reform. In keeping
with electoral promises, the government increased the “base salaries”d of all teachers by 50 percent in
2011. While the differentiated salary structure was kept, the decision was not aligned with the reform
principles of future salary increases being linked with performance and professional development.
Moreover, increases were granted to unqualified or beginner teachers, which was not the case with
the 2008 increases. As a result, the difference in base salary for an unqualified/beginner teacher and a
teacher with bachelor’s degreee was reduced to 18 percent compared with 27 percent in 2008.
Table A.19. Teacher salary structure teachers KS (euro, monthly)
                                                                                                   Current base salary with        Actual %
                                                    Base salary based on         % Increase
                    Base salary (in 2007)                                                          50% increase based on           Increase
                                                   qualifications (in 2008)      based on
                                                                                                    qualifications (in 2011)      based on
                                                                                qualifications
                                                                                                                                 qualifications
                  Pre-                            Pre-                                             Pre-
                          Primary   Secondary             Primary   Secondary     (in 2008)                Primary   Secondary
                primary                         primary                                          primary                           (in 2011)
 Unqualified/
                 201       216         236       201        216         236          0%           302*      324         352           0%
 Beginner235
 5-year
 secondary
                 201       216         236       221        238        260          10%          322**      346         377           7%
 teacher
 school
 2-year
 Higher
                 201       216         236       239        257        281          19%           340       365         398          13%
 Pedagogical
 School
 BA (3-year
 & 4-year)       201       216         236       255        274        300          27%           356       382         417          18%
 degrees
 Masters
 and Ph D        201       216         236       271        292        319          35%           372       400         436          23%
 degrees
Source: Ministry of Public Administration, Teachers’ Payroll Data July 2013; *Payroll data suggest that unqualified/beginner
teachers’ salaries were also raised by 50 percent; ** The 50 percent increase and the percentage increase for each
qualification were applied to 2007 base salary.

In the short run though, it appears that teachers were incentivized to upgrade their qualifications, albeit
through a government subsidized program. When comparing the composition of the teaching force by
qualifications in 2008 with data available in 2013, it appears that teachers have invested in upgrading their
pre-service qualifications (Figure 5.12). Over this time, there was a large reduction in teachers with Higher
Pedagogical School (HPS) education and a corresponding increase in those with a Bachelor degree. This
shift can be attributed to the initiative to fund the upgrade of pre-service qualifications of all teachers with
HPS to a Bachelor degree by the end of 2015.
132   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                   Figure 5.12: Distribution of teachers by pre-service qualiﬁcations, 2008 and 2013
                   12k



                   10k



                    8k

                                                                                                                               2008
                    6k
                                                                                                                               2013

                    4k



                    2k



                     0
                              UNQUALIFIED            5-YEAR            2-YEAR            BA (3-YEAR        MASTERS AND
                               /BEGINNER          SECONDARY            HIGHER             & 4-YEAR)        PH.D DEGREES
                               TEACHERS            TEACHER          PEDAGOGICAL           DEGREES
                                                    SCHOOL            SCHOOL
                   Source: Kosovo EMIS

                   Following the reform process and the 2011 increases, teachers’ salaries became comparable with other
                   sectors. The average teacher’s net salary was €347 per month.f This was only about 5.7 percent below the
                   average net salary in the public sector, and about 3 percent below the average salary in health sector.g

                   The best use for any additional funds for teacher salaries would be to provide incentives for improved
                   performance and professional development rather than politically motivated increases.h The National
                   Teacher Licensing Council has developed a professional development and performance evaluation
                   mechanism that will provide teachers with an opportunity to strengthen their qualifications and move up
                   the career ladder. The system, which is already in place, grants a temporary license and a regular license to
                   teachers. Those on temporary licenses (about 14 percent of the current teaching force that are beginner or
                   unqualified) will need to meet qualification and training criteria to receive a regular license or risk losing the
                   right to teach.i At the same time, teachers on a regular license can be promoted through five career grades.
                   Teachers need to take training and receive at least one positive performance evaluation in a period of five
                   years to move from one grade to another.j Additionally, the teacher career reform has made it mandatory
                   for teachers to attend at least 70 percent of “core trainings”. Linking future salary increases to training and
                   education of the teaching force would reinforce these reforms designed to enhance quality. Granting
                   politically-motivated across-the-board increases, on the other hand, would risk undermining them.
      a
        OECD, Education at a Glance 2012, Table B6.2.
      b
         World Bank EdStats.
      c
        The base salary increased by 10 percent to 35 percent depending on qualifications: teachers with (i) 5-year secondary teacher school received a 10 increase; (ii)
      2-year Higher Pedagogical School received 19 percent; (iii) Bachelor degree holders received 27 percent; and (iv) Master’s or Ph.D. degree holders received 35 percent.
      Additionally, for each year of working experience teachers received 0.003 percent of their base salary.
      d
         “Base salaries” are the salaries that teachers received in 2007, before any adjustments for inflation or other increases followed. Salary adjustments are not always made
      with relation to teachers’ current salaries but to their base salary.
      e
        As per the Law on Pre-University Education (2011), all new teachers must now complete at minimum a Bachelor’s Degree to be able to join the teaching force.
      f
        This was in 2013 before the wage increase of 25 percent granted in April 2014.
      g
         Kosovo Agency of Statistics, General Statistics, Quarterly Bulletin, Average Monthly Paid Net Wages in the Budget sector by year, April 2013.
      h
         In fall 2013, the government had promised another wage increase by 50 percent. In March 2014 GoK decided to increase wages by 25 percent applicable from April 1st
      2014, and the decision has had a negative impact in implementation of reform for career development of teachers. Furthermore, because the wage increase was done
      in a similar way as in 2011, the wage structure has pressed further the difference by qualifications pre-service.
      i
        In March 2014, GoK decided to increase wages of all civil and public servants by 25 percent, applicable from April 1st 2014. As noted earlier, due to time and data
      constrains, further analysis on the implications of these increases could not be included in this report.
      j
        According to Administrative Instruction No. 5/2010, a teacher career license is valid for 5 years. To extend the license, teachers need, at minimum, to have a satisfactory
      performance evaluation and to have completed at least 100 training hours, of which 70 percent in core in-service training programs and 30 percent in optional courses,
      in optional courses, over five years. The criteria for advancement to a higher license require at least 300 hours of teacher training over five years.
                                                                                                                                   133




        Jordan PER (2016)a

        Compensation captures a high share of recurrent spending in the education sector in Jordan, leaving
        few resources for non-wage inputs. The teacher pay scale and allowances in Jordan reward initial
        qualifications, seniority, and personal teacher attributes, as opposed to being an instrument for policy
        makers to incentivize better teaching performance or other desired education sector outcomes.
        Teachers in Jordan are relatively well-paid, based on comparisons with other tertiary-educated workers
        in the economy, relative to per capita GDP, and taking teaching time into account.

        A closer look at recurrent spending under the Ministry of Education (see Table 19) shows that fully 92.3
        percent of total recurrent spending was dedicated to worker compensation in 2013, with nonwage
        recurrent spending amounting to 7.7 percent. The non-wage recurrent spending includes spending on
        rent, utilities, maintenance, and cleaning – i.e. basic operations of educational institutions – as well as
        direct teaching inputs such as stationery, learning materials, and textbooks. By contrast, the 2011 OECD
        average share of compensation in total recurrent spending was 78.9 percent, leaving 21.1 percent for
        non-wage inputs.b


        Table 19: Ministry of education recurrent spending, by program (2013)
                      Adminis-      Vocational Educa-         Special    Early          Basic        Secondary Eradicating Sub-
                      tration and   Education tional,         educa-     childhood      education    education illiteracy  total
                      support                  social &       tion       education
                      services                 physical
                                               activities
Worker                4.5           2.8          0.0          0.3        0.3            76.4         7.9           0.0     92.3
compensation          4.3           2.6          0.0          0.3        0.3            71.4         6.7           0.0     85.6
  Salaries, wages,    0.2           0.2                       0.0        0.0            5.0          1.2                   6.6
allowances            0.6           0.1          0.1          0.1        0.0            1.8          3.2           0.0     5.8
  Social security                                0.0                                                                       0.0
contributions         0.0                                                                                                  0.0
Goods and Services    1.6                                     0.0                       0.3          0.0                   1.9
Assistance
Assistance/stipends
Other
Sub-total             6.7           2.9          0.1          0.4        0.3            78.4         11.1          0.1     100.0

        Source: Ministry of Finance. June 2014. General Budget Final Accounts of Fiscal Year 2013, pages 158-174



        Looking at the breakdown of worker compensations (see Table 20), overall – across all levels of
        education – additional allowances constitute the largest share at 36.6 percent, followed by wages
        of non-classified employees (26.8 percent), and the cost of living personal allowance (24.1 percent).
        However, since employees’ wages appear divided into three categories – classified, non-classified,
        and contract employees – arguably they should count together and so constitute 36.2 percent of
        total compensation. The additional allowance reflects the decision to double the base salary of all
        education sector employees, beginning in 2013. In effect, since it is an automatic doubling, it is no
        longer an allowance but constitutes part of the base salary. The largest allowance is therefore the
        cost of living personal allowance.
134   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




               The cost of living allowance is an allowance allocated to all staff without preconditions. Other
               allowances depend on the particular circumstances of the individual, e.g. whether they are married
               or single; teaching in a remote area; or had to relocate from their home district to another district,
               governorate, or even region of Jordan. This approach to allowances blunts their usefulness in terms
               of achieving certain desired results, such as location of teachers in certain areas, or teaching of certain
               subjects, or motivating certain behaviors of teachers.

              Table 20: Ministry of education worker compensation, by program (2013)
                                   Adminis-       Vocational Educa-         Special   Early     Basic         Secondary Eradi-     Total
                                   tration and    Education tional,         educa-    child-    education     education cating
                                   support                   social &       tion      hood                              illiteracy
                                   services                  physical                 educ-
                                                             activities               ation
      Worker compensation
        Salaries, wages, allow-
      ances
        Classified employees       17.4           12.7                                6.8       8.4           13.8                 9.3
        Non-classified employees   16.0           23.8                      35.0      29.6      27.7          25.1                 26.8
        Contract employees         1.2
        Cost of living personal    18.0           22.1                      25.5      27.1      24.7          22.3                 0.1
      allowance
        Cost of family allowance   2.1            1.7                       0.7       0.1       1.3           1.5                  24.1
        Additional work            0.7            0.8          55.0                             1.0           3.7                  1.4
      allowance                                                                                                                    1.2
        Additional allowance       36.4           38.9                      37.2      36.4      36.8          33.6                 36.6
        Other allowances           1.5                                                                                             0.1
        Transportation allowance   4.2                                                                                             0.2
        Transfer compensation      1.0                                                                                             0.1
        Field allowance            0.6                                                                                             0.0
        Employee bonus             0.9            0.0          45.0         1.6                 0.0                       100.00   0.1
      Total                        100.0          100.0        100.0        100.0     100.0     100.0         100.0       100.0    100.0
               Source: Ministry of Finance. June 2014. General Budget Final Accounts of Fiscal Year 2013, pages 158-174

              Public education employees fall into three categories, depending on whether they hold a BA
              (Category 1), a diploma (Category 2), or are technical support staff, e.g. drivers (Category 3). Focusing
              on Categories 1 and 2, under which teachers would fall, the salary progression takes place both in
              terms of steps within the same category (seven steps in Category 1 and nine steps in Category 2)
              as well as by years of service (up to a maximum of fifteen years at the highest step in each of the
              categories). As a result, the lowest base monthly pay for an entry level Category 1 employee (Step 7)
              is 150 JD, while the highest pay for a Category 1 employee (Special) with 15 years of service is 593 JD,
              meaning almost four times as much pay. Similarly, an entry level Category 2 employee (Step 9) earns
              125 JD per month, compared to a Category 2 Step 1 employee with 15 years of service who earns
              353 JD, i.e. almost three times as much (see Table 22).

              In many countries, and in most OECD countries, teachers’ salaries increase with the level of education
              taught.c This is not the case in Jordan. Instead, the initial qualification (BA or diploma) determines the
              starting salary.
                                                                                                                              135




        Table 22: Education sector staﬀ basic salary scale, 2012 (JD/month)
                                                                   Years at grade level
Category   Level    Grade
                               1     2     3      4     5    6      7       8      9      10    11    12    13    14    15
                    Special   425   437   449    461   473   485   497     509    521     533   545   557   569   581   593
            First      1      302   312   322    332   342   352   362     372    382     392
                       2      260   268   276    284   292
                       3      228   234   240    246   252
  One
           Second      4      202   207   212    217   222
                       5      181   185   189    193   197
                       6      165   168   171    174   177
            Third
                       7      150   153   156    159   162
                       1      269   275   281    287   293   299   305     311    317     323   329   335   341   347   353
            First      2      243   248   253    258   263
                       3      218   223   228    233   238
                       4      197   201   205    209   213
  Two      Second      5      177   181   185    189   193
                       6      161   164   167    170   173
                       7      146   149   152    155   158
            Third      8      135   137   139    141   143
                       9      125   127   129    131   133
Three                         120   123   126    129   132   135   138     141    144     147   150   153   156   159   162
        Source: MOE Human Resources Department

        In all school systems, teachers’ salaries rise during the course of a career, although the rate of change
        differs greatly. Since Jordan participated in the 2012 PISA, it is possible to compare its salary scale
        with other participating countries. Thus, Jordan is among the countries where salaries at the top of
        the scale are considerably higher than starting salaries – on average for this group, which includes
        Korea, Shanghai-China, Malaysia, Singapore, Romania, and Jordan, salaries at the top of the scale are
        2.5 times higher than starting salaries and it takes between 20 and 40 years to reach the top salary.d
        By contrast, in Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, Finland, Germany, the Slovak Republic,
        the Czech Republic, Spain, Peru, Montenegro, and Croatia, teachers’ salaries at the top of the scale are
        at most 1.4 times higher than starting salaries. Jordan’s approach to teacher compensation therefore
        encourages longevity in the sector, since rewards with seniority are substantial.

        Additional payments based on teachers’ qualifications, training, and performance are also common
        in OECD countries. In other words, while Jordan uses teachers’ qualifications to distinguish between
        the base salary for those with a diploma versus a BA, OECD countries tend to use an allowance
        to reward an initial education qualification that is higher than the minimum requirement. In this
        manner, the initial qualification is rewarded but its importance in teacher total pay recedes with time
        as the growth potential for all teachers is the same. Moreover, among the OECD countries, 21 countries
        offer an additional payment to teachers for outstanding performance, and in 17 of those countries, the
        decision to award the additional payments is made by the school principal (OECD 2014).
136   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              One comparison that is often employed to assess relative attractiveness of teacher pay is between
              teacher salaries and the earnings of tertiary-educated workers in the economy. Ideally, teachers’
              salaries here either refers to actual salary, including bonuses and allowances, for teachers aged 25-64
              or to statutory salary after 15 years of experience and minimum training. The comparison is made
              then relative to full-time, full-year workers with tertiary education.

              For the OECD countries, teachers in pre-primary, primary, lower secondary, and upper secondary
              education earned on average 0.80, 0.85, 0.88, and 0.92 times the amount earned by full-time, full-
              year workers with tertiary education. The country with the highest relative teacher pay was Korea,
              where pre-primary teachers earned 1.32 times the earning of other tertiary-educated workers in the
              economy, and all other teachers earned 1.36 times as much.

              In the case of Jordan, using data from the Jordan Employment and Unemployment Survey
              and Household Income and Expenditure Survey, Assaad et al. (2014) provide first-job wages for
              individuals between the ages of 25 and 40 in 2012 who graduated in either commerce/business or
              information technology (IT) from a four-year higher education institution and live in urban areas. The
              average monthly wage is found to be JD 342, rising to JD 561 five years later (where the individual
              did not go on to further higher education). This translates to JD 4,104 in 2012 JDs, or JD 4,334 in
              2013.e By comparison, a starting teacher with BA earned 5,460 JD, or 1.26 times the earnings of a
              commerce or IT graduate working in the private sector. While the comparison is not completely
              parallel with the OECD comparison described above, it does provide an indication that teachers are
              relatively well-paid in Jordan.

              Another method used often to assess whether teacher pay is adequate or not is to compare teacher
              pay to a country’s per capita GDP. Thus, per capita GDP in Jordan in 2013 was 3,653 JD, while the
              minimum starting salary for a teacher was 4,860 JD, i.e. 1.3 times the per capita GDP. However,
              this comparison is more typically done not for starting teachers but for teachers with 15 years of
              experience and minimum training – separately for lower secondary and upper secondary education.

              Using the 2012 PISA findings, the OECD average for lower and upper secondary is 1.24 and 1.29,
              respectively. For Jordan, the ratio is the same for both levels of education and stands at 2.15 – the
              highest ratio amongst all countries participating in PISA in 2012 (see Figure 16). In other words,
              a teacher with 15 years of experience in Jordan is earning more than twice the per capita GDP
              according to PISA data.
                                                                                                                               137




Figure 16: Teacher salaries relative to per capita GDP, 2012
Expenditure on education and teachers’ salaries




    Cumulative Expenditure by Educational Institutions per Students Aged 6-15
    Lower Secondary Teachers’ Salaries (after 15 years of experience/minimum training relative to per capita GDP)
    Upper Secondary Teachers’ Salaries (after 15 years of experience/minimum training relative to per capita GDP)

Source: OECD 2014. PISA 2012 Results: What Makes Schools Successful? Resources, Policies and Practices (Volume IV), page 96.




The above analysis of teacher salaries has focused on statutory pay using available data on the pay
scale. However, actual average teacher pay in Jordan may well be quite different, as the average
teacher may not have 15 years of experience and possess minimum qualifications. Table 25 provides
data on total salaries and allowances at the governorate level. The wage data are not available by
type of education sector employee, i.e. whether they are teachers, principals, supervisors, etc. If
there are significant differences across governorates in the breakdown across the different types
of education sector employees, then taking a simple average will make the comparison across
governorates very tenuous. Therefore, 6,800 JD probably represents a good estimate of the average
pay for education sector staff in Jordan in 2015 – although not for teachers specifically. Therefore,
given that Jordan’s per capita GDP was 3,811 JD in 2014, average education sector pay equals 1.78 of
per capita GDP, i.e. relatively high, but not as high as the ratio reported in comparison to other PISA
countries. This, in turn, indicates that the average education sector staff in Jordan has fewer than 15
years of experience on the job.
138   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Table 25: Average education sector staﬀ pay, by governorate (2015)
                      Governate            Total governate wages             Total Staff              Average Wage
                                              and allowances

                  Amman (incl. MOE)              162,220,932                   23,774                     6,823
                        Balqa                     43,917,540                    6,453                     6,806
                        Zarqa                     69,781,632                   10,359                     6,736
                       Madaba                    21,924,624                    3,239                      6,769
                        Irbid                    127,378,668                   18,241                     6,983
                        Mafraq                    58,181,928                    8,873                     6,557
                        Jarash                    25,154,568                    3,672                     6,850
                        Ajloun                    20,585,724                    3,017                     6,823
                        Karak                     47,644,260                    6,999                     6,807
                        Tafilah                   19,880,508                    2,966                     6,703
                        Maan                      24,860,952                    3,812                     6,522
                        Aqaba                     13,679,316                    2,066                     6,621
                         Total                   635,210,652                   93,471                     6,796
              Source: MOE Human Resources Department


              Yet another angle to assessing teacher pay in Jordan is the following: in addition to class size,
              student-teacher ratio, and teachers’ salaries, the number of hours of student instruction and the
              amount of time teachers spend teaching also affect the financial resources countries need to allocate
              to education. In Jordan, students spend on average 6 hours per day, 5 days a week in school – adding
              up to 30 hours of instruction per week. For teachers, the average workload is 24 lessons a week,
              although there is some variation: for basic education, teachers’ workload is 24-26 lessons a week,
              each lesson 45 minutes long; and for secondary, the weekly workload is 18-20 lessons, each 55
              minutes long. The relationship between class size, student-teacher ratio, student instruction time, and
              teaching time can be described as:

              Class size = student-teacher ratio x student instruction time / teaching time per teacher

              Using available data on average class size and student-teacher ratio, this relationship holds for Jordan
              using the average student instruction time of 30 hours per week and teaching time per teacher of 18
              hours per week (24 lessons each 45 minutes long).

              Given that the school year in Jordan consists of 195 days (slightly above the OECD average of 180-183
              depending on the level of education), the annual teaching workload is provided in Table 27 for basic
              and secondary levels of education, using the different weekly teaching workloads (and keeping in mind
              that lessons in basic education are 45 minutes long, whereas they are 55 minutes long in secondary
              education). As Table 27 shows, annual teaching hours are roughly comparable with averages observed
              in OECD countriesf. In other words, teachers in Jordan are not teaching above average annual hours so
              that above average pay is warranted.
                                                                                                                                                            139




In most countries, teachers are formally required to work a specified number of hours per week,
including teaching and non-teaching time, to earn their full-time salary. Some countries also regulate
the time that a teacher has to be present in the school. In fact, more than half of OECD countries
specify the time during which teachers are required to be available at school, for both teaching and
nonteaching activities, at one or various levels of education. Although teaching time is a substantial
component of teachers’ workloads, assessing students, preparing lessons, correcting students’ work,
in-service training and staff meetings should also be taken into account when analyzing the demands
placed on teachers in different countries. The amount of time available for these non-teaching activities
varies across countries, and a large proportion of statutory working time spent teaching may indicate
that less time is devoted to activities such as assessing students and preparing lessons.

Table 27: Teaching hours per year
            Level of education                           Jordan teaching workload                                    OECD average
                                                          Weekly                    Annual                                Annual

    Basic                                                     26                       761                             782 (primary)
                                                              24                       702                       694 (lower secondary)
    Secondary                                                 20                       715                      655 (upper secondary)
                                                              18                       644                      655 (upper secondary)

Source: World Bank SABER 2010; Ministry of Education; OECD 2014 page 474


The Ministry of Education determines teachers’ working time, stipulating that teachers spend the
school day on the school premises. Since the school year consists of 195 days with 6 hours of school
per day, this amounts to 1,170 hours of teacher working time annually. While such a definition is
more favorable than limiting working time only to hours spent directly in the classroom, it does not
go far enough in recognizing that lesson planning and grading may take place outside of official
school hours. Nonetheless, the resulting teacher working time required at school in Jordan is almost
identical to the OECD average for lower secondary (1,173 hours), below the OECD average for
primary (1,200 hours) and above the OECD average for upper secondary (1,142 hours). Therefore
again, teachers in Jordan are working average numbers of hours annually and receiving relatively
high pay.




a
  The external link to the document is expected to become available in June 2017.
b
  OECD, 2014, Education at a Glance 2014, Indicator B6, Table B6.2. “Expenditure by Educational Institutions, by Resource Category and Level of Education
(2011)”.
c
  OECD, 2014. Education at a Glance 2014, page 456.
d
  OECD, 2013. PISA 2012 Results: What Makes Schools Successful? Resources, Policies and Practices (Volume IV), Programme for International Student
Assessment, OECD Publishing, page 95.
e
  The 2013 inflation rate of 5.6 percent is based on Department of Statistics data, accessed at http://www.dos.gov.jo/dos_home_a/jorfig/2013/1.pdf.
f
  OECD, 2014, Education at a Glance 2014, page 474.
140   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                                                Example 17: Analysis of teacher distribution


              Indonesia PER (2013)


              Overall comment:

              The Indonesia public expenditure review displays the magnitude of the misallocation of teachers;
              estimates the size of the gains that might be realized by a rationalized distribution; and provides policy
              options to address these issues. It demonstrates how improving the distribution of teachers can have
              important effects on efficiency, equity, and quality of education.


              Despite the low average STR at the national level, there are vast differences in the availability and
              qualification of teachers across schools. Student-teacher ratios are very unequal, as are the levels of
              teacher qualifications. For example, in 2010, student-teacher ratios in primary schools ranged from fewer
              than 10 to greater than 60 students per teacher. Equally important are the differences in qualification.
              Wealthier urban areas have a higher concentration of more qualified and experienced teachers. The
              regional differences in the distribution of teachers by education level are very sharp: richer districts,
              especially those in Java and Bali, have access to more educated teachers. The share of teachers with a
              senior secondary or below education is under 20 percent in all districts in Java, whereas in some districts
              in Papua or Sulawesi, it reaches 60 percent.

             Figure 66: Share of teachers with senior secondary or less as their highest
             education by province, 2010

                                                    80
              % OF TEACHERS WITH SENIOR SECONDARY
              OR BELOW AS HIGHEST EDUCATION LEVEL




                                                    60

                                                    40

                                                    20

                                                     0
                                                                     Jama Timur
                                                                       Dou Jauta
                                                                    Awa Tungah

                                                                  DI. Yoguaunta




                                                                     Jama Timur
                                                                                                  Dou Jauta


                                                                                             DI. Yoguaunta




                                                                                                Jama Timur
                                                                                                  Dou Jauta


                                                                                             DI. Yoguaunta




                                                                                                Jama Timur
                                                                                                  Dou Jauta


                                                                                             DI. Yoguaunta
                                                                             Bali

                                                                        Jamaluat
                                                                          Banton
                                                                   Sunatrabarat
                                                         Nuggoe Acoh Dulosalami


                                                                                               Awa Tungah
                                                                                                        Bali

                                                                                                   Jamaluat
                                                                                                     Banton
                                                                                              Sunatrabarat
                                                                                    Nuggoe Acoh Dulosalami


                                                                                               Awa Tungah
                                                                                                        Bali

                                                                                                   Jamaluat
                                                                                                     Banton
                                                                                              Sunatrabarat
                                                                                    Nuggoe Acoh Dulosalami


                                                                                               Awa Tungah
                                                                                                        Bali

                                                                                                   Jamaluat




               Source: Own calculations using NUPTK Data, 2010
                                                                                                                        141




  Improving the distribution of teachers is a matter of efficiency, equity and quality of education. Making the
  distribution of teachers more equitable by ensuring that poor and remote schools have an equal share of
  qualified and experienced teachers might raise overall levels of learning and narrow learning disparities.
  The student-teacher ratio is the main factor when it comes to district spending on education. Districts
  with low STRs spend significantly more per student than districts with higher STRs. At the school level the
  relationship is even stronger. As implied by the trend in Figure 67, an increase in the student-teacher ratio of
  5 students per teacher reduces spending per student by about one-third.


  Figure 67: Per student spending and student-teacher ratios at the school level, 2010
                        50
                        45
                        40
STUDENT TEACHER RATIO




                        35
                        30
                        25
                        20
                        15
                        10
                         5
                         0
                             0   1     2            3           4           5            6           7

                                      BUDGET FOR STUDENT IN RUPIAH
Source: Own calculations using School Based Management


The potential for efficiency savings is large. The exact amount of potential efficiency savings from raising
student-teacher ratios is hard to calculate. However, using information on the current levels of students and
teachers and average teacher salaries, it is possible to estimate the teacher salary bill for different levels of the
student-teacher ratio. Holding the number of students and the average teacher salary constant, Figure 68
shows the effect on the total salary bill of raising the student-teacher ratio. Raising the student-teacher ratio
to 23, for instance, a level that existed in the early 2000s, would reduce the overall teacher salary bill by IDR 15
trillion or 22 percent. Raising the student-teacher ratio to 28 students, a level similar to other lower-middle-
income countries, would reduce the overall salary bill by 31 percent, equivalent to the total amount currently
being spent by the Ministry of Education and Culture (MoEC) on university education (IDR 22 trillion).
142   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                            Figure 68: Estimates of government spending on basic education teachers for
                            student-teacher ratios, 2009
            education teachers (Rp. billions)




                                                                                                                 Teacher salary spending as % of
            Total salary spending for basic




                                                                                                                 2009 actual value
                                                                 Student teacher ratio




                           Source: Own calculations based on APBDN (2009)



                           The Government of Indonesia (GoI) has made significant efforts to improve efficiency and equity in the
                           allocation of teachers. The GoI has issued various regulations over the last five years that have set standards
                           for school staffing levels. However, the staffing norms associated with each regulation are different and
                           provide different guidance on standards. This has caused some confusion and difficulty in interpreting
                           the regulations and has complicated the monitoring of compliance at the school, district and provincial
                           levels. As the hiring institution, districts also issue their own regulations on staffing norms and these can go
                           beyond the minimum staffing levels implied by national standards.

                           We can use the latest guidelines (the joint decree) to identify understaffed and overstaffed schools and
                           estimate the extent of the reallocation needed for all schools to meet the guidelines. The magnitude of
                           this reallocation can be interpreted as a measure of the inequality in teacher distribution. The guidelines
                           clearly define the minimum number of teachers required in a school according to its characteristics. Using
                           the latest school-level information on teachers and student numbers, it is then possible to identify which
                           schools have insufficient teachers and which have too many.

                           Under the technical guidelines of the joint decree, the number of teachers necessary for current levels of
                           provision is smaller than the existing teaching force. There are large mismatches in the existing stock of
                           teachers in primary and junior secondary schools. At the primary level, the number of teachers required
                           is approximately 100,000 less than existing levels. The magnitude of the reallocation needed to make the
                           distribution of teachers more equitable is massive – 340,000 teachers or about 17 percent of the total
                           teaching force would have to be transferred. Most of this redistribution would involve moving teachers
                           within districts. However, approximately 74,000 teachers would need to be moved from districts with excess
                           teachers to deficit districts in the same province (Figure 70).
                                                                                                                                                   143




Figure 70: Percentage of primary school teachers that would need to be
transferred to comply with joint decree
                                                                       # of existing teachers to move within districts
                                                                       # of existing teachers to move between districts in same province
                                    30k
NUMBER OF PRIMARY SCHOOL TEACHERS




                                    25k

                                    20k

                                    15k

                                    10k

                                     5k

                                     0
                                                           Jawa Barat




                                                                 Riau
                                                          Jawa Timur

                                                     Sumatera Utara
                                                   Sumatera Selatan
                                                            Lampung
                                                    Sulawesi Selatan


                                                  Sulawesi Tenggara
                                                               Jambi




                                                          Dki Jakarta
                                                   Kalimantan Timur

                                          Nanggroe Aceh Darussalam




                                                                               Bali
                                                        Jawa Tengah




                                                Nusa Tenggara Barat
                                                              Banten


                                                     Sumatera Barat

                                                   Kalimantan Barat
                                               Nusa Tenggara Timur


                                                 Kalimantan Tengah

                                                    Sulawesi Tengah
                                                 Kalimantan Selatan
                                                              Maluku
                                                               Papua

                                                                                        Sulawesi Utara

                                                                                             Gorontalo
                                                                                       Kepulauan Riau
                                                                                        Di. Yogyakarta


                                                                                          Malukuutara
                                                                                              Bengkuu
                                                                                        Sulawesi Barat
                                                                                           Papua Barat
                                                                                      Bangka Belitung
Note: The estimates show the number of teachers currently in schools with excess teachers (according to the joint
decree) that could be transferred to take up teaching in schools with deficits in their staffing levels. Class-based, sport
and local content teachers are included in the estimates. The estimates include both PNS and non-PNS teachers.
Source: MoEC school data (2010) and NUPTK Data (2010)




In order to contain the growth of the teaching force, local governments must face the true cost of hiring
teachers. The joint decree provides a reporting mechanism to contain teacher hiring excesses. Combining
this reporting mechanism with a transparent and improved system of setting quotas for civil service hiring
could go some way to improving teacher hiring decisions.a

A more direct approach to eliminating incentives for over-hiring would be to break the link between
intergovernmental transfers and teacher hiring. The current system for hiring civil servant (PNS) teachers
creates strong incentives for local governments to continue to increase the size of their teaching force
and accelerate the conversion of contract teachers to PNS status. At present, intergovernmental resource
transfers are partly determined by the size of a local government’s payroll. Districts with larger numbers of
civil servants receive more from the transfer system. Key to addressing this issue would be the elimination
of the link between the size of the civil service and the size of a local government’s General Allocation
Fund grant (DAU) allocation.




a
 For example, quotas for teachers could be based on national staffing standards and district school-age populations rather than local government
assessments of teacher need.
144   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                   Example 18: Cost projections


              Tajikistan PER (2013)


              Overall comment:

              This review provides an example of projecting the education costs that would be needed to pay for
              the implementation of various national policy options, including expanding preschool education,
              increasing teacher salaries, and accommodating projected enrollment increases in Tajikistan. It
              estimates the additional spending needs associated with each option as a share of the country’s gross
              domestic product.


              The government intends to further increase educational spending. In the short-term, the
              planned increase will be focused on increasing teachers’ and principals’ wages and investing in
              school infrastructure. In the long-run, as stated in the National Education Development Strategy Up
              To 2020, the government aims to increase education spending—up to 6 percent of GDP by 2015 and
              not less than 7 percent of GDP by 2020.

              To accommodate various investment needs, higher spending on general secondary
              education may be warranted. Table 11 shows public spending on general secondary education
              in 2009 to 2011, which remained stable at around 2.7 to 2.8 percent of GDP. Using 2011 spending
              as a baseline, Table 12 illustrates potential additional public spending to (i) accommodate projected
              enrollment increases in the next decade, (ii) expand one-year preschool for all six year-olds, (iii)
              increase salaries for educational personnel, and (iv) increase instruction hours. This may drive the
              general secondary education expenditures up for additional 1.2 to 2.7 percent of GDP (in 2011
              prices). Any increase in education spending should be considered within the overall government
              budget envelope with the identification of priority policy interventions and assessment of their
              efficiency and costs. Sustaining high growth rates would allow for higher per pupil spending without
              sizable increase in educational spending as percentage of GDP.

              Table 11: Public spending on general education, 2009-2011

                                                          Million TJS                Million US dollars 1/       Percentage of GDP
                                                  2009       2010       2011       2009       2010      2011    2009   2010   2011

                 Personnel costs                  390.5      451.5      536.9       94.3      103.1     116.5   1.89   1.83    1.79
                 Goods and services                87.3      109.1      122.7       21.1       24.9     26.6    0.42   0.44    0.41
                 Other rec. expenditures            1.0        1.3        1.7        0.2        0.3      0.4    0.00   0.01    0.01
                 Capital expenditures             106.7      113.0      163.3       25.8       25.8     35.4    0.52   0.46    0.54
                 Total                            585.5      675.0      824.6      141.3      154.1     178.9   2.84   2.73    2.74
              Source: Tajikistan BOOST v0.4 government expenditure database.
              Note: 1/ Exchange rates at 1US$ - TJS 4.14 in 2009, TJS 4.30 in 2010, and 4.61 in 2011.
                                                                                                                                   145




Table 12: Additional annual spending needs for various policy options at 2011 prices
                                                                               Million TJS1/ Million US         Percentage
                                                                                             Dollars1/           of GDP2/
    Accommodating projected enrollment increases during the                       143-250           31-54         0.47-0.89
    next decade
       New construction of additional 550 classrooms per year                     88-158            19-34         0.29-0.53
       Renovation of 400-700 classrooms per year                                  46-83             10-18         0.15-0.28
       Recurrent cost to accommodate additional stu-                                9.4              2.0             0.03
       dents (27,500) per year
    Expansion of one-year pre-school for six year-olds                            98-155          21.4-33.6       0.32-0.51
       New construction of 600 classrooms per year over 6 years                     97               21              0.32
       (3,550 classrooms in total) for 177,000 six year-olds
       New construction of 250 classrooms per year over 6 years                      40              8.8             0.13
       (if 2,000 classrooms are available for pre-school)
       Additional recurrent cost per year of enrolling all 6 year-olds               58             12.6             0.19
       (i.e. 177,000 additional children)
    Increasing salaries                                                           60-270            13-59           0.2-0.9
       Increasing salaries for all education personnel by 30 percent               270 3/            59              0.90
       Increasing salaries only for teachers by 30 percent 4/                       180              39              0.60
       Increasing salaries for lower categories by 20 percent 5/                    60               13              0.20
    Increasing instruction hours                                                  60-120            13-26           0.2-0.4
       Increasing instruction hours by 10 percent (i.e. increasing                  60               13              0.20
       teacher salaries by 10 percent)4/
       Increasing instruction hours by 20 percent (i.e. increasing                  120              26              0.40
       teacher salaries by 20 percent)4/


Source: World Bank Staff estimates.

Notes:
1/
   Exchange rate at 1 US$ = TJS 4.61
2/
   Based on GDP In 2011 (TJS 30.1 billion or US$ 6.52 billion).
3/
   The data on personnel costs for all educational staff are available only up to 2011, and no breakdown by type of staff
(teachers, school administrators, non-teaching staff, and government administrators) is available. While teacher salaries
increased substantially in September 2011 (by 30 percent) and September 2012 (by 60 percent), that was not the case for
other staff. Hence, it is assumed that total personnel costs increased by 20 percent (two-thirds of the teacher salary increase)
between 2011 and 2012, and another 40 percent (two-thirds of the teacher salary increase) between 2012 and 2013. Based
on this assumption, total personnel cost in 2013 is assumed to be TJS 902 million (TJS 537 million or 1.15 x 1.3), which is
used as the baseline.
4/
   Assuming that personnel costs for teachers include two-thirds of total personnel costs for general education.
5/
   Assuming that one-half of teachers will be subject to this increase.
146   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Jordan PER (2016)a


              Overall comment:

              The Jordan Response Plan 2016-2018 case provides a good example of projecting education costs to
              meet specific, national education goals and targets. The analysis provides details on indicators used in
              the education sector vulnerability assessment and costing analysis in accordance with national norms
              and standards on class size, number of classes per school, and student-teacher ratio. However, the
              Jordan Response Plan approach goes beyond abiding by national standards on core education-system
              indicators. It proposes a number of projects and sector-specific objectives aimed at improving access
              to quality and inclusive education for Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanians.



              The Jordan Response Plan 2016-2018 estimates education sector needs by carrying out an education
              sector vulnerability assessment at the district level by using the three indicators of school size, class
              size, and student-teacher ratio. It defines the national standard for class size at 27, thereby identifying
              vulnerability to crowding in classes to be most severe in seven districts of the four governorates with
              high concentrations of Syrian refugees, i.e. Amman, Zarqa, Irbid, and Mafraq.

              The assessment further finds that 150 new schools would be needed to meet a national standard of
              19 classes per school, which translates to a school size of 513 (assuming an average class size of 27).
              These schools would be located primarily in the same four governorates with highest concentrations
              of Syrian refugees. Finally, the assessment finds that an additional 8,600 teachers would be needed
              to meet a national standard of 17 students per teacher. In other words, the MOE is aiming to absorb
              the Syrian students while maintaining its current class size and student-teacher ratio. In addition,
              new schools to be constructed are to accommodate above 500 students, which is greater than the
              current average school size.

              Beyond abiding by national standards on core education system indicators, the Jordan Response Plan
              2016-2018 aims to apply lessons learned from past refugee crises and enhance the Government’s
              ability to respond to emergencies while at the same time strengthening the education system’s
              resilience. This resilience implies that the education system is able to adapt and maintain quality in
              the face of potential new crisis scenarios. Rather than relying on the unit cost approach, the Plan
              proposes a number of projects that aim to improve access to quality and inclusive education for
              Syrian refugees and vulnerable Jordanians, boosting the capacity of the public education system
              with additional learning spaces, remedial/catch-up classes for those children who have missed
              out on weeks or months of schooling, and access to improved and diversified certified alternative
              learning opportunities for children and youth. Projects are also to deliver capacity building of
              teachers to safeguard the quality of education. The resulting three-year Plan starts with a baseline
              number of 156,663 Syrian children enrolled in education services (whether formal, non-formal, or
              informal), and targets increases in enrolment to 222,000 in 2016; 248,000 in 2017; and 272,800 in
              2018. The increased enrolment is not expected to result from influx of additional Syrian refugees into
              Jordan, but rather from increased enrolment rates of Syrian children already in Jordan.
                                                                                                          147




A range of projects are proposed in the Plan, spanning improving the capacity of education
authorities to ensure the continuous delivery of quality inclusive education services; enhancing
access to safe and protective learning spaces; and increasing provision of adequate, protective, and
safe learning spaces and facilities. In terms of associated costs, over US$850 million are estimated
over the 2016-2018 period, with over US$470 million dedicated to facilities, i.e. construction of
150 new schools and additional classrooms or renovation of 450 prioritized schools. The fact that
attention is being paid not only to construction of new schools but also to adding classrooms to
existing schools is warranted given the relatively small average school size in Jordan. In other words,
the Plan recognizes the necessity for a dual approach that is based on detailed analysis of the needs
on the ground in specific locations in the country. The next largest project at over US$180 million
includes the hiring and pay of teachers.
a
    The external link to the document is expected to become available in June 2017.


Democratic Republic of Congo PER (2015)


Overall comment:

The DRC case briefly analyzes the government’s projection of the budget required to implement the
medium-term education-sector strategy. It identifies strengths and weaknesses in the way that the
government conducted its cost analysis, and explains potential challenges to the projected medium-
term strategy.


The medium-term outlook of the education sector strategy does not address the current challenges
arising from the financing of the education sector. From the recently adopted 2016-2025 sector
strategy, the projected budget still shows high dependence on donors. It was also planned with
a significant financing gap, which has not been addressed. However, the projection of the costs
based on the new sector strategy reveals both good and bad news. The good news is that the
functional classification by level of education is well-crafted which is very promising for sectorial
analysis at the monitoring and evaluation stages. And the strategy planning is based on the
focused and measurable targets, which is also important. On the negative side, there are three core
areas of concern: (i) the ministry of budget needs to establish a clear budget line for each level of
education and properly plan according to the budget lines- the lack of clear and consistent budget
nomenclature is one of the drawbacks for this analysis, (ii), the projected strategy has not taken
private provision of schooling into account both in terms of cost and the human resources needs,
and (iii), projected scenarios are missing the demographic aspect of the unit cost, which currently is
projected to increase over time in US dollars. The unit cost calculation is also based on the expected
funds from outside resources, which may or may not be realized.
148   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                        Figure 40: Medium-term outlook of public spending on education by sources and
                        unit cost projection, 2016, 2025

           2016                                                                                                                                                                          120%




                                                                                                                                                     719
                                                                                                                                               709
                                                                                                                                                                                         100%
           2017




                                                                                                                                                                                   676
                                                                                                                                                                                         80%
           2018




                                                                                                                                         562
                                                                                                                                                                                         60%




                                                                                                                                                                             529
                                                                                                                                   522
           2021                                                                                                                                                                          40%




                                                                                                                             455
           2025




                                                                                                                                                                       428
                                                                      427




                                                                                                                                                                 411
                                                                420




                                                                                                                                                           394
                                                                                                                                                                                         20%
                                                          314




                                                                                                                                                                                          0%
                                                    279




                                                                                                                 241
                                              244




                                                                                                                       230
                                                                                                                                                                                         -20%    2016   2017   2018   2021   2025




                                                                                                           204
                                                                                                     185
                                                                                               165


      15 13 11 11                   52
                                         71                                 62 72
                                                                                  74
                                                                                       93 96
                                                                                                                                                                                                Internal Resources
                    9      27 33 37


      Preschool              Primary          Non-Formal                     1st Cycle         2nd Cycle                     Technical                      Higher                              Development Partners
                                                                            Secondary          Secondary                        and                        Education
                                                                              School             School                      Vocational                                                         Shortage of Planned Budget
                        Source: Education Sector Strategy, 2016-2025, January 2015


                        Based on the projected GDP growth, the government could afford to increase the budget for the
                        education sector especially given that education is one of the top five priority sectors designated by
                        the authorities. Education spending as share of GDP is projected to reach only 3.4 percent by 2025
                        (Figure 41) which is still below the current SSA average (5.0 percent) and the minimum suggested
                        rate of 4.7 percent. Just as with the unit cost analysis performed in the last sector strategy, the main
                        concern with the projected estimate for the new sector strategy is that the capital spending still
                        heavily depends on external sources (about 44 percent annually) especially given the recent history
                        of low execution rate for external resources.


                        Table 41: Medium-term outlook of public spending on education by sources and
                        unit cost projection, 2016, 2025




                                   Education spending as share of total public spending
                                   Capital spending as share of total education spending
                                   Education spending as share of GDP

                        Source: Education Sector Strategy, 2016-2025, January 2015
                                                                                                            149




    Example 19: Fiscal sustainability analysis


Albania PER (2014)


Overall comment:

The Albania public expenditure review conducted a long-term fiscal sustainability analysis with
specific policy recommendations. Based on the assumption that the country’s fiscal consolidation
program will be implemented as planned, it examines the impact of the proposed increases in public
education spending on the public debt.



In the short to medium term, given the lack of fiscal space and the fiscal consolidation plan in place
for the period 2014-16, Albania should carry out reforms to make the social sectors more efficient
and do more with the same level of budgetary resources. In the medium to long term, particularly
starting with 2017, Albania could consider increasing public spending on education, with a clear
recognition of the trade-offs – that increased public spending will lead to a higher public debt-to-
GDP ratio (relative to the baseline) but that given the needs in the sector such investments may
be worthwhile.

The key public spending recommendations with implications for fiscal sustainability related to
education are as follows:

Increase public spending on education, as fiscal space opens starting from 2017, from the current 3
percent to about 4 percent of GDP, bringing Albania closer to its regional peers in terms of the level of
public spending on education. The additional public spending could be channeled to several areas in
which Albania still needs investment, such as teachers’ professional development; learning materials
and school supplies; quality of school facilities; and, more time on tasks and activities in schools.

The assumptions behind a baseline scenario for Albania’s fiscal sustainability are as follows: the
current fiscal consolidation program for the period 2014-2016, both on the revenue and on the
expenditure side, will remain in place and will be implemented as planned. Under this scenario,
Albania’s public debt-to-GDP ratio will fall from 72 percent in 2014 to 69.7 in 2016, including the
clearance of arrears of 5.3 percent of GDP over three years. Beyond 2016, the baseline scenario
assumes that the fiscal consolidation continues between 2017-2022, with the expenditure to GDP
ratio declining from 28.7 percent in 2016 to 25.2 percent in 2022, while revenues staying at 25.2
percent of GDP. Public debt-to-GDP reaches 49.7 percent at the end of 2022 under the baseline.

Relative to the baseline scenario, the impacts of the proposed increases in public spending on
education and health (from 2017) on the public debt-to-GDP ratio are presented in Figure 6.1.
150   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              An education spending increase scenario assumes an increase in education public spending from
              the current 3 percent of GDP to 4 percent of GDP starting in 2017 and continuing throughout the
              considered period. The effect of this will be to increase Albania’s public debt-to-GDP ratio by 5.2
              percent of GDP by 2022.

              Figure 6.1: Albania public debt to GDP ratio under increased education and health
              sector spending, 2017-2022

                75


                70


                65
                                                                                                  63.1
                60

                                                                                                  56.9
                55                                                                                54.9


                50                                                                                49.7


                45


                40
                        2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022



                                                            Combine Increase in Education and Health and Spending
                                                            Health Spending Increases from 2.6 to 4 percent of GDP
                                                            Education Spending Increases from 3 to 4 percent of GDP
                                                            Baseline

              Source: World Bank staff calculation
                                                                                                                           151




 Madagascar PER (2015)


 Overall comment

 The wage bill in the education sector has to be carefully monitored for its fiscal sustainability and for the
 presence of “fiscal space” to cover non-wage, recurrent expenditures and capital expenditures required to
 complement teachers.

 This example from Madagascar assesses the trajectory of the current wage bill and simulates the fiscal
 consequences of a planned Government policy that would integrate community teachers into the civil
 service. Community teachers are locally hired and employed by parents’ associations. They consist of
 two groups: (i) subsidized teachers, who receive salaries from the State, and also, depending on the local
 context, additional funding from parents; and (ii) non-subsidized teachers, who receive salaries solely from
 parents. Integrating these teachers into the civil service shifts their entire wage payment to the central
 government.


 The share of regular teachers’ salaries in the budget has been fast increasing, and the wage bill has
 reached unsustainable levels. Looking at changes in regular salaries is informative to address issues
 of sustainability because regular salaries are not flexible downward. Using more recent data from
 the MFB/SIGFP shows that the share of regular salaries is following a fast increasing trend, reaching
 over three fourths of the education executed budget in 2013 (Figure 15). Although this is still within
 reasonable limits, the trend is not sustainable. The recent announcement that 10,000 community
 teachers will be absorbed into the civil service in 2014, and another 10,000 in 2015, are in that sense
 worrying (see Box 7 for more details).

 Figure 15: Evolution of real education expenditures by broad economic category

                            700
                            600
BILLION CONSTANT 2013 AR.




                            500
                            400
                            300
                            200
                            100
                              0
                                  2006        2008          2009          2010         2011        2012             2013


                                         Capital Expenditures      Other Recurrent Expenditure   Regular Salaries
 Source: Data from MFB-SIGFP.
152   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Box 7. The Impact of the Regularization of Community Teachers as
              Civil Servants

              Recent political decisions in the sector include the progressive integration of community teachers in the
              civil service. Analyses carried out under this PER have aimed at estimating the potential impact on the
              MFB budget of such integration, using various scenarios. Projections for 2020 show that the number of
              teachers would reach 96,100 for an expected 5.2 million children in primary school. This would translate
              into the recruitment of an additional 68,000 civil servants compared with 2014. An analysis of the
              potential impact of this decision on public spending on education is presented below. The evolution
              of the macroeconomic context was simulated using two different scenarios, in line with the recent
              scenarios elaborated by the IMF. More details on the methodology and scenarios for the macro context
              are provided in the case study developed for this PER.

              In addition, the analysis examined two different hypotheses for integrating community teachers in the
              civil service:

              •   Hypothesis 1: all community teachers are integrated in the civil service as early as 2016, and new
                  teachers are hired as civil servants.

              •   Hypothesis 2: community teachers are progressively integrated in the civil service to ensure that
                  all teachers are civil servants by 2020. More specifically, this hypothesis assumes the integration of
                  10,000 community teachers in 2016, 15,000 in 2017, 15,000 in 2018, 16,000 in 2019 and 16,960 in
                  2020.

              The results of projections show that Hypothesis 1
              is unsustainable even in the most favorable case        Simulating the impact of the
              of the evolution of the macroeconomic context.          integration of community teachers
              Indeed, from 2016 onwards, the salary needs for
              primary schools would amount to 550 billion
              MGA. This amount exceeds the global amount
              of the 2014 MFB budget, which was 541 billion
              MGA in 2014, and is 10 times larger than the
              current amount allocated to community
              teachers’ subsidies.

              In the case of Hypothesis 2, the results of
              projections show that the integration of 10,000
              community teachers in 2016 and as many in 2017
              would result in salary costs equivalent to about
              300 billion Ar in 2016 and as much as 350 billion
              Ar in 2017. This compares with 286 billion Ar and
              318 billion Ar projected for salary costs in 2016 and
              2017 respectively. Under both scenarios 1 and 2,
              the wage bill would amount to 600 billion Ar by
              2020, far above the projected resources available
                                                                                                             153




for salaries under scenario 1 (504 billion Ar) and scenario 2 (414 billion Ar). This scenario seems hardly
sustainable even in the case of favorable economic growth (Scenario 1), and completely unrealistic in
case of a slower economic growth (Scenario 2).

The results of these simulations show that the integration of community teachers as planned will
have large and unsustainable consequences on the MoE budget. To improve its feasibility, it would
seem essential to envisage one of the following options: (a) dramatically slow down the progression of
integration, or (b) allocate more resources to education. Even in the latter case, this simulation shows
that the integration of community teachers into the public service, even if progressive, will result in
further increasing the already high weight of salaries in the MoE budget. The interventions aiming to
improve the quality of education, such as the improvement of infrastructure, but also teacher training
and the improvement of the availability of learning material, could therefore not be financed by the
State budget.
154   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 20: Demographic trends and enrollment projections


              Guinea PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              This analysis shows the projected enrollment and education-funding gap based on demographic
              trends and different gross domestic product growth scenarios. It concludes that the current level of
              funding is a real constraint given the projected population growth in the country.


              Guinea has one of the highest levels of population growth in the world: 52 percent of the
              Guinean population is composed of women, and fertility rates are among the highest in the
              region at 5.1 live births per woman, and even higher in rural areas at 5.8 live births. The school-
              age population (ages 3 through 25) comprises almost half the population in Guinea, and grew
              at about 2.8 percent annually between 2008 and 2013.

              The current level of funding is a real constraint given the projected population growth.
              Enrollments have expanded, but the capacity to serve students lags behind what is needed
              given Guinea’s large and growing school age population. If the education sector continues to
              receive less than 3 percent of GDP, and 13 percent of public resources—and the country does
              not improve its resource use—an increasing number of children and youth will be out of school.
              To illustrate this point, assuming that current gross enrollment ratios will hold steady–9 percent
              at the pre-primary, 98 percent at the primary, 45 percent at the lower secondary, and 25 percent
              at the upper secondary levels - enrollments across all levels would have to increase by 620,000
              students by 2020 just to accommodate the population growth.

              If the public sector continues to serve the same share of students, this would mean an
              additional 414,000 students enrolled in public schools. To support that kind of growth, under
              current resource use patterns, Guinea’s public education spending on operating costs only
              must grow by one fourth in real terms, which is only possible under current resource allocation
              patterns if the economy grows by 3 to 4 percent annually— faster than the population. If
              growth rates averaged to 2 percent, for example, by 2020, another 124,000 children, or 2 percent
              of the projected school age population in 2020, would be excluded from education (left panel
              of the figure below). To serve this additional population—that is, just to keep the out-of-school
              youth rate at its 2012 level—the funding for operating expenditures would have to grow by
              GNF 1.1 billion in real terms. That would mean the education sector would have to double or
              receive 2 percent more of the country’s GDP.
                                                                                                                                           155




                 Projected enrollment gap and operating expenditure gap due to population growth
Enrollment gap




                                                                             Funding gap
                               GDP Growth - 1 percent                                               Operating costs with current funding
                                                                                                    and GER
                               GDP Growth - 2 percent
                                                                                                    GDP Growth - 1 percent
                               Projected Public Enrollment
                                                                                                    GDP Growth - 2 percent
                                GDP Growth - 3 percent
                                                                                                    GDP Growth - 3 percent
                               GDP Growth - 4 percent
                                                                                                    GDP Growth - 4 percent

                 Source: World Bank Staff calculations using population data from U.S. Census international databases, expenditure and
                 enrollment data from MEF, and dropout rates from ELEP 2012.
156   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




             Belarus PER (2013)


             Overall comment:

             The Belarus analysis examines the implications of the declining number of students in the country,
             particularly in rural areas, for the size of the education workforce and school network. Although Belarus
             has made progress in consolidating its school network in response to demographic trends, it has not
             seen a commensurate adjustment in the number of teachers, which has remained relatively stable.
             Student-teacher ratios have declined, particularly in rural areas, with significant implications for per
             student costs.


              The education system must adjust to a dramatic decline in the number of students. Belarus’
              population is projected to decrease to 8 million in 2050 from more than 10 million in 1995. The
              school-age population has decreased dramatically during the last 40 years: from 1.9 million in 1970
              to 0.9 in 2010 (Figure 75). Just in the last four years, the number of students in general secondary
              schools declined by 14.1 percent. At the same time, the number of people living in cities has almost
              doubled during the last 30 years (from 4 million in 1970 to 7.2 million in 2011). As a result, the
              demand for education, particularly in rural areas, collapsed. Based on current fertility and internal
              migration rates, population dynamics among school-aged cohorts in urban areas are expected to
              stabilize over next two decade, while the decline in rural areas is expected to continue.

              Figure 75: Number of students has declined, especially in rural areas
              Demographic trends 1970-2030 (thousands)

                                                                                                            All Ages
                                                                                                            Age 5-14
                                                                                                            Age 5-24
                                                                                                            Rural
                                                                                                            Urban




              Source: UN, Beistat.

              In response to these trends, the Government has begun to right-size the school network.
              Accommodating such large shifts in student enrollment is tremendously challenging for a school
              system because it involves closing down schools, a politically difficult task in any country.

              Nevertheless, Belarus has made progress consolidating its school network. Since the early 1990s more
              than 1,200 schools were closed, equal to about 30 percent of the existing schools at the beginning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        157




of the period (Figure 76). School closures accelerated in the 2000s, and every year since 2002 more
than 100 school have closed annually. Impressively, school closures have kept pace with the declining
number of student.

Figure 76: Consolidation of school network
1991=100

130


110
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of Teachers
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of Schools
 90
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Number of Students
 70


 50




      1991               1993                   1995              1997               1999                   2001              2003             2005               2007               2009

Source: CISSTAT. “Statistics of the Countries of the CI5,” MOE (2011).


However, the size of the education workforce has not seen a commensurate adjustment, and
consequently student-teacher ratios have declined, with significant implications for per student
costs. The number of teachers has remained relatively stable despite the significant decline both in
the number of students and schools (Figure 76).

Student-teacher ratios at both primary and secondary have continued to fall and are among the lowest
in the region (Figure 78). Since teacher salaries are the single largest cost item, this increase in the
number of teachers per student has been associated with a significant increase in per student costs.


Figure 78: Student-teacher ratios are among the lowest in the region
Primary school student-teacher ratios in the ECA region                                                                          Secondary school student-teacher ratios in the ECA region
1999-2009                                                                                                                        1999-2009

 30                                                                                                                              18
                                                                                                                                 16
 25                                                                                                                              14
 20                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                 10
 15                                                                                                                                  8
 10                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                     4
  5
                                                                                                                                     2
  0                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                      MDA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BLR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LTU
                                                                                                                                                                         UZB
                                                                                                                                                      RQU
                                                                                                            HUN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AZE
                                                                                                                                                                                            CZE




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KAZ
                                                                                                                                                KGZ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SVN
                                                                        MDA




                                                                                                                                                                                                  POL
                                                                                                                                         TJK




                                                                                                                                                                   MKD
                                                UZB




                                                                  ROU
                        CVE




                                                                                                      AZE


                                                                                                                  LVA
                                                      KAZ




                                                                                                                                                            SVK
      KGZ




                                          SVN




                                                                                                                                                                                                        UKR
                                                                                                                        POL
            TJK




                                                            MKD




                                                                                                LTA




                                                                                                                                                                               BGR
                  ARM




                                                                                          BLR
                                                                              SVK
                              RUS




                                                                                    UKR
                                    BGR




      2009                           2004

Source: EdStats database.
158   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Schools in rural areas are particularly resource intensive. As a result of demographic change and
              urbanization, rural areas have seen the sharpest declines in population and student numbers. While
              rural schools tend to be smaller everywhere, there continues to be a quite substantial misalignment in
              the demand and supply of education services between rural and urban areas (Figure 79).


              Figure 79: Most students are in urban area while most schools are in rural areas

                100
                 90                  22.6
                 80                                                35
                 70                                                                     60.4
                 60
                 50
                 40                  77.4
                 30                                                65
                 20                                                                     39.6
                 10
                  0
                                 Students                   Teachers                 Schools

                                                           Rural        Urban


              Student-teacher ratio in secondary schools

                12

                10

                 8

                 6

                 4

                 2

                 0
                                     STR                     Urban                             Rural
                              City of Minsk          Brest oblast          Vitebsk oblast      Gomel oblast
                              Grodno oblast          Minsk oblast          Mogiev oblast       Belarus
              Source: Belstat, MOE



              While the majority of students (about 77.4 percent) now reside in cities, 60.4 percent of schools and
              35 percent of teachers were located in rural areas. Equally, the student-teacher ratio is substantially
              lower in rural areas, or as low as 4.6 in rural areas of Vitebsk oblast. While rural schools are important
              in providing access to education, the resource intensity drives up per student costs. School-level data
              would be necessary to understand whether such resource differentials are justified, and how they
              could be optimized either by within-school reorganization or school consolidation.
                                                                                                                   159




        Georgia PER (2015)


        Overall comment

        This review analyzes the fiscal and equity implications of a policy that provided free preschool. The
        policy is expected to increase enrollments, but reduce local government revenues, as a result of the
        elimination of fees. The analysis provides four different scenarios, based on different assumptions
        about enrollment trends, and explores the impact on equity (the impact of school-fee elimination
        policy on interregional differences in spending and inequality in the provision of preschool services).



       Making preschool education free will also encourage enrollment, which will raise the costs for local
       governments. Before the fees were eliminated, enrollment rates were much higher among rich
       than among poor households, ranging from 30 percent in the poorest households to more than
       50 percent in the richest. Without fees enrollment rates for less well-off families are expected to rise
       and enrollment rate gaps are likely to diminish. Regions more heavily reliant on parental fees as a
       source of preschool funding are generally associated with lower enrollments, except for Tbilisi. This
       means that with parental fees eliminated, regions that were more reliant on parental fees will be
       confronted by a more acute increase in costs because of two shocks: (1) higher preschool spending
                                                            to compensate for the higher parental fee, and
Table 4.3: Additional ﬁscal cost of eliminating             (2) a bigger increase in enrollment due to the
preschool fees, million GEL                                 lower enrollment rate before the change.

         Scenarios               Estimated Fiscal Impact        In different scenarios the immediate increase
                                                                in preschool spending after the parental fee
  Fee Reform Scenario 1
                                                                elimination is estimated to total GEL24–39
  Fixed Enrollment                              24
                                                                million. Four scenarios are considered (Table
  Fee Reform Scenario 2                                         4.3). In Scenario 1 enrollment remains the same
  Fixed Supply                                  33
                                                                as pre-reform and the central government
  Fee Reform Scenario 3                                         compensates for the amount used to be paid
  Enrollment Equal to Average                   27              in fees by parents. In this scenario the cost of
  in Top Three Consumption
                                                                the reform will be GEL24 million. In Scenario 2,
  Quintiles
                                                                enrollment increases so that preschool places
  Fee Reform Scenario 4                                         currently available are totally filled. In that
  Enrollment Equal to Average in                39
                                                                scenario enrollment will increase by about
  Top Consumption Quintile
                                                                10 percent to max out preschool capacity,
Source: Staff calculations                                      leading to a higher cost of GEL33 million.
                                                                Scenario 3 corresponds to the case where
           enrollment increases up to the average enrollment rate for households in the top three quintiles
           of the consumption distribution. In that case, enrollment will increase by 4.3 percent, at a cost of
           GEL27 million. In Scenario 4, enrollment is assumed to increase up to the average enrollment rate
           for households in the top quintile of the consumption distribution, bringing a 19 percent increase in
           enrollment and a much larger fiscal cost of GEL39 million.
160   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Interregional differences in spending are likely to exacerbate inequality in the provision of preschool
              services. For some regions the implied fiscal impact is much heavier than for others, driven by
              differences in parental fees, enrollment rates, and per child preschool spending (Figure 4.14). Before
              the parental fee was eliminated there was already a large disparity in the quality of preschool services:
              for instance, Tbilisi provides much better preschool services and its cost per child is nearly 30 percent
              higher than the rest of the local governments. After the fee exemption, more developed local
              governments like Tbilisi are likely to be in a better position to curb the fiscal impact; others where
              parental contributions were high and enrollment rates low may not be able to fully compensate for
              the amounts parents used to pay. This will lead to further deterioration of the quality of preschool
              education in these localities and result in more unequal preschool services across the country.


              Figure 4.14: Fiscal impact of parental fee elimination by region
                               (Additional cost as percent of GDP)




              Sources: 2011 WMS and staff calculations.          Enrollment Equal             Fixed Supply
                                                                 to Average in Top
                                                                                              Fixed Enrollment
                                                                 Consumption Quintile
                                                                 Enrollment Equal to
                                                                 Average in Top Three
                                                                 Consumption Quintile
                                                                                                                                                      161




     Example 21: Technical eﬃciency of inputs (eﬃciency indicators)


Belarus PER (2013)


Overall comment:

This public expenditure review analyzes the technical efficiency of inputs (student-teacher ratio, and
class and school size) in Belarus, comparing them with regional and international benchmarks. It finds
inefficiencies in the provision of these education inputs, with the student-teacher ratio among the
lowest in the region, and small school and class sizes.



In Belarus, student-teacher ratios at both primary and secondary have continued to fall and are among
the lowest in the region (Figure 78).

Figure 78: Student-teacher ratios are among the lowest in the region
Primary school student-teacher ratios in the ECA region 1999-2009

30

25

20

15

10

 5

 0
                                                                                                                    HUN
                                                                            MDA
                                                  UZB




                                                                      ROU
                       CVE




                                                                                                              AZE


                                                                                                                           LVA
                                                         KAZ
     KGZ




                                            SVN




                                                                                                                                  POL
           TJK




                                                                MKD




                                                                                                      LTA
                 ARM




                                                                                               BLR
                                                                                  SVK
                             RUS




                                                                                        UKR
                                    BGR




Secondary school student-teacher ratios in the ECA region 1999-2009                                                                     2009   2004

16
14
12
10
 8
 6
 4
 2
 0
                                                                                  HUN
                                                        MDA




                                                                                                                          BLR
                                                                                                        LTU
                                      UZB
                 RQU




                                                                                                                                 AZE
                                                               CZE




                                                                                                                LVA
                                                                                         KAZ
           KGZ




                                                                                                SVN
                                                                      POL
     TJK




                              MKD
                       SVK




                                                                            UKR
                                              BGR




Source: EdStats database.
162   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              The average class size is 16 students, compared to 21 and 24 students in OECD primary and lower
              secondary, respectively (Figure 80). Class size in rural areas is only 9.4, against 20.4 in urban areas.

              Figure 80: Class and school sizes are small
              40
              35
              30
              25
              20
              15
              10
               5
               0
                       CHN
                             CHL


                                           JPN
                                                  ISR
                                                         IDN
                                                               ARG
                                                                     TUR
                                                                           BRA
                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                       IRL
                                                                                             AUS
                                                                                                   FRA
                                                                                                          DEU
                                                                                                                ESP
                                                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                                                            PRT
                                                                                                                                  BEL
                                                                                                                                        CZE
                                                                                                                                              MEX
                                                                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                                                                          CHE


                                                                                                                                                                      AUT
                                                                                                                                                                            ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                  POL


                                                                                                                                                                                              EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                          GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BLR
                                    PRK




                                                                                                                                                                DNK




                                                                                                                                                                                        SVK
              500


              400


              300


              200


              100


                   0
                                   ROU
                                          LTU
                                                 BGR
                                                        LVA
                                                               EST
                                                                     RUS
                         ROPE




                                                                           MDA


                                                                                       SVN
                                                                                             BLR
                                                                                                    GEO
                                                                                                            HUN
                                                                                                                  UKR
                                                                                                                        HRV
                                                                                 SVK




              Source: NSI except Poland (BOOST data), Slovakia (Ministry of Education), statistics authorities of CIS countries. “Western
              Europe” includes other members of the European Union not mentioned in the figure, less Malta and Cyprus, plus
              Norway, Iceland and Switzerland. OECD at a Glance, 2011.
              Notes: Year of reference 2008. Public institutions only (including for Belarus).




              Overall, lower student-teacher ratios and smaller classes imply high costs per student, which do not
              necessarily lead to better learning outcomes.
                                                                                                         163




              Example 22: Analysis of unit costs and outcomes


Albania PER (2014)


Overall comment:

The Albania analysis provides an example where the efficiency discussion in terms of public spending
and learning outcomes may not be straightforward. (Both inputs and outputs for the country are low,
compared to those for other countries). The Albania case also includes an analysis of the relationship
between financial resources and learning outcomes at the subnational level and reveals problems of
both inefficiency and equity in spending.



Compared to other countries in the region, Albania’s education system gets poor learning outcomes
and has low public spending. Hence, it is difficult to determine whether Albania’s system is efficient
given that both inputs and outputs are low. The figure shows Albania on the curve that best fits
international data on outcomes and public spending per pupil. Albania appears among the lowest
spending countries in the sample. While the efficiency discussion in terms of public spending and
learning outcomes is not clear it is evident that the system has not been effective at providing
students with the necessary basic competencies.


Figure 2: International comparison: PISA score and expenditure per
secondary student
(Reading, Mathematics and
  PISA 2012 Average score

          Science)




                                             Total expenditures per pupil in secondary
                                           education (USD converted using PPPs for GDP)


Source: IMF, PISA, and World Bank calculations
164   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                                     Measuring eﬃciency at subnational level

                                     Results from Matura, the university entrance exam, suggest that financial resources alone do not
                                     explain learning outcomes. Figure 2 illustrates the relationship between financial resources and learning
                                     outcomes (as measured by 2013 Matura mathematics scores) by district. While the flat blue line is
                                     an unweighted average score for the county (average of the blue dots), the flat red line measures
                                     expenditures per pupil in each county (right-hand side axis). The figure shows that some counties
                                     seem to be more efficient than others in using their resources to produce good learning outcomes.
                                     For instance, Qarku Tirane, Vlorë, Elbasan, and Fier spend approximately the country’s average and get
                                     relatively good results, while other districts spend as much and do not get good learning outcomes.

                                     It is important to stress that this analysis is based on correlation, and thus causality between expenditures
                                     and scores cannot be claimed.a The figure also suggests that the financing mechanism does not target
                                     poorer prefectures (as measured by the share of population in poverty). For instance, Gjirokastër has low
                                     poverty incidence and the highest expenditure per pupil, whereas Kukës is poorer and gets a low per
                                     capita allocation.

                                     Figure 3: University examination scores and county ﬁnancial resources
                                     8.0                                                                                                                                                 80k
                                     7.5                                                                                                                                                 75k




                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EXPENDITURE PER PUPIL (RED)
          MATURA MATHMATICS (BLUE)




                                     7.0                                                                                                                                                 70k
                                     6.5                                                                                                                                                 65k
                                     6.0                                                                                                                                                 60k
                                     5.5                                                                                                                                                 55k
                                     5.0                                                                                                                                                 50k
                                     4.5                                                                                                                                                 45k
                                     4.0                                                                                                                                                 40k
                                     3.5                                                                                                                                                 35k
                                     3.0                                                                                                                                                 30k
                                                                                                                                                           Shkodër
                                               Berat

                                             Shrapar
                                             Kucove


                                                        Bulque
                                                         Dibër
                                                           Mut

                                                                   Durrës
                                                                    Kruje

                                                                             Elbasan
                                                                             Granish
                                                                            Libradad
                                                                               Peqin

                                                                                             Fier
                                                                                         Lushnje
                                                                                       Malbraster

                                                                                                    Gjrobasier
                                                                                                        Pernet
                                                                                                     Tepelene

                                                                                                                    Korçë
                                                                                                                   Devoll
                                                                                                                  Kolonje
                                                                                                                 Pogrades

                                                                                                                                 Kukës
                                                                                                                                   Has
                                                                                                                               Tropoje

                                                                                                                                            Lezhë




                                                                                                                                                                                 Vlorë
                                                                                                                                           Kurbin
                                                                                                                                           Mirdie



                                                                                                                                                       Maleseradhe
                                                                                                                                                              Pude


                                                                                                                                                                     Karuke

                                                                                                                                                                              Delvine
                                                                                                                                                                              Sarande
                                                                                                                                                                     Tiranë




                                              Berat       Dibër   Durrës     Elbasan     Fier       Gjrobasier     Korçë        Kukës        Lezhë     Shkodër       Tiranë   Vlorë
                                                                                                                                                                                               POVERTY HEADCOUNT (%)




                             20

                             15

                             10
                                                                                                                                                                     Tiranë
                                           Berat


                                                       Dibër


                                                                  Durrës


                                                                             Eibasan


                                                                                       Fier


                                                                                                     Gjrokas


                                                                                                                 Korçë


                                                                                                                            Kukës


                                                                                                                                         Lezhë


                                                                                                                                                     Shkodër




                                                                                                                                                                                Vlorë




                                     Source: INSTAT, National Examinations Agency, and Ministry of Education and Sports.
                                     Note: Matura results are from 2013; poverty headcount comes from INSTAT’s analysis of the LSMS 2012 and measures the
                                     share of the population below Albania’s poverty line.

                                     a
                                       For instance, it may be that Gjirokastër’s results would have been much lower had it not spent this amount of
                                     resources on education.
                                                                                                             165




Belarus PER (2013)


Overall comment:

The Belarus analysis explains why higher per student costs are not translating into better performance
outcomes: While a low student-teacher ratio (STR) is driving up per student costs, the quality of
teaching has not improved.


In Belarus, demographic change is affecting the demand for education services. Declines in school-
age population and urbanization have reduced the number of students, especially in rural areas. As
a result, student-teacher ratios at both the primary and secondary level are among the lowest in the
region. Teacher salaries remain relatively low, making it difficult to attract and retain skilled labor in
the teaching force. While per student costs have risen, this has not necessarily led to better learning
outcomes (Figure 12).

Figure 12: Low student-teacher ratio is driving costs, but no leading to better outcomes
Per student cost, thousand BYR




    2              4                6               8              10              12
                                 STUDENT-TEACHER RATIO




   0               2k               4k              6k              18k             10k

                           PER STUDENT COSTS, THOUSAND BYR
Source: World Bank staff calculations based on BOOST, MOE and Belstat data. Each dot represents a rayon.
166   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Indonesia PER (2013)


              Overall comment:

              The Indonesia review provides an example of subnational analysis by correlating “changes” in total
              spending on education and “changes” in enrollments or learning outcomes across districts. It takes into
              account that districts with different characteristics may need to spend different amounts to reach the
              same outcomes. By looking at the rates of change in spending and outcomes, this comparison controls
              for district characteristics that are constant over time.



              Correlating spending per student with outcomes may miss an important point: districts with
              different characteristics may need to spend different amounts to reach the same outcomes. So a
              lack of correlation in one year may not mean that district spending does not matter for outcomes.
              A cleaner comparison is obtained by regressing changes in resources with changes in outcomes. If
              district spending on education matters for education outcomes, districts that increase their spending
              faster than other districts should experience a faster improvement in outcomes. By looking at the rate
              of these changes, this comparison controls for district characteristics that are constant over time.

              The Indonesia 2013 PER analysis shows no correlation between changes in total spending on
              education and changes in enrollments or learning outcomes across districts (Figure 57). The fact that
              increasing spending is not correlated with improvements in outcomes means that further increases
              in spending, given all other factors unchanged, will be unlikely to be associated with improved
              outcomes, and that outcomes may vary across districts regardless of changes in spending.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    167




                                                            Figure 57: Change in public education spending and change in education outcomes
                                                            at the district level

                                                                     a) SMA NER, total spending (2002-2009)                                                                                               b) SMA NER, non-salary spending (2002-2009)

                                                    150                                                                                                                                150
         CHANGE IN SENIOR HIGHSCHOOL ENROLLMENT %




                                                                                                                                        CHANGE IN SENIOR HIGHSCHOOL ENROLLMENT %
                                                    100                                                                                                                                100



                                                     50                                                                                                                                 50




                                                      0                                                                                                                                  0



                                                    -50                                                                                                                                -50

                                                           -100            0               100                200   300                                                                               0                                  500                1000


                                                            Change of SMA NER & Education Expenditure                                                                                            Change of SMA NER & Education Expenditure
                                                            Fitted Line                                                                                                                          Fitted Line


                                                                    c) SMP NER, total spending (2002-2009)                                                                                                    d) SMP NER, non-salary spending (2002-2009)

                                                    100                                                                                                                                 100
 CHANGE IN JUNIOR HIGHSCHOOL ENROLLMENT %




                                                                                                                          CHANGE IN JUNIOR HIGHSCHOOL ENROLLMENT %




                                                     50                                                                                                                                  50




                                                      0                                                                                                                                      0




                                                    -50                                                                                                                                 -50
                                                          -100             0              100                200    300                                                                                   0                               500                1000


                                                          Change of SMP NER & Education Expenditure                                                                                              Change of SMP NER & Non-Salary Education Expenditure
                                                          Fitted Line                                                                                                                            Fitted Line


                                                                    e) SMP UN score, total spending (2005-2009)                                                                                                f) SMP UN score, non-salary (2005-2009)
                                                     60                                                                                                                                60
        CHANGE IN NATIONAL EXAM SCORE IN SMP %




                                                                                                                                              CHANGE IN NATIONAL EXAM SCORE IN SMP %




                                                     40                                                                                                                                40




                                                     20                                                                                                                                20




                                                      0                                                                                                                                 0




                                                    -20                                                                                                                                -20

                                                          -100             0              100                200    300                                                                      -100                    0             100              200     300


                                                           Change of SMP UN Score & Education Expenditure                                                                              Change of SMP UN Score & Education Expenditure
                                                           Fitted Line                                                                                                                 Fitted Line



Source: MoF SIKD (budget), Susenas (NER) and MoEC (UN exams)
168   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Madagascar PER (2015)


              Overall comment:

              This example shows a method for judging the efficiency of a country’s public-education expenditures
              relative to its outcomes. It compares the expenditure-outcome relationships for one country
              (Madagascar) with those for other countries. The methodology is that of regression analyses against other
              countries and time series, with the results displayed in four-quadrant graphs. The public expenditure
              review has an extensive methodological annex (Annex 3) that explicates the models and assumptions
              underlying the results presented in this example. Although the Annex is too long to be included here,
              interested users can activate the link to the review to read the full Annex.



              Overall efficiency analyses are particularly helpful to benchmark the structural performance of the system
              in comparison to other countries (Box 5). The objective of this analysis is to establish a link between the
              level of public education expenditures and general education outcomes using information from a large
              set of countries of all income groups and regions. The methodology and motivation as well as limitations
              of the analysis in terms of the outcome indicators chosen are presented in Box 5. The structural analysis,
              which evaluates a long-run “Madagascar effect” based on estimation from an unbalanced panel of 144-
              176 countries over the period 1980-2012, is presented in Annex 3 along with details on the methodology
              and regression results for both structural and current efficiency analyses.

              However, various limitations to the analysis impose caution when interpreting the results.
              In order to grasp the overall picture and make policy recommendations regarding the size of public
              expenditure, one cannot look at results of the efficiency analysis in isolation of analyses of inequalities in
              terms of financial burdens and outcomes. In addition, because education outcomes are usually affected
              with substantial delays by changes in the learning and teaching environment, it is possible that the
              efficiency analysis does not capture accurately the capacity of the system to transmit competencies and
              knowledge to its pupils.



              Box 5. Eﬃciency Analysis of Public Education Expenditure

              Overall/system efficiency analysis is often presented comparing efficiency score estimated by Data
              Envelopment Analysis methods (DEA) to situate countries relative to an Efficiency Frontier (see Herrera
              and Pang (2005) for a review of the literature). It is, however, difficult to interpret DEA efficiency scores
              for countries with low levels of spending. In particular, a country can obtain a very high efficiency score
              despite very poor education outcomes. Keeping sight of where the country stands in terms of both
              levels of input and output while assessing efficiency is thus very useful. The methodology presented
              here uses the same data as for DEA but efficiency is assessed visually in two dimensions rather than
              using a summary indicator. One dimension is obtained using deviations from expected public
              expenditure and the other using deviations from expected education outcome. Expected outcomes
                                                                                                               169




and expected expenditures take account of the country’s income level (in PPP), its size, and effects
of regional and income groupings for LDCs. The unexplained variation is used to determine relative
efficiency.

Evaluating “structural” efficiency. Structural efficiency relates to the long-term standing of the
country relative to others in terms of public expenditure performance. It is important to measure
to establish some benchmark that can be used to interpret current efficiency, especially because
these results depend on characteristics of the Madagascar’s education system (such as the relative
importance of the private sector). A measure of structural efficiency can be obtained using all time
periods and countries for which data are available and exploiting the panel structure of the data. A
random-effects regression separates the residual variance in two parts: one that is common to all
countries and one that is country specific. The country specific residual variance or “random effect”
can be used to measure the structural advantage/disadvantage of the country (the country’s typical
deviation from expected outcomes).

Evaluating changes in “current/conjectural” efficiency. Beyond looking at the general position
of the country relative to others, it is important to gage how it has changed across two time periods.
In this case, expectations are estimated for each time period averaging values over 2 or more years
(dampening measurement errors) and running an Ordinary Least Square regression on the cross-
section of countries for which data is available. Residuals are then calculated as the difference between
observed and predicted values.

The choice of outcomes indicators. Different types of outcomes can be considered depending
on whether efficiency is assessed over a long time period (structural efficiency), or using averages
calculated over short time periods (current efficiency). In general, outcomes that are most
contemporaneously related to current expenditures, sufficiently dependent on the overall situation
in the country, and sufficiently available and comparable across countries are best suited to evaluate
changes over time. Herrera and Pang (2005) use primary and secondary enrollment (gross and net),
completion rates (first and second level), years in school, and learning scores. Based on data availability,
the gross primary and secondary combined enrollment ratios, primary completion rates, and the youth
literacy rate (only available 2000 and 2009) are used here. The youth literacy rate is most relevant to the
structural analysis as it is less contemporaneously related to expenditure than the other two but is only
sparsely available. Enrollment rates are somewhat problematic for Madagascar given the inaccuracy
of population estimates. Combining primary and secondary rates dampens (but does not solve) the
problem. Learning outcomes would have been a good indicator in the structural analysis to capture the
quality dimension but are not sufficiently available (number of years) or comparable across countries.
Unfortunately, this was the case for all other internationally comparable indicators of quality.

The choice of expenditure indicators. Government education expenditure data in percentage of
GDP (or GNI) are widely available in the UNESCO Institute of Statistics’ database for the period 1980-2012
(covering 177-211 countries, depending on the year). The indicator is comparable across countries and
goes through country clearance procedures. The indicator includes all public expenditures externally or
internally financed.
170   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              The four-quadrants graphical illustrations. Results can be plotted into a four quadrant graph where (0,0)
              is the point where both education outcome and expenditures are at levels predicted by the model.
              Deviations from expected education outcomes are represented vertically (y-axis) and deviations from
              expected expenditure horizontally (x-axis). For most education outcome indicators, higher is better, so a
              position in the NW quadrant is most efficient and a position to the SE is least efficient. The SW quadrant
              includes countries which underperform in terms of education outcomes but also have relatively low
              expenditures. They are called underachievers. Those in the NE quadrants are overachievers.

              Why focus on government expenditure? Although outcomes are the combined result of public and
              private education, and all education expenditures are expected to have some effect on outcome, the
              present analysis only considers public expenditures. First, as discussed above, there are no reliable
              data on total expenditures in education and no data that are comparable across countries. Second,
              according to the evidence provided above, public education represents the bulk of education
              expenditures, and it is also closely connected to the private education system; third, the outcomes
              considered focus on primary and primary/secondary education, accounting for more than 80 percent
              of children under 14 years. Finally, and importantly, even if comparable data on private expenditure are
              available, the point here is to evaluate public expenditure needs on efficiency grounds. If a country can
              obtain better education outcome overall with less public expenditure because the private sector takes
              on a larger part of the burden, it is indeed an efficiency improvement in terms of public expenditure.

              Structurally, Madagascar places in the group of the most efficient countries in terms of
              enrollment but as an underachiever in terms of completion (Figure 13). In other words, considering
              the full variation of expenditures and outcomes over 1980-2012, Madagascar tends to spend slightly
              less on education (in percent of GDP) than its level of income, size and geographical location would
              predict while it achieves average or better than expected outcomes in terms of enrollment (primary
              and secondary combined) and youth literacy. However, the result is different when looking at
              completion rates: Madagascar achieves slightly lower completion rates than the levels of expenditure
              would predict. These results are not to be interpreted as reflecting the current situation but need
              to be taken into consideration when interpreting the results presented below. These results are not
              to be interpreted as reflecting the current situation but need to be taken into consideration when
              interpreting the results presented below.

              Overall, the system demonstrated some resilience to the severe cuts in public funding during
              the crisis and remains broadly efficient compared to other countries. The analysis shows a slight
              increase in efficiency during the period 2009-2012 compared to 2000-2008 in terms of completion
              rates (Figure 14). In other words, the decrease in completion was less than what could have been
              predicted given the simultaneous decreased in spending. However, it is likely that the delayed effect
              on completion explains part of this result. On the other hand, the analysis shows that although the
              country’s advantage in terms of GERs was reduced, it remains well above expectation. This may
              indicate a certain degree of resilience of the system, likely to be related to the rapid increased in private
              spending to compensate the cuts in public spending. In addition, it is important to note that this
              analysis does not fully take into account the potential loss in terms of education quality which would
              be measured through learning outcomes.a

              Overall, the above analysis shows the relatively good structural performance of the system,
              but hides important weaknesses, including in terms of learning outcomes. Madagascar has a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 171




high potential in education as it has managed to achieve better or similar outcomes than comparable
countries with lower expenditures. So far, the crisis does not appear to have had a significant impact
on efficiency if 2009-2012 averages are considered. This would seem to indicate that there some room
to increase public expenditure on education without moving to a situation of overspending relative
to other countries. Important caveats include however (a) it is likely that the full impact of the recent
years is not fully captured, especially on indicators which react with a delay (such as completion rates),
(b) the efficiency of the system is so far analyzed through the lenses of enrollments and completion,
ignoring therefore changes in the equality of education. Given the dramatic decrease in education
learning outcomes over the past decade, it is probably the case that although Madagascar is relatively
more efficient than others at getting children to school, it is performing particularly poorly in terms of
ensuring that resources are translated into improved learning outcomes.

Figure 13: Expenditure performance of public education: pre/post-crisis eﬃciency
based on completion rates
Overall Efficiency of Public Spending in Education based on averages 2009-2012*
Indicator: Primary Completion Rates
  DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED EDUCATION OUTCOME




                                                           MOST EFFICIENT:                                                                          OVERACHIEVERS:
                                                           Primary completion rate higher than expected,                                            Primary completion rate higher than expected,
                                                           Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                                        Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected

                                                40


                                                20

                                                                                                                                                                                                    LDCs
                                                     0                                                                                                                                              SSA
                                                -20
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LICs
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Madagascar
                                                -40
                                                           UNDERACHIEVERS:                                                                     LEAST EFFICIENT:
                                                           Primary completion rate lower than expected,                                        Primary completion rate lower than expected,
                                                           Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                                   Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected


                                                                             -4                 -2             0         2            4

                                                                                  DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED PUBLIC EXPENDITURES

* Predicted values based on OLS regressions on GDP/c, GDP/c^2 with group effects for income and region
(LDCs), population and size GDP in PPP per capita for all regressions.
Data Sources: World Bank Edstats based on UNESCO statistics for education variables, including expenditures, IMF
data for income variables.
Overall Efficiency of Public Spending in Education based on averages 2000-2008*
Indicator: Primary Completion Rates
DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED EDUCATION OUTCOME




                                               60        MOST EFFICIENT:                                                                       OVERACHIEVERS:
                                                         Primary completion rate higher than expected,                                         Primary completion rate higher than expected,
                                                         Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                                     Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected
                                               40


                                               20


                                                0

                                               -20


                                               -40
                                                         UNDERACHIEVERS:                                                                  LEAST EFFICIENT:
                                                         Primary completion rate lower than expected,                                     Primary completion rate lower than expected,
                                                         Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                                Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected


                                                                 -5                                        0                                 5                                                 10

                                                                                                  DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED PUBLIC EXPENDITURES
172   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Figure 14: Expenditure performance of public education: pre- vs post-crisis
              eﬃciency based on gross enrollment ratios (primary/secondary combined)
              Overall Efficiency of Public Spending in Education based on averages 2000-2008*
              Indicator: Gross Primary & Secondary Enrollment Combined Rate**
                 DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED EDUCATION OUTCOME




                                                                    MOST EFFICIENT:                                                                      OVERACHIEVERS:
                                                                    Primary completion rate higher than expected,                                        Primary completion rate higher than expected,
                                                                    Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                                    Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected

                                                               20


                                                                0

                                                              -20


                                                              -40
                                                                    UNDERACHIEVERS:                                                                 LEAST EFFICIENT:
                                                                    Primary completion rate lower than expected,                                    Primary completion rate lower than expected,
                                                                    Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                               Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected


                                                                                 -5                                 0                          -5                                      -10

                                                                                                       DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED PUBLIC EXPENDITURES

              * Predicted values based on OLS regressions on GDP/c, GDP/c^2 with group effects for
              income and region (LDCs), population and size GDP in PPP per capita for all regressions.
              ** Gross enrollment rates for Madagascar: 2005-2008 average
              Data sources: World Bank Edstats based on UNESCO statistics for education variables,                                                                                                       LDCs
              including expenditures, IMF data for income variables.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         SSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LICs
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Madagascar
              Overall Efficiency of Public Spending in Education based on averages 2009-2012*
              Indicator: Gross Primary & Secondary Enrollment Combined Rate**
              DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED EDUCATION OUTCOME




                                                              60
                                                                    MOST EFFICIENT:                                                                    OVERACHIEVERS:
                                                                    Primary completion rate higher than expected,                                      Primary completion rate higher than expected,
                                                                    Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                                  Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected
                                                              40


                                                              20


                                                               0

                                                              -20


                                                              -40
                                                                    UNDERACHIEVERS:                                                             LEAST EFFICIENT:
                                                                    Primary completion rate lower than expected,                                Primary completion rate lower than expected,
                                                                    Gov. Exp./GDP lower than expected                                           Gov. Exp./GDP higher than expected


                                                                                      -4                -2          0          2           4

                                                                                           DEVIATIONS FROM EXPECTED PUBLIC EXPENDITURES

              * Predicted values based on OLS regressions on GDP/c, GDP/c^2 with group effects for
              income and region (LDCs), population and size GDP in PPP per capita for all regressions.
              Data sources: World Bank Edstats based on UNESCO statistics for education variables,
              including expenditures, IMF data for income variables.




              a
                                         The full set of results is presented in Annex 3.
                                                                                                              173




    Example 23: Cost-beneﬁt analysis


Ethiopia: Cost-beneﬁt analysis on a project component (2008)


Overall comment:

This is a good example of a cost-benefit analysis of alternative materials that can be used to construct
classrooms. It includes an analysis of the rates of return to the savings associated with different options
relative to the base case of chika, a building material made of mud and thatch, and a comparison of
the present values for two options relative to their discount rates. Note that the example is not from a
public expenditure review, but from a policy research working paper (Jimenez and Patrinos 2008)



Tables 1-3 and figure 1 illustrate a cost-benefit analysis. They involve the choice of the construction
material for building new classrooms in Ethiopia. Table 1 lays out the alternative materials considered,
with their advantages and disadvantages. Table 2 calculates the relative costs per lifetime year for each
option. Table 3 calculates the rates of return on the savings from alternative materials relative to the
base case of chika (mud and thatch) under different assumptions. Figure 1 shows the present value
of chika versus hollow core block (HCB), assuming half maintenance costs and plotted against the
associated discount rate.

On the basis of tables 2 and 3, HCB emerges as the cheapest material per year of its lifetime and with
the highest rates of return on savings under different assumptions. However, figure 1 shows that there
is a discount rate at which building chika schools is preferable to HCB. The crossover discount rate is 23
percent in the case highlighted.

What is interesting here is how benefits are treated. The benefit is implicitly assumed to be school seats
resulting from the construction. De facto, this benefit is assumed to be constant across the materials
options. Since benefits are assumed to be constant regardless of the material selected, the analysis
becomes one of relative costs of the materials under different assumptions.
Only a few advantages or disadvantages displayed in table 1 are independent of the relative costs
(initial and recurrent or maintenance costs), which are properly captured in table 2. These “independent”
variables include the popularity of the different materials within the community, the comfort that the
material offers students and teachers in the classroom and environmental degradation (de-forestation).
These variables could have been converted to categorical variables, weighted or unweighted, to
measure the relative benefits of the different materials. For example, chika and corrugated iron sheets
were unpopular materials with parents and students. The analysis could have argued that using either
of these materials to construct new classrooms would prompt parents to be less likely to enroll their
children in schools that were built of these materials, thus reducing their school seat benefits. The
analysis did not use this option.
174   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Table 1: Relative advantages and disadvantages of alternative construction
              materials (Ethiopia)
                      Material                   Advantages                     Disadvantages               Maintenance

                Chika (mud and thatch)            Cool in dry                  Does not resist termites             High
                                                and hot weather                  Washes away in rain
                                             Cheap initial investment              Depletes forest
                                                                                  Not popular with
                                                                                community, students
                   Concrete element          Resists termites and rain        Costly initial investment             Low

                          Stone               Resist fire, termites, rain     Costly initial investment             Low

                Hollow concrete block         Resist fire, termites, rain     Need stable foundation,               Low
                        (HCB)                    Better insulation                 supervision

                          Brick                Comfortable and cool            Many trees cut to burn               High
                                                                                       brick
                                                                                Weak in rainy season
                Corrugated iron sheets       Cheap initial investment         Susceptible to corrosion              High
                                                                                 Not heat resistant
                                                                                 Not popular with
                                                                              community or students
              Source: Harry Patrinos


              Table 2: Cost comparison of school buildings, 1992 Ethiopia Birr*
                                             Capital     Recurrent                           Lifetime*            Cost/Year
                     Material             (Investment) (Maintenance)                          (Years)             Lifetime
                Concrete element                213,000                     2,130                  40                  7,455
                Stone                           189,284                     1,893                  40                  6,625
                Brick                           170,400                     5,000                  30                 10,680
                Hollow Concrete Block           127,800                     1,278                  30                  5,538
                Chika                           85,200                      6,000                  10                 14,520
                Corrugated Iron Sheet           31,950                      5,000                  10                  8,195

              * With full maintenance
              Source: Participatory Evaluation of EICMA (Educational Institutes Construction and Maintenance Agency). A report to
              Ministry of Education and SIDA. 1992.
              Source: Jimenez and Patrinos, table 4, p.31.


              Table 3 includes the results of sensitivity analyses. Thus, school buildings are not well maintained in
              Ethiopia, and the assumption of full maintenance is not realistic. For this reason, a sensitivity analysis
              considers the more realistic case that maintenance will be less than adequate. For simplicity’s sake,
              half of the required maintenance is assumed to take place. The choice of technology also depends
              on the availability of local materials. It may simply not be possible to transport certain materials to
              remote areas. For many rural areas there will be impossible transportation problems. In such cases
                                                                                                                                             175




                       there is no alternative other than building with chika. In less severe cases there may be roads, but
                       the cost of transporting materials may be prohibitive. To examine this problem, sensitivity analysis
                       was carried assuming scenarios of cost escalation due to transportation difficulties using orders of
                       magnitude of 10 to 30 percent.


                       Table 3: Rates of return on savings due to selection of diﬀerent school building
                       materials versus chika (Ethiopia)

                                                         Full                  Half    Transportation Difficulties:
                             Material                Maintenance           Maintenance      Cost Escalation
                                                                                                     10%           20%           30%
                         Concrete element                   6%                      9%                 7%            5%           2%
                         Stone                              8%                     11%                 9%            6%           3%
                         Brick                              5%                     11%                 9%            6%           2%
                         Hollow Concrete Block              17%                    23%                19%           13%           8%
                         Chika                          (base camp)            (base camp)           (base)        (base)       (base)

                       Source: Jimenez and Patrinos, table 5, p.32



                       Figure 1 shows that even in the case of hollow concrete block, there are instances when it is not a good
                       investment. All of the alternatives to chika have a lower present value. However, the total undiscounted cost
                       of using the different alternatives is different, and they have differing time profiles. Therefore, the alternative
                       one chooses may depend on the opportunity cost of capital.

                       Figure 1: Present value of chika versus                      In the cases examined here, the higher the
                       hollow core block relative to discount rate                  opportunity cost of capital assumed the
                       Graphic Derivation of Crossover Discout Rate, Choice Between greater the likelihood of choosing chika over
                       Chika and Hollow Concrete Block Alternatives in Ethiopia     the alternative. This is because with the chika
                                                                                    model one is postponing investment. In other
                                                                                    words, there is a discount rate at which chika
                                                                                    becomes the preferred option, despite higher
                                                                                    undiscounted total cost or lower present value of
Present value (birr)




                                                                                    the alternatives. To illustrate this example, the case
                                                                                    of chika versus HCB is used. The present value of
                                                                                    the two methods, assuming half maintenance
                                                                                    costs, is plotted against the associated discount
                                                                                    rate. The graph shows that there is a discount rate
                                                                                    at which building chika schools is preferred to
                                                                                    HCB. This is known as the crossover discount rate,
                                                                                    which is 23 percent in the case highlighted. This is
                                                                                    the same as the internal rate of return calculated
                                            Discount rate (percent)                 for the benefits (cost-savings) stream presented
                                                                                    above for the case of half-maintenance, which is
                       Source: Jimenez and Patrinos, figure 4, p.34                 probably the more realistic scenario.
176   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 24: Data envelopment analysis



              Overall comment:

              The Kenya and Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) reviews have examples of data envelopment
              analysis at the subnational level. The Kenya example is a simple analysis based on one input (per
              capita spending) and one output (net enrollment rate or percentage of exam passes), while the
              DRC analysis conducts an analysis based on composite input and output variables. The DRC analysis
              provides a brief methodological note and explains the difference between the input and output
              approach in such analysis. These two examples provide different ways of examining and presenting
              data envelopment analysis results, such as the efficiency frontier graph in the Kenya example and the
              efficiency score quadrants diagram in the DRC analysis.


              Kenya PER (2013)

              Data envelopment analysis (DEA) is a linear programming methodology (developed by Farrell’s (1957),
              which can be used to estimate efficiency as the distance from the observed input-output combinations
              to an efficiency frontier defined as the maximum attainable output for a given input level.

              Per capita spending in Kenya tends to be low for northern and coastal counties with higher pupil
              teacher ratio (PTR), implying a shortage of teachers in these regions. Counties in these areas also
              tend to have lower net enrolment rates. But several counties, such as Turkana and West Pokot, report
              remarkable performance in exams, placing them on the frontier of translating per capita spending into
              exam performance measured in terms of the percentage of children passing the Kenya Certificate of
              Primary Education (KCPE) (Figures 1 and 2).

              The per capita spending in secondary level shows the reverse: unit costs are higher in the more remote
              areas in the northern and coastal regions. This fact is explained by the much lower enrolment rates in
              these regions and lower pupil-teacher ratio. The counties in these regions also show the challenge of
              being efficient with the resources. These counties are much more likely to be well below the frontier in
              terms of exam performance. Counties such as Kiambu, Nairobi and Nyeri where enrolments and school
              performance are relatively high are the most cost effective at this level. The counties far from the frontier
              at secondary level such as Garissa, Kwale, Laikipia and Nyamira are not cost effective (Figures 3 and 4).
                                                                             177




Figure 1: Per capita spending and NER-primary, 2009




Source: Ministry of Education




Figure 2: Per capita spending and percentage of exam passes, primary, 2010




Source: Ministry of Education
178   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Figure 3: Spending per capita and NER–secondary, 2009




              Source: Ministry of Education




              Figure 4: Spending per capita and percentage of passers at secondary level, 2012




              Source: Ministry of Education
                                                                                                               179




Democratic Republic of Congo PER (2015)

Eﬃciency measurement with DEA

Data Envelopment Analysis (DEA) is based on the construction of an empirical non-parametric
production frontier and the measurement of the efficiency through the distance between the
observed data and the optimal value of these data given by the estimated frontier. In the current
analysis, the production frontier approximates the maximum quality or access to education (the
output) that could be achieved given different levels of educational resources (the inputs). The
figure below illustrates the efficiency measurement with DEA in a hypothetical case of one input x
that is used to produce one output y.


Illustration of the eﬃciency measurement with DEA


  y                               C
                         r
                     ntie
                  Fro
y0         B                                            F
                              A                         A
                                                        B
                                                        C




            Θx0              x0                     x

The frontier gives maximum levels of the output that could be achieved given different quantities of
the input used. In the DEA literature, observations are called Decision Making Units (DMUs). DMUs
that are on the frontier are relatively efficient (for instance, DMU at the point C) while those below
the frontier are relatively inefficient (for instance, DMU at the point A). The level of efficiency is given
by the distance to the frontier. Let’s consider the DMU0 initially at the point A. This DMU uses x0
units of the input in order to produce y0 units of the output. As already mentioned, DMU0 is not
relatively efficient. In order to be efficient, this DMU can reduce its input in the way that it projects on
the frontier at the point B. In other terms, in order to be efficient, this DMU can keep its output level
unchanged but has to reduce its input to the optimal level. The optimal quantity of input is given
by with. The higher is, the closer the DMU is to the frontier and the more efficient is the considered
DMU. The value of is the efficiency measure. This approach is called input oriented DEA. There is
an alternative to the input oriented DEA (the output oriented DEA) which is about how to get the
frontier by increasing the output given the input used. While there are also several DEA models, the
model that we use is the one developed by Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1981).
180   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Eﬃciency measurement of the DRC education system

              In this study, we use input oriented approach because we would like to focus on the use of resources
              in the DRC education system. One can notice the high heterogeneity in terms of access and quality
              of education across DRC provinces. Provinces that seem to perform well in terms of access do not
              necessarily do so in terms of the quality of education. For this reason, we perform two different
              efficiency analysis, one for the access to education and the other for the quality of education.

              Eﬃciency in the provision of education access

              Recall that the illustration done above is a hypothetical case with only one output and one inputa.
              In order to estimate a DEA model for the DRC, we need to choose inputs and outputs. In fact,
              DRC education system uses many inputs in order to provide the observed access to education.
              In addition there are several indicators of education access. More specifically, in the inputs side,
              we need to have proxies for educational infrastructure, equipment, human resources and public
              expendituresb. In the current efficiency analysis, we use the total number of schools and classrooms
              per student as proxies for infrastructure, the total number of equipment materials (chairs, tables and
              other types of equipment) as a proxy of school equipment, the number of teachers per student as a
              proxy for human resources and government total spending per student as a proxy for government
              expenditures. The outputs are: the gross enrollment rate, the gender parity ratio, the pass rate at
              grade 6 and the repetition rate.

              As already discussed, according to the administrative organization, the DRC includes eleven provinces
              and each province is divided into districts. Inside the administrative districts, primary and secondary
              schools are differently managed. For this reason, we distinguished between primary and secondary
              schools inside each district. We aggregated schools by levels of education and we considered districts
              as DMUs depending on the level of educationc. In other terms, a DMU represents either all primary
              schools or all secondary schools in a given district. For instance, in the district of Beni, we have two
              DMUs, one for primary schools and the other for secondary schools. This approach is advantageous
              because it allows comparing primary and secondary schools within the same district and across
              districts. We have one frontier for primary and secondary schools and this provides a proper
              comparison. Due to the lack of data in several districts, we only consider 82 DMUs and 42 districts.

              Eﬃciency in the provision of the quality of education

              A DEA model is estimated using PASEC 2013 survey data in order to measure the efficiency in the
              provision of quality education in the DRC primary education system. Some key variables necessary
              for this analysis are not available for secondary education. For this reason, we concentrate on primary
              education. Inputs include the number of teachers per student, the number of classrooms per student,
              teachers’ level of education, teachers’ monthly salary and schools’ equipment. Outputs are: the success
              rate, average score in the PASEC French and mathematics tests. We have a total 160 schools.

              The overall results of the DEA analysis at the provincial level shows that Katanga and Bas-Congo
              provinces are relatively efficient and Kinshasa, Bandundu and Nord-Kivu relatively inefficient in their
              resource use. Figure 49 presents the summary of DEA results in four quadrants (I, II, III and IV). The
                                                                                                                                   181




first quadrant (I), refers to provinces with relatively high efficiency scores both in terms of access and
quality related variables (learning outcomes). Quadrant (II), designates provinces with a relatively high
efficiency score in quality. This group of provinces are basically in line with first quadrant (I) in terms of
learning outcomes efficiency score but have lower efficiency scores in access outcomes compared
to quadrant (I). Quadrant (III) shows provinces with relatively lower scores in both access and quality
outcomes efficiency scores. The final quadrant (IV), shows provinces with relatively better efficiency
scores in the access model (in line with the first quadrant (I) in this aspect) but lower efficiency scores
in learning outcomes.

Figure 49: Summary of provincial grouping based eﬃciency scores based on
DEA model




Source: Authors’ estimations based on Ministry of Budget, EMIS, SECOPE, HBS 1-2-3, 2012, and PASEC

a
 DEA accommodates multi input and multi output technologies. The principle is the same when we have more than one
input and more than one output but it is difficult to be graphically illustrated. In addition, it is important to highlight that
the efficiency assessment is done in a relative terms and results could change when the sample changes.

b
  The choice of inputs and outputs is supported by the literature. In fact, similar choice of inputs are done by authors in
studies on the efficiency analysis in education. Other authors provide discussion about possible inputs and output for the
education system. See for instance, Correa (1963), Burkhead (1967), Michaud (1981), Charnes, Cooper, and Rhodes (1981)
and Worthington (2001).

c
 It should have been more appropriate to consider educational provinces as DMUs instead of districts given the fact
that districts are linked to the country’s administrative organization rather than the organization in the education system.
However, we could not have performed this analysis with the only educational provinces because DEA requires a certain
number of observations for the results to be reliable.
182   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 25: Internal eﬃciency indicators


              Bangladesh PER (2010)


              Overall comment:

              An internal efficiency analysis based on survival, repetition, and completion rate indicators reveals
              inefficiency problems in the education system in Bangladesh.


              The education system in Bangladesh is characterized by persistent low quality and inefficiency. Only
              half of all children beginning primary and secondary education survive up to the final grade. At the
              secondary level only one in five actually passed the SSC examination (Table 3.2). Failure to complete
              secondary education is a growing phenomenon. Between 2000 and 2005, the proportion of the
              16-25 age group with an incomplete secondary education as their highest educational attainment
              increased from 23 to 33 percent (Al-Samarrai 2007a).


              Table 3-2: Internal eﬃciency (%) of the education system (2005)

                        Sector                Repetition Rate                Survival Rate                Completion Rate
                                              M      F      T               M      F      T               M     F      T
                     Primary                  12        11        11        49        57        53         -         -         -
                Secondary (general)           8         8         8         43        40        41        23        17        20
               Secondary (madrassa)            -         -         -         -        57        61         -        14        22
                 Higher secondary              -         -         -         -         -         -         -        59        57

              Source: (DPE 2006a; BANBEIS 2007).
              Notes: Primary statistics cover government, registered non-government and experimental schools. Statistics for madrassa
              education are for 2003. Figures for survival and completion rates are calculated using the reconstructed cohort method.
                                                                                                           183




     Example 26: Rate of return to education


Sri Lanka PER (2011)


Overall comment:

This review presents considerable differences in the rates of return to education by level of education.
Interestingly, the impact of education on earnings is higher for females at all levels except for those
who only completed primary education.


Education attainment and earnings are positively related in Sri Lanka. Earnings rise continually as
the education levels of individuals increase [Figure 2.1). A male worker with primary education earns 16
percent more per month than a man with no schooling, and a female worker with primary education
earns 8 percent per month more than a woman with no schooling. Among men and women who
have completed basic education, a male worker earns 43 percent more than a man with no education,
and a female worker earns 45 percent more than a woman who is not educated. The highest gains
are recorded among men and women who have completed higher education. Overall, these findings
clearly support the notion that men and women benefit from their investments in education.

Figure 2.1: Impact of education on earnings, male and female workers, 2008

 500%

 450%                                                                                           459

 400%
                                                                        FEMALE 372
 350%
                                                                                          322
 300%
                                                                       MALE 284
 250%

 200%                                                            210

 150%                                                      151
                                                 118
 100%
                                            87
  50%                       43 45
   0%
            16 8

             PRIMARY         BASIC          GCE O/L        GCE A/L         UNIVERSITY   POSTGRADUATE
            EDUCATION      EDUCATION       QUALIFIED      QUALIFIED        GRADUATE
            COMPLETED      COMPLETED

Source: World Bank staff computations, derived from econometric estimates of earnings functions.
184   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              The rates of return to education are positive and substantial at the secondary and higher
              education levels. Among primary educated workers the returns to education are positive but
              relatively low, at 2 percent for men and 1 percent for women, respectively [Figure 2.2]. Workers who
              have completed basic education receive slightly better returns: 7 percent for men and 10 percent for
              women. However, among workers who are secondary educated or higher, returns to education are
              considerably greater. GCE O/L qualified men earn returns of 13 percent, while women enjoy even
              higher returns at 21 percent. Among GCE A/L qualified workers, men receive a return of 15 percent,
              while women receive a return of 18 percent. Among university graduates the returns to education for
              both men and women are 21 percent. At postgraduate level, the returns to education for men are 9
              percent and for women 17 percent, respectively.

              Figure 2.2: Private rates of return to education, male and female workers


                                                              FEMALE                           21
                                                                21                                  21


                                                                                  18
                                                                                                                     17

                                                                             15
                                                          MALE
                                                           13


                                              10                                                                 9

                                          7




                        2   1




              Source: World Bank staff computations, derived from econometric estimates of earnings functions.


              This pattern of returns to education is consistent with the fact that the supply of primary and
              basic educated human capital is relatively high, so that returns to education at this level are small.
              At secondary education level and higher education level, however, the supply of educated labor
              is lower, and returns to education are high. In addition, workers may be using their educational
              certificates at secondary education and higher education levels to signal their quality, while
              employers may be using these certificates to screen potential employees for quality. Overall, the
              pattern of returns to education is consistent with economic theories of human capital and of
              signaling–screening in labor markets with asymmetric information. The higher returns enjoyed by
              women in comparison to men is likely to be due to selection effects, as fewer women participate
              in the labor market. Therefore, the women who do work are likely to be more capable than
              average, resulting in better productivity and greater returns to human capital.
                                                                                                                           185




      Example 27: Analysis of inequity


Costa Rica PER (2015)


Overall comment:

A simple analysis of learning outcomes, enrollment rates, and rates of preschool attendance reveals
large regional differences and differences associated with socioeconomic status, indicating an
inequity problem exists in Costa Rica’s education sector.


In Costa Rica, urban and rural areas of the country present large disparities in enrollment in
secondary and upper-secondary. While almost 60% of the 19 year old living in urban areas living
are enrolled in school, less than 50% of those living in rural areas do so (Figure 21).

Equally worrying, the disparities in post-secondary enrollment associated with household income
have been dramatically increasing over time (Figure 22).


Figure 21: Age speciﬁc enrollment by                              Figure 22: Post-secondary enrollment
geographic area                                                   by income quintile

    100                                                            80

     90                                                            70
     80
                                                                   60
     70
                                                    UR
                                                      BA
                                                        N




     60                                                            50
                                                          RU
%




                                                            RA




     50
                                                              L




                                                                   40
     40
                                                                   30
     30
                                                                   20
     20
               PRIMARY
                SCHOOL            LOWER        UPPER
     10        AGES 6-11        SECONDARY    SECONDARY             10
     0
                                                                    0
          5   7     9      11     13    15   17    19
                                                                        2007   2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013   2014
                                AGES
                                                                               Q1      Q2        Q3       Q4          Q5
Source: World Bank SSEIR team’s analysis of household                Source: World Bank SSEIR team’s analysis of
surveys, author’s calculations based on ADePT software               household surveys, author’s calculations based
                                                                     on ADePT software
186   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Moreover, the latest results from the Third Regional Comparative and Explanatory Study (TERCE) 2013
              examination of Latin American students by UNESCO show that Costa Rica is the only country in the
              region where students in both 3rd and 6th grades performed worse in TERCE 2013 than they did in
              Second Regional Comparative and Explanatory Study (SERCE) 2006 in reading and in mathematics.
              Consistent with the findings for enrollment, there are large differences in learning outcomes associated
              with socioeconomic status. Data from the SERCE 2006 show that one standard deviation (sd) increase
              in a socioeconomic conditions index are associated with a 0.3sd increase in test scores (Figure 24).


              Figure 24: SERCE standardized score by socioeconomic status index




              Source: SERCE (2006)


              The drivers behind the large inequalities include gaps in the access to education services that start
              early in life. There is well established evidence that high quality Early Child Development programs
              act as equalizers, since they can reduce the effect of household socioeconomic differences on the
              child cognitive and non-cognitive development and, therefore, the ability to perform well in school.
              In Costa Rica, there is a large differential in daycare (age 1-3) and preschool (age 3-5) attendance by
              household income quintile. Only 3% of the children in the first quintile attend daycare, as opposed to
              16% among those in the fifth quintile (Figure 27). Similarly, for children in preschool age, 27% of those
              in the first income quintile attend preschool, while attendance goes up to 49% for those in the top
              income quintile (Figure 28).
                                                                                                                         187




Figure 27: Daycare attendance by household income quintile, 2014

                 18

                 16
                                                      16
                 14
%1-3 YEARS OLD




                 12

                 10

                  8

                  6                           7

                  4

                      3             4
                  2
                           2
                  0
                Q1        Q2        Q3        Q4       Q5
Source: World Bank SSEIR team’s analysis of household surveys, authors’ calculations using standardized ADePT software
(Education Module)


Figure 28: Preschool attendance by household income quintile, 2014

                 60


                 50
                                                      49
%3-5 YEARS OLD




                 40


                 30                          34
                                   29
                      27
                           25
                 20


                 10


                  0
                      Q1   Q2      Q3        Q4       Q5
Source: World Bank SSEIR team’s analysis of household surveys, authors’ calculations using standardized ADePT software
(Education Module)
188   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                  Example 28: Analysis of per capita ﬁnancing (PCF)


              Tajikistan PER (2013)


              Overall comment:

              The report provides historical background on the reform of the country's per capita financing
              arrangements and the indicators used to measure their implementation. It also addresses factors that
              could undermine the sustainability of the reform.


              History of Per Capita Financing (PCF) in Tajikistan

              Since 2010, all general secondary schools receive their budgets according to a per capita
              financing (PCF) formula. In Tajikistan, PCF for general education was first piloted in five cities and
              rayons in 2005, with budget allocation primarily based on the number of students.a After successful
              implementation during the pilot phase, the PCF reform was gradually expanded and adopted
              nationwide— to all schools in 68 rayons—by 2010. The norms (unit costs) per student and per
              school have increased considerably over years (Figure 8), and the formula has been revised to better
              reflect the different needs of schools such as geographic location, type of schools, and multi-
              language requirements.


              Figure 8: Minimum standards (norms) for per pupil and per school,
              2008-2013




                                                  Primary        General              Secondary

              Source: Ministry of Education
                                                                                                                189




The introduction of PCF has considerably increased the role of schools and the central
government in general education financing but it reduced the role of rayons. Schools prepare
their budgets according to the norms and formula set by the Ministries of Finance and Education of
the republican government. They then submit them to rayons, which in turn submit an aggregated
education budget to their respective oblasts and finally to the Ministry of Finance of the republican
government.b There remains a room for budget negotiations between the different levels of the
government, and rayons may also allocate a significant portion of their local budget to education.
However, the introduction of PCF has considerably reduced the role rayons in general education
financing because the larger part of it is determined by the centrally defined formula. On the other
hand, because the formula- based budget allocation cannot fully accommodate various factors and
needs of schools under different conditions, the PCF model gives rayons the right to reallocate up
to five percent of the formula-based allocations from schools with a surplus to those with a deficit.
At the school level, schools may flexibly determine their budgets as long as they meet educational
requirements and norms for wages.

Subnational Variation in Education Expenditure
Overall, the introduction of PCF has led to a more equitable distribution and efficient use
of resources, increased budgetary autonomy at the school level, and greater transparency
and community involvement in school planning and budgeting. Between 2007/2008 and
2011/2012, the nationwide student-teacher ratio increased from 17.0 to 18.0 on average. Over the
same period, the share of personnel costs in local government education expenditures fell from 86.8
percent to 75.9 percent, freeing resources to improve the quality of education. In terms of equity,
in 2010 only 82 percent of all general secondary schools had an approved budget in line with the
formula-based budget, but in 2011 95 percent of schools had a PCF-compliant budget.c The switch
to PCF provides greater budgetary autonomy for schools and gives them responsibility to manage
resources effectively and efficiently, and work closely with communities to plan school development,
formulate budgets and monitor expenditures. There has been regular monitoring and evaluation of
reform implementation by the Ministry of Education.d The success of PCF in general education has
encouraged the MOE to extend it to other levels of education.

A comparison of student-teacher ratios between oblasts and rayons illustrates wide regional
variations in terms of efficiency outcomes. Between 2007/2008 and 2011/2012, the overall STR
improved from 17.0 to 18.0 ranging from 5.7 in Roshtkalla rayon in GBAO to 25.0 in the city of Dushanbe
in 2007/2008 and from 6.5 to 25.5, respectively, in 2011/2012. Between the maximum and minimum,
there are wide variations within each oblast (though all data are not shown in the graphs), but not
all oblasts and rayons observed the similar change (Figure 9). As a result, per student spending and
the percentage distribution of recurrent spending widely vary between oblasts, but without a clear
correlation (Figure 10). Part of these variations can be explained by conditions—elevation and population
density—but there also are considerable variations between rayons that have similar conditions (Figure
11). The remaining variations may be explained by other factors such as multi-language requirements,
type of school, or catchment areas, but also by the inefficiencies in school network, managing class size,
and recruitment of teachers and non-teaching staff. The Ministry of Education has observed irregularities
in school financing, for example, payment of full-year salaries for seasonal workers (e.g., heating staff in
winter) and electricity bills in schools without electricity. In-depth analysis of school-level data for each
rayon is necessary to identify potential areas for further efficiency gains.
190   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Figure 10: Per student unit cost and wage bill vary among oblasts, but without a
              clear correlation




                                                                                              Capital
                                                                                              Other Recurrent
                                                                                              Maintenance/repairs
               Percentage Distribution of Recurrent Spending 2011                             Heat & Utilities
                                                                                              Food
                100
                                                                                              Personnel
                 90
                 80
                 70
                 60
                 50
                 40
                 30
                 20
                 10
                  0
                             Dushanhe        Khation       Sughd         Total   RRS   GBAO

              Source: Tajikistan BOOST v0.4 government expenditure database
                                                                                                                                  191




Figure 11: STRs correlate with elevation and population density, but there are
intra-oblast variations among rayons with similar conditions
           student-teacher ratio                                                       student-teacher ratio




Source: MOE, EMIS for STRs; Wikipedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Provinces_of_Tajikistan) for the population density;
and Avaneya, Vahram, 2012, Improving the system of school financing in the Republic of Tajikistan on the basis of normative
formula funding, final, for elevation.




The successful implementation of the PCF reform is undermined by distorted incentives for
schools reducing their wage bills. General education budget for each rayon is approved by the
central government according to the PCF formula. However, if some rayons fail to raise revenues
as estimated based on their fiscal capacity, education budget could be reduced. However, local
governments continue to finance “protected” budget items (e.g.), whereas other (non-wage)
expenditures are the first to be reduced. This means that schools, that have rationalized staffing and
increased their non-wage budget for quality improvement, get penalized, whilst those that have kept
many teachers are rewarded. The gap between the approved budget according to the formula and
the actual execution has compromised the successful implementation of the PCF reform.




a
  Yovon, Kulob, and Vahdat rayons, and the cities of Khorog and Khojand.
b
  See World Bank, 2012, Tajikistan Public Expenditure Review Interim Report, Box 2 (p. 17) on the local government budget
preparation process.
c Being in compliance was defined as having a budget that was 95 percent or greater as calculated using the PCF formula.
This cut-off is based on the regulation that districts are entitled to reallocate up to 5 percent of the district-level budget,
while ensuring that no school receives less than 95 percent of the budget as calculated by the PCF formula.
d
  The PCF reform has been supported under the Fast Track Initiative grants and the Ministry has engaged consultants to
monitor and evaluate the implementation and produced a number of reports analyzing the outcomes and aiming to
improve the mechanism.
192   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Mauritania PER (2016)


              Overall comment:

              The Mauritania example reports disparities in per student resources and flags several critical regional-
              distribution issues related to equity.


              The resources allocated to the regional offices are regressive. Poor and rural regions such as
              Guidimagha, Brakna, Gorgol, and Assaba, show a per student expenditure considerably below the
              national average (MRO 810 – 3 US$). At the same time, the number of students per teacher is high
              in these regions, between 45 and 64 (Figure 3.13). These data underline several critical regional
              distributional issues: (i) resources are not distributed based on need, as determined by the number
              of students, the conditions of the schools, and the poverty rate; (ii) the government struggles to hire
              and retain teachers in remote areas; and (iii) learning opportunities are more limited for poor students
              in remote areas due to lower spending on school inputs and fewer teachers in the classroom.


              Figure 3.13: Budget per student, pupil/teacher ratio, and the poverty rate by
              region, 2015

              2,500                                                                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                                                     2,005
                                                                                                                                                                      70
              2,000                                                                                                                         1,830                     60

              1,500                                                                                                                                                   50
                                                                                                                                   1,197                              40
              1,000                                                                             901          904          905
                                                                                                                                                                      30
                                                                         685      753
                                                       600      655
                                        602
                           499                                                                                                                                        20
                500
                                                                                                                                                                      10
                   0                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                       Brakna
                           Guidimagha


                                        Hodh Chargui




                                                                         Assaba
                                                                Gorgol




                                                                                  Hodh Gharbi


                                                                                                Nouadhibou


                                                                                                             Nouakchott


                                                                                                                          Trarza

                                                                                                                                   Tagant


                                                                                                                                             Adrar


                                                                                                                                                      Tiris Zemmour




                                 Per Pupil
                       Spending Per
                       Spending       Pupil
                                      Ratio (no. of students, right axis)
                       Pupil/Teacher Ratio
                       Pupil/Teacher
                               Rate (in
                       Poverty Rate
                       Poverty      (in %, right axis)

              Source: Ministry of Education 2015
                                                                                                                     193




               Example 29: Analysis of cash transfer programs



          Overall comment:

          The Costa Rica and Indonesia public expenditure reviews examine the effectiveness of demand-
          oriented interventions, such as conditional cash transfer programs. The Costa Rica analysis finds poor
          targeting in the country’s program. The Indonesia example assesses the impact of a cash transfer
          program that targets poor students and challenges related to the program’s design, targeting,
          monitoring, and evaluation. The detailed Indonesia report also includes policy recommendations for
          addressing these challenges.



          Costa Rica PER (2015)

          The diagnostic, targeting and design of subsidies in secondary education can be improved. There are
          large socioeconomic differences both in the transition probability from lower secondary to upper
          secondary and from secondary to tertiary. Liquidity constraints can partly explain this difference.
          Evidence from the 2014 ENAHO shows that subsidies directed to students are poorly targeted (Figure
          30). For instance only 29% of the 15-19 year old belonging to the first quintile of the household income
          distribution receives Avancemos, a conditional cash transfer (CCT) aimed at reducing dropout in
          secondary education among the poorest. On the contrary, among those in the fourth quintile of the
          income distribution, 8% report receiving this monetary transfer.

       A recent evaluation (Hidalgo and Romero, 2013) shows that this CCT has a positive impact on dropouts
       and enrollments. In other words, the CCT helps students stay in school and helps those dropping
       out getting back to school. Although some students remain in education by other factors, between
                                                                  10% and 16% of the students do so solely
Figure 30: Takeup of transfer and subsidies by                    because of the CCT and would, otherwise
household income quintile, 2014                                   abandon their studies. Likewise, re-entering
                                                                  the educational system do so for various
                                                 Avancesmo        reasons, but even higher percentage (77%
                                                 School Meal      or more) did so because of the transfer
                                                 Transportation were given. Although the sample in the
                                                                  case of reintegration is much smaller than
                                                 FONABE
                                                                  in the case of desertion, it cannot ignore
                                                                  the positive impact of the transfer is much
                                                                  higher in reintegration. Therefore, a better
                                                                  targeting of subsidies and transfers can
                                                                  significantly weaken the liquidity constraints
                                                                  that affect poorest households.
Source: World Bank SSEIR team’s, authors’ calculations using Household Surveys:
ENAHO 2014
194   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Indonesia PER (2012)

              The Bantuan Siswa Miskin (Cash Transfer for Poor Students, BSM) program provides cash transfers
              from central education agencies directly to students or schools. Both Kementerian Pendidikan dan
              Kebudayaan (Ministry of Education and Culture, Kemdikbud) and Kementerian Agama (Ministry of
              Religious Affairs, Kemenag) have BSM transfers providing cash payments once enrollment, attendance
              and other criteria have been verified. The amount of the transfers provided rises with the level
              of education, from Rp 360,000 for primary school to approximately Rp 1.2 million (per year) for a
              university student.


              Table 2: BSM at a glance

                  Official Program Name                                              Bantuan Siswa Miskin (BSM)
                  Program type                                                       Cash transfer for poor students
                  Program Type and inaugural year (start/usage year)                 Permanent, tax-financed, 2008
                  Coverage                                                           National (100% provinces, 100% districts)
                  Number of beneficiaries (2010)                                     5.9 million
                  Official value of benefit                                          Rp 360,00-1,200,000 depending on level of schooling
                  Public expenditure (2010)                                          Rp 3,607 billion (US$ 397 million)
                  Administrative cost per recipient (2010)                           Rp 15,608 (US$ 1.56)
                  Percent of poor 6-18 years old covered (year)                      3.2% (2009)
                  Key policy and execution agencies                                  Kemdikbud, Kemenag
                  Key implementation agencies (role)                                 Kemenag, Kemdikbud (verification of beneficiary
                                                                                     lists), Education service providers (targeting and
                                                                                     eligibility, fund distribution)
                  Support operations partners (role)                                 PT Pos/appointed bank (fund distribution)
                  Local Government participation                                     Targeting, verification, socialization,
                                                                                     monitoring and Evaluation
              Sources and Notes: Kemenkeu, Susenas 2009, program manuals and World Bank staff calculations.


              BSM spending has risen rapidly and it now ranks as the third-largest household-based transfer (by
              central government expenditure). BSM spending has increased in line with the rapid expansion in target
              beneficiaries. In 2010, Rp 3.6 trillion (around US$ 397 million) was spent on the program, equivalent to
              4 percent of central government education expenditures. BSM accounts for 10 percent of all central
              government resources devoted to household-based social assistance (SA). Around half of BSM spending
              goes to primary and junior secondary school students, with the remaining going to senior high school
              students and university students at similar portion.
                                                                                                                 195




Table 3: BSM expenditure summary, 2008-2010

                                                                       2008           2009            2010
    Total BSM (Constant, 2009 prices, Rp bn)                            1,238          2,562           3,607
      Primary school level (SD)                                          274            875            1,077
      Junior secondary school level (SMP)                                318            786             890
      Senior secondary school level (SMA)                                600            718             778
      University level                                                    46            183             863
    Analytical Series:
      Total BSM (Constant 2009 prices, Rp bn)                           1,343          5,856           3,339
      Total BSM (US$, Rp million)                                        127            247             397
      Share of central education expenditures (%)                        2.2            3.0             4.0
      Share of combined Kemdikbud and Kemenag (%)                        2.1            3.0             4.1
      Share of central government SA spending (%)                        3.9           10.0            13.7
    Analytical Series:
      Target number of beneficiaries (Million)                          3.0             4.6             5.9
      Average benefit level per beneficiary (Rp)                      597,709         555,338         606,912
Sources and Notes: Kemdikbud and Kemenag records from Directorates General, Kemenkeu BPS, and World Bank staff
calculations. Nominal expenditures have been deflated using the GDP deflator.

In total, there are 10 BSM initiatives, each with its own manual, fund flow structure, and implementing
procedures. There is little coordination between initiatives, even those located in the same institution.
The BSM program is national in scope but reaches very few students overall and does a poor job of
identifying poor students. In 2009 program coverage (through the senior secondary level) was still
small at 2.3 percent of all 6 to 18 year olds in Indonesia. Overall coverage of enrolled children is 3
percent. However, students from the poorest 40 percent of households account for approximately half
of all BSM scholarships (and half of all rupiah distributed through the BSM program) while the middle-
class and richer households in the top 60 percent capture an equal 50 percent of all BSM scholarships.
In other words, a rupiah from the BSM program is equally likely to end up the hands of a poor student
as in the hands of a non-poor student.

BSM does not target those who are unfamiliar with the school system and its administrators. BSM
initiatives typically identify potential scholarship recipients by soliciting nominations from schools
and school committees. Students nominated must have already achieved consistent attendance and
demonstrated “good behavior” confirmed by the principal. Recently enrolled students or prospective
new entrants have very little chance of being selected; likewise, those who have not made themselves
known to the principal are unlikely to be selected.

BSM does not effectively address difficult and costly transition periods - between elementary and
junior secondary, and again between junior and senior secondary - when the overwhelming majority
of dropouts occur. Verification procedures plus slow rates of disbursement together mean that
recipients typically receive a BSM transfer for their first schooling year only after their second schooling
year has already started.
196   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Support operations like monitoring and evaluation are partly delegated to schools, which are also the
              main agency in charge of delivering BSM funds to beneficiaries. This has led to weakness in non-benefit
              program operations. Within the 10 different BSM initiatives, very few budgeted funds are spent on
              socialization, monitoring and evaluation, and complaints, appeals, or grievances.

              BSM could be a valuable program for poor households and for Indonesia generally if it were better
              targeted, better socialized, and benefit packages were revised to correspond to the risks that poor
              students face. Poor households are not translating primary school enrolments into frequent success in
              higher levels of education. Education costs, especially for senior secondary, are rising in real terms. Poor
              households in particular are facing the biggest increases in real education expenditures (at all schooling
              levels). By providing benefits adequate for meeting the real costs of education precisely when those
              higher costs arrive, the BSM program could serve an important risk-mitigation function and inducement
              to higher education for poor households. Unfortunately the BSM program does not have any of these
              characteristics and its effectiveness is consequently lowered.
                                                                                                            197




    Example 30: Beneﬁt incidence analysis


Democratic Republic of Congo PER (2015)


Overall comment:

The DRC example conducts a classic average (or simple) benefit incidence analysis of the distribution
of education public expenditures across different levels of education. It provides an example of a
common situation where public spending in lower levels of education (in this case, primary and
secondary) is progressive, while higher-education spending is significantly pro-rich and regressive. The
example also provides a subnational- (provincial-) level benefit incidence analysis revealing variance in
public-resource distribution across quintiles by province.


A BIA (Benefit Incidence Analysis) using the concentration curve to evaluate the targeting of
government subsidies shows that the distribution of public expenditure in primary and secondary
education is relatively more biased towards the poor than the distribution of income. Figure 34
includes the consumption concentration curve, which is a proxy for the general wealth and income
inequality across quintiles. Compared to the consumption concentration curve, the expenditures
on primary, lower secondary and upper secondary education are relatively more equitable than the
general wealth distribution. This can be observed from the concentration curves in primary, lower
and upper secondary lying above that of the consumption curve, indicating that spending in these
levels tend to be more equitable.

Therefore, while public spending in primary and secondary education levels is not pro-poor per se, this
is somewhat mitigated by the fact that the distribution of spending promotes greater equality than
the general observed income inequality. In contrast, higher education is significantly not pro-poor
and is regressive. Given that the richest quintile receives the most benefit from public spending- the
distribution of public spending in higher education is in fact worse than the general wealth inequality.

Even though public spending on education is less regressive than is income distribution, such
spending nonetheless benefits the rich much more than then poor. Moreover, the inequality
becomes higher at higher levels of education. Figure 34(a) presents the BIA without adjusting for
demographic factors and Figure 34(b) presents the analysis taking into consideration demographic
factors. In general, public spending on education is pro-poor if the concentration curve for the
particular level of education is above the 45-degree line. Figure 34(a) shows that the concentration
curve for primary education spending is just above the line of perfect equity, while that of post-
primary education spending is entirely below the line of equity. However, after adjusting the
spending data in each quintile for variations in number of children by quintile, spending in all levels
of education fall below the perfect equity line, including at the primary level. This suggests that
public spending in education in the DRC favors the richer households at all levels of education since
the poorest quintile receives lower shares of public spending.
198   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




                 Figure 34: Lorenz curve for household consumption expenditure and public
                 spending on education by level

                                      Concentration Curve                                                                       Concentration Curve

      1                                                                                             1

      .8                                                                                            .8

      .6                                                                                            .6

      .4                                                                                            .4

      .2                                                                                            .2

      0                                                                                             0

           0               .2              .4              .6           .8               1                 0          .2           .4                .6          .8   1


                                                        Line of Perfect Equality               Upper Secondary              Lower Secondary
                                                        Primary                                Consumption                  Higher Education


                 Sources: Author’s estimations based on Ministry of Budget, EMIS, SECOPE, and HBS 1-2-3, 2012



                 The provincial level BIA analysis reveals that public resource distribution across quintiles varies to
                 some degree by province where Kasai Orientale appears to be the most equitable province while
                 Equateur is the least equitable. Figure 35 depicts the overall distribution of public funds by quintile
                 and province. For example, about 27 percent of total public funding benefits the richest quintile in
                 Kasai-Orientale while the lowest quintile receives about 17 percent (3 percent below their population
                 share). The corresponding figures for Equateur are 39 percent and 10 percent, respectively.


                 Figure 35: Provincial level beneﬁts incidence analysis of public expenditure on
                 education - all levels of education
                100%
                90%
                                27%      27%         31%        33%          33%         33%             33%    34%         37%         38%          39%       39%
                80%                                                                                                                                                   Q5
                70%                                                                                                                                                   Q4
                60%             23%
                                         30%         20%
                                                                26%          22%         23%             20%    27%         24%         19%          19%       18%    Q3
                50%
                40%             16%                                                                                                                                   Q2
                                                     17%                     18%                         16%                            14%
                30%                      23%                    20%                      14%                    17%         12%                      19%       18%    Q1
                                18%
                20%                                  18%                     15%         14%             18%                17%         14%
                                                                                                                12%                                  12%       14%
                10%                      16%                    11%
                                17%                                                                                                     14%
                                                     13%        10%          12%         14%             13%    11%         10%                      11%       10%
                    0%                   4%

                                                                                                         du                                                e
                                                                               C                                                                       al
                                                   le
                                         sa




                                                                go




                                                                                                                 u
                                le




                                                                                                                           vu
                                                                                         a




                                                                                                                                     ga




                                                                                                                                                                ur




                                                                             DR
                                                                                                               iv
                                                                                    em




                                                                                                                                                      t
                                                   ta




                                                                                                     n
                             a

                                         a




                                                                                                                                                              te
                                                                                                                           Ki
                                                              n




                                                                                                                                                   en
                                                                                                                                     n
                          nt




                                                                                                  du
                                                                                                               -K
                                      sh

                                                en

                                                           Co




                                                                                                                                  ta




                                                                                                                                                i
                                                                                                                      d-




                                                                                                                                                            ua
                                                                                     i
                         rie




                                                                                                             rd
                                                                                  an




                                                                                                                                              Or
                                  Kn




                                                                                                n
                                                                                                                                Ka
                                              id




                                                                                                                    Su
                                                       s-




                                                                                             Ba
                                                                                                                                                          Eq
                                                                                                          No
                 i-O




                                                                              M
                                           cc

                                                     Ba
                                        i- O
                sa
               Ka




                                      sa
                                  Ka




                 Source: Authors’ estimations based on Ministry of Budget, EMIS, SECOPE, and HBS 1-2-3, 2012
                                                                                                            199




    Example 31: Analysis of private spending by income quintile


Madagascar PER (2015)


Overall comment:

After Madagascar’s 2009 military coup, the Government faced a severe budget crisis. Where they
could, families tried to fill public expenditure gaps in the education sector to keep their schools
operating. Given this context, this PER prioritized an analysis of household contributions to education.
It assessed the impacts of the shift to more private financing of education on households in different
income quintiles and on enrollment outcomes. The analysis relied on two household surveys (2005
and 2010) and new survey data collection



Distribution of household expenditure by income levels and regions

In the recent years, private spending on education has generally increased, with some direct
impact on enrollment. Since the crisis, a greater number of households with a child in Grade 2
has had to pay enrollment fees, PTA contributions and monthly school fees (Table 20). The share
of households paying enrollment fees has increased the most, by 7 percentage points, against 4
percentage points for the share paying PTA contributions and one percent for those paying school
fees. In addition to be more frequent, the amount paid in school fees have generally increased.
Average household per pupil spending increased from Ar 6,561 to Ar 8,277, representing a 26
percent increase over three years.a This has had direct repercussions in terms of enrollment. Indeed,
financial problems are the first reason given by household to explain dropout, and this has only
worsened since the beginning of the crisis in 2009.

Table 20: Share of households in the southern districts that paid enrollment fees,
PTA contributions and monthly school fees, 2009 and 2012 (sample selection)

  Percent                                               2009               2012    2009-12 Gap (% Points)
  Households having paid enrollment fees                 34.6               41.5            6.9
  Households having paid PTA contributions               36.5               40.9             4.4
  Share of parents having paid late                      71.4               85.2            13.8
  Parents exempt from PTA contributions                  20.0               14.5            -5.5
  Households having paid monthly school fees             12.5               13.8             1.3
Source: South Survey in the Districts of Amboasary and Betioky, 2009 and 2012.
200   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              The share of household budget spent on education increased more for the richest. To interpret
              this data, it is important to note that, in Madagascar, the poverty level is situated around the average
              level of consumption in the fourth quintile (and even closer to the high end of the fourth quintile
              in 2010). The distribution in 2005 was U-shaped, with the poorest spending a higher share of their
              income than households in the second, third and fourth quintiles. The situation was more clearly
              progressive in 2010, with shares of income increasing for the richer households, but this came with
              an increase in household expenditures on education for all but the bottom two quintiles, with all
              quintiles paying a higher share of their budget in 2010.b Looking at average education expenses per
              child in school, there was a slightly higher cost in the third and fourth quintiles in the bottom two
              and richest quintiles (Figure 26).

              Figure 26: Household direct education expenditure, 2005 and 2012




                    % of Budget, 2005             Average Expenditure Per Child in School, 2005
                    % of Budget, 2005             Average Expenditure Per Child in School, 2012
              Source: EPM 2005 and ENSMOD 2012.


              The cost per child in school differs significantly by region, and is inversely related to poverty
              rates. Correlation coefficients with contemporaneous poverty are negative and significant (-0.70
              in 2005 and -0.90 in 2010), after adjusting for regional price variations. The strong correlation results
              hide some important variance across regions, however, especially when looking at changes in costs
              between 2005 and 2010 (Figure 27). Changes across time show that all regions experienced an
              increase in cost in real terms, except for Ihorombe. Regions with the highest poverty rate in 2005
              also experienced some of the highest increases in expenditure per child in school (Sofia and Atsimo
              Andrefana, in particular).c
                                                                                                      201




Figure 27: Primary attendance rate and the share of household budget on
education by region, 2012
PRIMARY ATTENDANCE RATE
(6-10 YEARS) 2012




                                            EDUCATION EXPENSE IN PRIMARY AS SHARE OF BUDGET, 2012
Source: ENSOMD 2012.



 The share of primary education in the household budget is weakly related to primary
 attendance rates, indicating that the private cost of public education can be higher for
 families living in regions where attendance is low. According to 2012 Household Survey data, the
 share of education in household expenditure increases with primary attendance, but the correlation
 coefficient is weak (0.34). Figure 28 shows differences across regions. The regions of Analamanga,
 Diana and Sava stand the highest attendance rate with greater share of household expenditure on
 education, whereas the region of Anosy has a high household expenditure with less attendance
 primary rate.



Figure 28: Cost per child in school by region, ranked by poverty level, 2005 and 2010




                 Cost Per Child in School, 2005             Poverty Ratio, 2005 (Secondary Axis)
                 Cost Per Child in School, 2010             Poverty Ratio, 2010
Note: Cost per child is adjusted to reflect prices in the capital.
Data source: Household Surveys 2005 and 2010.
202   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              The share of education expenditure in the household budget is also negatively correlated
              with poverty levels.d Correlation coefficients are negative and significant in both years (-0.51 in
              2005, and -0.59 in 2010), although confidence intervals do not allow for establishing whether the
              relationship is indeed stronger in 2010. Figure 29 also shows that the strong correlation result hides
              significant variance across regions with a similar pattern as noted above.

              Relationship between out-of-pocket and public expenditures
              on education

              Households are financing an increasing share of the total costs of education (Box 9). In order to refine
              the analysis on how education is financed in Madagascar, it is important to compare public and
              household expenditure. Over 2006-2008, current public expenditure contributed, on average, to 73
              percent of expenses of one child enrolled at school, whereas household expenditure represented, on
              average, 27 percent (Figure 30). In some regions (Vatovavy-Fitovinany, Melaky, Atsimo Atsinanana,
              Androy and Atsimo Andrefana), the share of public expenditure per child in school reached more than
              80 percent over this period. However, from 2009 to 2013, the share of current public expenditure
              was, on average, 59 percent of total spending per child enrolled. This reflects a substantial increase in
              the share of the costs per child enrolled financed by household. The increase was higher in Atsimo
              Andrefana, Menabe and Vatovavy Fitovinany, three regions that are particularly vulnerable.


              Figure 29: Burden of education expenditures by region, ranked by poverty levels,
              2005 and 2010




                 Burden of educ exp 2005             Poverty ratio, 2005 (secondary sxis)
                 Burden of educ exp. 2010            Poverty ratio, 2010

              Note: Burden=share of education expenditure in household budget averaged by region.
              Data source: EPM.
                                                                                                             203




Box 9. Parents’ Contribution to School Financing: Results From a Field Study

The results of the survey carried out for this study (non-nationally representative) show that
household expenditures averaged 18,000 MGA for a child in primary school, ranging from 27,000
MGA in Analamanga to 7,300 MGA in Melaky. Parental contributions to school expenditures averaged
more than 21,000MGA in the regions of Analamanga and Atsinanana. A survey conducted by MEN in
2013-2014 in 30 schools of the Antananarivo Renivohitra CISCO showed comparable results, included
an average contribution of parents to the school budget of 18,410 MGA, varying from 5,000 MGA to
28,000 MGA. In 30 surveyed schools, the collected resources reached a total of 128 million MGA, an
average budget of 5.3 million MGA per school.


Parental contribution for a child enrolled              Parental contribution to school
in primary school (EPP)                                 expenditures : distribution by area
                                                        –(in MGA/parent/year)
                                                                          Urban
                                                                          Rural
                                                                          Total




Source : Survey conducted during the study




                                                        Source : Survey conducted during the study


Parental contributions are essentially used to pay community teachers and the school keeper, purchase
supplies, pay for repairs, and finance report cards and school sports. With the contribution of parents,
the surveyed schools provide a monthly subsidy to subsidized and non-subsidized community
teachers. The amounts are almost equivalent, 63,500 MGA/ month for the non-subsidized community
teachers and 61,150 MGA/month for subsidized community teachers. Nearly 72 percent of parents
consider that the level of the subvention is more than they can afford (52.6 percent) or is rather high
(19.2 percent). Moreover, parents’ satisfaction with the performance of teachers differs according
to their status. The highest satisfaction rates go to the subsidized community teachers (92 percent)
surpassing the satisfaction rates of the civil servants (less than 86 percent), and largely surpassing the
satisfaction rates for the performance of non-subsidized community teachers (37 percent).
204   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Breakdown of the use of school budget realized through parental contributions

                                                                        1.6% 0.5%




                                                    9.3%
                                                                                                                                                                                              Remuneration of Subsidized FRAM Teacher
                      7.4%                                                                                                   38.0%                                                            Remuneration of Non-Subsidized FRAM Teacher
                                                                                                                                                                                              Guardian Salary
                    10.2%                                                                                                                                                                     School Operations
                                                                                                                                                                                              Maintenance, Rehabilitation Facilities, and Furniture
                                                                                                                                                                                              Buildings (Classroom, Latrines, Housing)
                                                                                                                                                                                              Other

                                                                32.9%




              Source : Survey conducted during the study




              Figure 30. Average household expense per child compared to per pupil government
              education expenditure, 2005 and 2010
             100%
              90%
              80%
              70%
              60%
              50%
              40%
              30%
              20%
              10%
              0%
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VAKINANKARATRA
                                         AMORON’ | MANIA
                       ALAOTRA-MANGORO




                                                           ANALAMANGA


                                                                          ANALANJIROFO


                                                                                         ANDROY


                                                                                                  ANOSY


                                                                                                          ATSIMO ANDREFANA


                                                                                                                             ATSIMO ATSINANANA


                                                                                                                                                 ATSINANANA


                                                                                                                                                              BETSIBOKA


                                                                                                                                                                          BOENY


                                                                                                                                                                                  BONGOLAVA


                                                                                                                                                                                                 DIANA


                                                                                                                                                                                                         HAUTE-MATSIATRA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IHOROMBE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ITASY


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MELAKY


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MENABE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SAVA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SOFIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VATOVAVY FITOVINANY




                    Average expenditure per child in school, 2005
                    Average of 2006-2008 current expenditure on education per child in school
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  205




100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
 0%
                          AMORON’ | MANIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VAKINANKARATRA
        ALAOTRA-MANGORO




                                            ANALAMANGA


                                                         ANALANJIROFO


                                                                        ANDROY


                                                                                 ANOSY


                                                                                         ATSIMO ANDREFANA


                                                                                                            ATSIMO ATSINANANA


                                                                                                                                ATSINANANA


                                                                                                                                             BETSIBOKA


                                                                                                                                                         BOENY


                                                                                                                                                                 BONGOLAVA


                                                                                                                                                                             DIANA


                                                                                                                                                                                     HAUTE-MATSIATRA


                                                                                                                                                                                                       IHOROMBE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ITASY


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MELAKY


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MENABE


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SAVA


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SOFIA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VATOVAVY FITOVINANY
       Average expenditure per child in school, 2010
       Average of 2009-2013 current expenditure on education per child in school

 Note: The expenditure data is averaged over 2006-2007 for salaries by region and 2006 and 2008 for other current
 expenditure.
 Data sources: EPM 2005 and 2010, MFB.




 a
   Annex B explains the difference between the two groups: Sample Selection and Tracer Study.
 b
    A lower budget share in the poorest quintile would not have led to a positive interpretation, however, as it would have
 likely meant that the poorest students do not go to school altogether, which is not desirable.
 c
   The correlation coefficient between the change in cost and poverty rates are, however, not significant.
 d
   The burden was also measured as the average household expenditure per child in school relative to per capita
 expenditures in the region, giving similar results (corr -0.55 in 2005 and -0.59 in 2010)
NOTES
                                                                                                               207




1. The Systems Approach for Better Education Results (SABER) is a World Bank initiative that produces
comparative data and knowledge on education policies and institutions, with the aim of helping
countries systematically strengthen their education systems. SABER evaluates the quality of education
policies against evidence-based global standards, using new diagnostic tools and detailed policy data
collected for the initiative. These key questions are aligned with the SABER School Finance Conceptual
Framework discussed in "What Matters Most for School Finance: A Framework Paper" (2013), in the
SABER Working Paper Series. A more detailed explanation of the SABER School Finance instrument is
available at http://saber.worldbank.org/index.cfm?indx=8&pd=3&sub=0.

2. See Freinkman and Skhirtladze (2015) for a detailed review of 75 public expenditure reviews that
cover multiple sectors.

3. "Fiscal space" is defined as "room in a government´s budget that allows it to provide resources for
a desired purpose without jeopardizing the sustainability of its financial position or the stability of
the economy” (IMF 2005). The education sector can create fiscal space by cutting inputs to the sector
(e.g., reducing the size of the teaching force) or by obtaining those inputs at a cheaper cost (e.g.,
introducing procurement reforms to produce large savings in textbook costs).

4. World Bank staff may consult budget information through the Education Global Practice website.

5. SABER’s education management information system assesses data quality as one of the policy areas.
Its four policy levers include (i) methodological soundness, (ii) accuracy and reliability, (iii) integrity,
and (iv) periodicity and timeliness. For details about the assessment methodology, see http://saber.
worldbank.org/index.cfm?indx=8&pd=2&sub=0.

6. UNESCO's International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) is used to categorize and report
cross-nationally comparable education statistics. UNESCO's Institute of Statistics uses these categories
to report data on education finance, such as a government's per capita expenditure by ISCED-based
levels of education. ISCED 2011 is the latest version and is available at: http://www.uis.unesco.org/
Education/Documents/isced-2011-en.pdf.

7. Fiscal imbalance is a mismatch in the revenue powers and expenditure responsibilities of a
government. Horizontal fiscal imbalance occurs when subnational governments are able to raise
either more or less funds from their tax base than they need to cover the cost of providing services.
Equalization transfers can help to mitigate horizontal imbalances. Vertical fiscal imbalance describes
the variance between a central government’s revenue and expenditures against those of regional
governments. It is a structural issue and thus needs to be corrected by reassignment of revenue and
expenditure responsibilities among different levels of the government.

8. In contract theory and economics, information asymmetry deals with the study of decisions in
transactions where one party has more or better information than the other. This creates an imbalance
of power in transactions, which can sometimes cause the transactions to go awry.

9. An externality is a side effect or consequence of an activity that affects other parties without this
being reflected in the cost of the goods or services involved, such as the pollination of surrounding
crops by bees kept for honey, or a factory's pollution of the air of nearby communities.
208   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              10. Rent-seeking is the use of the resources of a company, an organization, or an individual to obtain
              economic gain from others without reciprocating any benefits to society through wealth creation. An
              example of rent-seeking is when a company lobbies the government for loan subsidies, grants, or tariff
              protection. The process of lobbying government is a political process. Economists call such lobbying
              “rent seeking” because the objective is to secure economic rents that are higher than the normal
              profits obtainable by competing in the economic marketplace.

              11. Elite capture is a process whereby resources transfers designated for the benefit of the larger
              population are usurped by a few individuals of superior status–be it economic, political, educational,
              ethnic, or otherwise.

              12. For detailed definitions of functional and economic classifications of expense, see International
              Monetary Fund (2014).

              13. For a discussion on textbook management, see Read (2015).

              14. See Chapter 7 in World Bank (2004).

              15. Education improvements in Rwanda in the 2000s, for example, have been linked to better funding
              arrangements as a result of public financial management PFM improvements, a sector-wide approach
              program (SWAP), and decentralization policies (ODI 2009). Similar improvements were seen in
              Cambodia, where a program that supported PFM improvements across a number of sectors, including
              education, found lower repeat rates for students in select provinces (Wescott 2008).

              16. See PEFA (2016a) and PEFA (2016b).

              17. These international targets on education financing are included as reference points in UNESCO
              (2015b).

              18. The Department for International Development is held to value-for-money standards by its
              oversight body, the Independent Commission for Aid Impact (ICAI). The Commission operates
              independently of Government, and reports directly to the International Development Committee of
              the UK Parliament.

              19. See Barnett, C. et al. (2010) and Department for International Development (2011) on value for
              money.

              20. See, for example, Coelli, et al. (2005) and Herrera and Pang (2005)

              21. See Psacharopoulos and Woodhall (1985) and UNESCO et al. (2014), Chapter 2.

              22. See Psacharopoulos and Woodhall	
 Chapter 5.

              23. Other relevant policies and programs range from inclusive education programs, to special training
              programs for teachers in disadvantaged schools, to education programs targeting specific groups
              of students.
                                                                                                          209




24. See Birdsall, Ibrahim, and Gupta (2004) for public policies that can increase demand for education.

25. As pointed out in    Technical Note 4, in 2013 Transparency International published a
comprehensive analysis of sources of corruption by level of education. See: https://www.transparency.
org/whatwedo/publication/global_corruption_report_education.

26. Data collection and analytical instruments are available at: http://saber.worldbank.org/index.
cfm?indx=8&pd=3&sub=4.

27. See Jensen and Wolde (2016) for details.

28. SDG 4 aims to “ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning
opportunities for all.” (The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable
Development Goals, https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdg4).

29. For information on 2001 survey, see Kattan and Burnett (2004); for information on 2005 survey, see
Kattan (2006).

30. An introductory primer on PETS/QSDS is Reinikka and Smith (2004). Other resources are Reinikka
and Svensson (2002); and Dehn, Reinikka, and Svensson (2003).

31. In Sub-Saharan Africa, annual losses of textbooks have been found to be as high as 65 percent in
some countries (Read 2015).

32. These committees consist of three government representatives and three democratically elected
representatives of the program's beneficiaries.

33. The World Bank developed this tool in partnership with the African Economic Research Consortium
and the African Development Bank, and launched it in 2013.

34. For more on MAMS, see www.worldbank.org/mams; and Lofgren, Cicowiez, and Diaz-Bonilla (2013).

35. The J-PAL is a network of 136 affiliated professors from more than 40 universities. The methodology
and research results can be found at: https://www.povertyactionlab.org/policy-lessons/education/
increasing-test-score-performance.

36. For example, see Glewwe et al. (2011).

37. A cost-efficiency analysis is typically not conducted in public expenditure reviews, but is often
conducted in project appraisal documents during a project preparation.

38. For instance, Alonso and Sanchez (2011) compare different funding models.
REFERENCES
                                                                                                                  211




Allen, Richard, Richard Hemming, and Barry Potter. 2013. “Challenges of Reforming Budgetary Institutions
     in Developing Countries.” In Public Financial Management and Its Emerging Architecture, edited
     by Marco Cangiano, Michale Lazare, and Teresa R. Curristine, 411. Washington, DC: International
     Monetary Fund.

Alonso, Juan Diego, and Alonso Sanchez. 2011. Reforming Education Finance in Transition Countries: Six Case
     Studies in Per Capita Financing System. A World Bank Study. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://
     openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2332.

Barnett, Chris, Julian Barr, Angela Christie, Belinda Duff, and Shaun Hext, 2010. Measuring the Impact and
     Value for Money of Governance & Conflict Programmes, Final Report. Itad Ltd. https://assets.publishing.
     service.gov.uk/media/57a08b1eed915d3cfd000b44/60797_ITAD-VFM-Report-Dec10.pdf.

Birdsall, Nancy, Amina J. Ibrahim, and Geeta Rao Gupta. 2004. “Achieving the Millennium Development
     Goal of Universal Primary Education.” United Nations Millennium Project Task Force on Education and
     Gender Equality. http://www.eldis.org/go/home&id=14619&type=Document#.WO-czDvyu01.

Chiche, Mailan. 2009. Sector Budget Support in Practice: Case Study of the Education Sector in Rwanda.
     London: Overseas Development Institute; Oxford: Mokoro. https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/
     files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/5580.pdf.

Coelli, Timothy. J., Dodla Sai Prasada Rao, Christopher J. O’Donnell, and George Edward Battese. 2005. An
     Introduction to Efficiency and Productivity Analysis, Springer Science & Business Media. 2nd ed. New York:
     Springer. http://facweb.knowlton.ohio-state.edu/pviton/courses/crp394/coelli_Intro_effic.pdf.

Dehn, Jan, Ritva Reinikka, and Jakob Svensson. 2003. “Survey Tools for Assessing Performance in Service
    Delivery,” in The Impact of Economic Policies on Poverty and Income Distribution: Evaluation Techniques
    and Tools, edited by L. A. Pereira da Silva and F. Bourguignon, Washington, DC: World Bank; New York:
    Oxford University Press.

Demery, Lionel. 2000. “Benefit Incidence: A Practitioner’s Guide”. Working paper 35117, World Bank,
   Washington, DC. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/574221468135940764/Benefit-
   incidence-a-practitioners-guide.

--------. 2003. “Analyzing the Incidence of Public Spending.” In The Impact of Economic Policies on Poverty
       and Income Distribution (Evaluation Techniques and Tools), edited by F. Bourguignon and L. Pereira da
       Silva, p. 41. Washington, DC: The World Bank; New York: Oxford University Press. http://documents.
       worldbank.org/curated/en/973661468739790876/pdf/multi0page.pdf.

Department for International Development. 2011. DFID’s Approach to Value for Money (VfM). https://www.
    gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/67479/DFID-approach-value-
    money.pdf.

Freinkman, Lev M. and Sophiko Skhirtladze. 2015. Taking the Stock of PERs: Emerging Patterns and
     Examples of Good Practice, Washington, DC: World Bank. http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/
     en/561951490728666169/Taking-the-Stock-of-PERs-Emerging-Patterns-and-Examples-of-Good-
     Practice-Final-June-2015.
212   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Glewwe, Paul W., Eric A. Hanushek, Sarah D. Humpage, and Renato Ravina. 2011. “School Resources and
                  Educational Outcomes in Developing Countries: A Review of the Literature From 1990 To 2010.”
                  Working Paper 17554, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.
                  org/papers/w17554.pdf.

              Glewwe, Paul W., Michael Kremer, and Sylvie Moulin. 2009. “Many Children Left Behind? Textbooks and
                  Test Scores in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 1 (1): 112–35. http://pubs.
                  aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/app.1.1.112.

              Herrera, Santiago and Gaobo Pang. 2005. “Efficiency of Public Spending in Developing
                   Countries: An Efficiency Frontier Approach.” Policy Research Working Paper 3645,
                   World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTQFA/Resources/
                   EfficiencyofPublicSpendinginDevelopingCountries_MAY05.pdf.

              Inter-Agency Network for Education in Emergencies. 2010. Reference Guide on External Education
                    Financing. New York: INEE. http://toolkit.ineesite.org/toolkit/INEEcms/uploads/1003/INEE_
                    Reference_Guide-Ext_Educ_Financing_EN.pdf.

              *.'	International Monetary Fund
. 2005. “Back to Basics—Fiscal Space: What It Is and How to Get It.” Finance
                    and Development, June Vol 42 (2). http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/fandd/2005/06/basics.htm.

              --------. 2014. Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
                     https://www.imf.org/external/Pubs/FT/GFS/Manual/2014/gfsfinal.pdf.

              Jensen, Leif, and Hirut Wolde. 2016. Strengthening Public Expenditure Analysis: Application of BOOST
                   Standard Tables and Selected Tools and Techniques. BOOST Guidance Note Series. Washington, DC:
                   World Bank. http://wbi.worldbank.org/boost/tools-resources/boost/guidance-notes.

              Jimenez, Emmanuel, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2008. “Can Cost-Benefit Analysis Guide Education
                   Policy in Developing Countries?” Policy Research Working Paper 4568, Washington, DC:
                  World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/6544/wps4568.
                   pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y.

              Kattan, Raja Bentaouet. 2006. “Implementation of Free Basic Education Policy.” Education Working
                   Paper Series 7, Human Development Network, Education, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
                   siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/Resources/EDWP_User_Fees.pdf.

              Kattan, Raja Bentaouet, and Nicholas Burnett. 2004. User Fees in Primary Education. A World Bank
                   Study. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EDUCATION/
                   Resources/278200-1099079877269/547664-1099079993288/EFAcase_userfees.pdf.

              Lewis, Maureen A., and Gunilla Pettersson. 2009. “Governance in Education: Raising Performance in
                   the Sector.” World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTHDOFFICE/
                   Resources/5485726-1239047988859/GAC_in_education_master_12_April_2009.pdf.
                                                                                                                  213




Lockheed, Marlaine E., and Eric Hanushek. 1988. “Improving Educational Efficiency in Developing
    Countries: What Do We Know?” Compare 18 (1): 21-38. http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/
    pdf/10.1080/0305792880180103?needAccess=true.

Lofgren, Hans, Martin Cicowiez, and Carolina Diaz-Bonilla. 2013. “MAMS–A Computable General
     Equilibrium Model for Developing Country Strategy Analysis.” in Handbook of Computable General
     Equilibrium Modeling, Vol. 1A, edited by Peter B. Dixon and Dale W. Jorgenson, 159–276. North
     Holland: Elsevier B.V.

Mincer, Jacob. 1974. Schooling, Experience, and Earnings. Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Mingat, Alain, Jee-Peng Tan, and Shobhana Sosale. 2003. Tools for Education: Policy Analysis. Washington,
    DC: World Bank.

Montenegro, Claudio E., and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2014. Comparable Estimates of Returns to Schooling
    Around the World. Policy Research Working Paper 7020, World Bank, Washington, DC. http://
    documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/830831468147839247/pdf/WPS7020.pdf.

Narayan, Amber. 2014. “Who Benefits from Education Sector Subsidies?” A PowerPoint presentation
     prepared for “Economics of Education”, Education Staff Development Program, Washington, DC,
     April 1-2, 2015.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). Education at a Glance. 1998-2016.
    http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/education/education-at-a-glance_19991487.

PEFA. 2016a. PEFA Assessment Field Guide. Vol. 2 of PEFA 2016 Handbook., Washington DC: PEFA Secretariat.
     https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/16_08_30%20Fieldguide_8.pdf.

2016b. PEFA: Framework for Assessing Public Financial Management. Washington DC: PEFA Secretariat.
       https://pefa.org/sites/default/files/PEFA%20Framework_English.pdf.

Psacharopoulos, George. 1973. Returns to Education: An International Comparison. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

--------. 1995. The Profitability of Investment in Education: Concepts and Methods. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Psacharopoulos, George, and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 2004. “Returns to Investment in Education:
     A Further Update.” Education Economics 12 (2): 111–134. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
     INTDEBTDEPT/Resources/468980-1170954447788/3430000-1273248341332/20100426_16.pdf.

Psacharopoulos, George, and Maureen Woodhall. 1985. Education for Development: An Analysis of
     Investment Choices. New York: Oxford University Press. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/
     en/477701468137718173/pdf/multi-page.pdf.

Psacharopoulos, George, and Richard Layard. 1979. “Human Capital and Earnings: British Evidence and a
     Critique.” Reviews of Economic Studies 46 (3): 485–503.
214   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Read, Tony. 2015. Where Have All the Textbooks Gone? Toward Sustainable Provision of Teaching and Learning
                   Materials in Sub-Saharan Africa. Directions in Development—Human Development. Washington, DC:
                   World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/22123.

              Reinikka, Ritva, and Jakob Svensson. 2002. Assessing Frontline Service Delivery. A World Bank Study.
                   Washington, DC: World Bank.

              ----------. 2004. “Local Capture: Evidence from a Central Government Transfer Program in Uganda”
                     Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (2): 679–705. https://academic.oup.com/qje/article-
                     abstract/119/2/679/1894528/Local-Capture-Evidence-from-a-Central-Government?redirectedFrom
                     =fulltext.

              Reinikka, Ritva, and Nathanael Smith. 2004. Public Expenditure Tracking Surveys in Education: Peru, Uganda
                   and Zambia. Ethics and Corruption in Education. Paris: UNESCO International Institute for Educational
                   Planning. http://www.iiep.unesco.org/sites/default/files/public-expend-track-surv.pdf. http://etico.
                   iiep.unesco.org/uploads/media/136267e.pdf.

              Salmi, Jamil, and Roberta M. Basset. 2012. “Education for All: The Equity Challenge in Tertiary
                   Education.” Paper presented at Salzburg Global Seminars, Austria, October 2–7. http://www.
                   salzburgglobal.org/fileadmin/user_upload/Documents/2010-2019/2012/495/Session_Document_
                   OpportunitiesforAll_495.pdf.

              Shand, David. 2000. “Promoting Allocative Efficiency (Strategic Prioritization),” prepared for the World
                  Bank’s Core Course on Budgetary Processes and Public Expenditure Management, Washington,
                  DC, May 22. https://view.officeapps.live.com/op/view.aspx?src=http://www1.worldbank.org/
                  publicsector/pe/Core%20Couse-%20Strategic%20Allocn.ppt.

              Schick, Allen. 1998. “Allocative Efficiency,” In A Contemporary Approach to Public Expenditure Management,
                   89–110. Washington, DC: World Bank.

              Snilstveit, Birte, Jennifer Stevenson, Radhika Menon, Daniel Phillips, Emma Gallagher, Maisie Geleen,
                    Hannah Jobse, Tanja Schmidt, and Emmanuel Jimenez. 2016. The Impact of Education Programmes on
                    Learning and School Participation in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review Summary
                    Report. 3ie Systematic Review Summary 7. London: International Initiative for Impact Evaluation (3ie).
                    http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/429341481774674870/The-Impact-of-Education-Programmes-
                    on-Learning-and-School-Participation.pdf.

              Theunynck, Serge. 2009.  School Construction Strategies for Universal Primary Education in Africa: Should
                  Communities Be Empowered to Build Their Schools? Africa Human Development Series. Washington,
                  DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2637.

              Transparency International. 2013. Global Corruption Report: Education. New York: Routledge. https://www.
                   transparency.org/whatwedo/publication/global_corruption_report_education.
                                                                                                                  215




Underwood, Julie K. 1995. “School Finance Adequacy as Vertical Equity.” University of Michigan
    Journal of Law Reform 28 (3): 493–519. https://litigation-essentials.lexisnexis.com/webcd/
    app?action=DocumentDisplay&crawlid=1&srctype=smi&srcid=3B15&doctype=cite&docid=
    28+U.+Mich.+J.L.+Reform+493&key=e01524aba9318b07adeedc50a54b6582.

UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2015a. “National Education
    Accounts: A Comprehensive Framework to Improve Education Finance Statistics.” Paper prepared
    for the World Education Forum 2015, Incheon, Republic of Korea, May, 19–22, 2015. http://www.uis.
    unesco.org/Education/Documents/wef-national-education-accounts.pdf.

--------. 2015b. Education 2030 Framework for Action: Towards Inclusive and Equitable Quality Education and
       Lifelong Learning for All. http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/ED/ED_new/pdf/
       FFA-ENG-27Oct15.pdf.

--------. 2015c. EFA Global Monitoring Report, Education for All 2000-2015: Achievements and Challenges. Paris:
       UNESCO. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002322/232205e.pdf.

--------. 2015d. “Pricing the Right to Education: The Cost of Reaching New Targets by 2030”. Education
       for All Global Monitoring Report. Policy Paper 18, July 2015 update. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/
       images/0023/002321/232197E.pdf.

UNESCO Institute for Statistics (UIS), UNESCO International Institute for Educational Planning (IIEP), and
    IIEP Pôle de Dakar. 2016a. Methodology of National Education Accounts. Paris: UNESCO IIEP and
    Montreal: UNESCO-UIS. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002457/245781e.pdf.

--------. 2016b. Who Pays for What in Education?: The Real Costs Revealed through National Education
       Accounts. Montreal: UNESCO-UIS. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0024/002462/246277e.pdf.

UNESCO, UNICEF, World Bank and GPE (Global Partnership for Education). 2014. Education Sector Analysis
    Methodological Guidelines, Vol. I. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0023/002305/230532e.pdf.

van de Walle, Dominique. 2003. “Behavioral Incidence Analysis of Public Spending and Social Programs.” In
     The Impact of Economic Policies on Poverty and Income Distribution (Evaluation Techniques and Tools),
     edited by F. Bourguignon and L. Pereira da Silva, 69–84. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York:
     Oxford University Press. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/973661468739790876/pdf/
     multi0page.pdf.

Welham, Bryn, Philipp Krause, and Edward Hedger. 2013. “Linking PFM Dimensions to Development
    Priorities.” Working Paper 380, Overseas Development Institute, London. https://www.odi.org/sites/
    odi.org.uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/8392.pdf.

Wescott, Clay G. 2008. World Bank Support for Public Financial Management: Conceptual Roots and Evidence
    of Impact–Background Paper to Public Sector Reform: What Works and Why? An IEG Evaluation of World
    Bank Support. IEG Working Paper, World Bank Independent Evaluation Group, Washington DC. http://
    siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTPUBSECREF/Resources/pfm_wescott.pdf.
216   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines




              Wils, Annababette. 2015. “Reaching Education Targets in Low and Lower-middle Income Countries: Costs
                    and Finance Gaps to 2030.” Background paper prepared for the Education for All Global Monitoring
                    Report 2015 “Education for All 2000-2015: Achievements and Challengers”. http://unesdoc.unesco.
                    org/images/0023/002325/232560e.pdf.

              Woodhall, Maureen. 2004. Cost-benefit Analysis in Educational Planning, 4th ed. Paris: UNESCO International
                 Institute for Educational Planning. http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0013/001390/139042e.pdf.

              World Bank. 2002. Peru: Restoring Fiscal Discipline for Poverty Reduction. A Public Expenditure Review.
                  Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/239311468074329638/
                  Peru-Restoring-fiscal-discipline-for-poverty-reduction-a-public-expenditure-review.

              --------. 2004. 8PSME%FWFMPQNFOU3FQPSU.BLJOH4FSWJDFT8PSLGPS1PPS1FPQMF Washington, DC:
                     World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5986.

              --------. 2009a. Core Guidance: Preparing PERs for Human Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://
                     siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTPERGUIDE/Resources/PER-Core.pdf.

              --------. 2009b. Specific Guidance for Education: Preparing PERs for Human Development. Washington, DC:
                     World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTPERGUIDE/Resources/PER-Education.pdf.

              --------. 2011. World Bank Group Education Strategy 2020, Learning for All: Investing in People’s Knowledge and
                     Skills to Promote Development. Washington, DC: World Bank. http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/
                     EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTEDUCATION/0,,contentMDK:22474207~menuPK:282402~page
                     PK:210058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:282386,00.html.

              --------. 2012. Public Financial Management Reforms in Post-Conflict Countries: Synthesis Report.
                     Washington, DC: World Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/945231468340162289/
                     pdf/699640WP0P1206070023B0PFM0Web0Final.pdf.

              --------. 2013. What Matters Most for School Finance: A Framework Paper. SABER Working Paper Series 2,
                     Washington, DC: World Bank. http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/hdn/ed/saber/supporting_
                     doc/Background/FIN/Framework_School_Finance.pdf.

              --------. 2014. What Matters Most for Education Management Information Systems: A Framework Paper. SABER
                     Working Paper Series 7, Washington, DC: World Bank. http://wbgfiles.worldbank.org/documents/
                     hdn/ed/saber/supporting_doc/Background/EMIS/Framework_SABER-EMIS.pdf.

              --------. 2015. Education Sector Public Expenditure Tracking and Service Delivery Survey in Zambia.
                    Washington, DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/
                     handle/10986/23884/K8641.pdf?sequence=2&isAllowed=y.

              --------. 2017. World Development Report 2017: Governance and the Law. Washington, DC: World Bank.
                     http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2017.
218   Education Public Expenditure Review Guidelines


             Education Global Practice




      WORLDBANK.ORG
