ACRONYMS AND
ABBREVIATIONS
   ARDA    Agricultural and Rural Development Authority
    GDP    Gross Domestic Product
    GMB    Grain Marketing Board
     LAs   Local Authorities
  MoFED    Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
   NSSA    National Social Security Authority
    OPC    Office of the President and Cabinet
    RBZ    Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe
    SEPs   State-owned Enterprises and Parastatals
   SOEs    State Owned Enterprises
 ZAMCO     Zimbabwe Asset Management Company
   ZESA    Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority
  ZETDC    Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission and Distribution Company
 ZIMSTAT   Zimbabwe National Statistics Agency
 ZIMVAC    Zimbabwe Vulnerability Assessment Committee
  ZINWA    Zimbabwe National Water Authority
    ZPC    Zimbabwe Power Company




                                                                        i
                                       PREFACE

     The Zimbabwe Economic Update (ZEU) offers a World Bank perspective on recent economic
     developments in Zimbabwe and also undertakes evidence-based analysis on key areas of
     the Zimbabwean economy. This second edition explores the Zimbabwean public sector: local
     authorities and state-owned enterprises and parastatals and has significantly benefited from
     authorities’ input. Both in the preparation and review. The ZEU is intended to enhance ongoing
     policy debates to foster the country’s goals to increase growth, reduce poverty and lessen
     inequality. I would therefore like to thank the Government of Zimbabwe for their considerable
     input into this publication.

     Since the last ZEU, growth prospects have noticeably dimmed. Recent large public financing
     requirements have placed considerable pressure on the financial sector leading to liquidity
     shortages. Large areas of the economy have been affected, particularly, services and industry,
     although the ending of the drought has improved prospects of agriculture.

     Clearly, urgent reform of the public sector is essential to bring overall public finances on a
     sustainable footing. However, its size and rigidity makes this a difficult task. The problem is
     compounded by a large public debt burden, which has substantially raised the cost of credit.

     Tackling these twin issues requires a deep and extensive reform program. This could enable a
     rapid increase in capital and investment flows into the country. And rejuvenate the economy.

     In this regard, I strongly support initial Government actions to bring finances under control. In
     particular, implementing measures to rationalize the public sector wage bill, and reduce public
     expenditure pressures. A key next step would be to consolidate the fiscal accounts and strengthen
     oversight of state-owned enterprises.

     Sustaining this reform program will require broad multi-stakeholder consensus and steady political
     will. This is essential if we are to unlock Zimbabwe’s long-term growth potential, alleviate poverty,
     and expand economic opportunities for the country’s diverse and well-educated workforce.

     I look forward to engaging on these issues with the Government of Zimbabwe, the private sector,
     civil society, and the country’s other international development partners.

     Paul Noumba Um

     Country Director for Botswana, Lesotho, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia and Zimbabwe




ii
                                   Contents

            Acronyms and Abbreviations i
            Preface ii
            Contents iii
            Acknowledgements vi


            Executive Summary vii
            	   Outlook and Challenges ix


Chapter 1   Recent Economic Developments 1
      1.1   Growth and Poverty 1
            	   Agriculture 2
            	   Mining 2
            	   Manufacturing 3
            	   Services 3
            	   Poverty 3


      1.2   Fiscal Policy 4


      1.3   Monetary and Financial Sector Policy 6


      1.4   The Balance of Payments 8
            	   Outlook and Challenges 9


Chapter 2   Local Authorities 14
      2.1   Local Government 14
    2.1.1   	   Legal and Institutional Context 15


      2.2   LA Revenues and Expenditures 16
    2.2.1   Revenues 16
    2.2.2   Local Government Spending 20



      2.3   Fiscal Challenges 22




                                                     iii
           2.4   Policy Options 24


     Chapter 3   State-Owned Enterprises 26
           3.1   Introduction 26


           3.2   The Role of the SEPs in the Zimbabwean Economy 27


           3.3   SEP Financial Performance 29


           3.4   Fiscal Contributions and Risks from SEPs 31


           3.5   SEP Governance 33


           3.6   Policy Options 35


                 Figures
      Figure 1   Growth Rates and Investment-to-GDP Ratios, Zimbabwe and Selected Comparators, 2012-16 1
      Figure 2   Growth of the Mining Sector 3
      Figure 3   Growth and Poverty Rates, 2011-2016 (%) 4
      Figure 4   Total Public Debt Stock 5
      Figure 5   Key Fiscal Indicators, 2011-16 6
      Figure 6   Financial Sector Indicators, 2011-2016 7
      Figure 7   Balance of Payments 8
      Figure 8   Trends in LA Revenue by Source, 2011-2014 (US$ millions) 16
      Figure 9   Disaggregated Local Government Revenues (US$ millions) 18
     Figure 10   Cost Recovery among Water Utilities and Water-Service Coverage, All Urban Local Authorities,
                 2012-2015 Average 20
     Figure 11   Aggregate Budget of Selected Local Authorities by Expenditure Area, 2011-15 Total 20
     Figure 12   Revenue and Expenditure Trends among Local Authorities, 2011-14 (US$ millions) 21
     Figure 13   Local Authorities’ Fiscal Deficit 21
     Figure 14   Debts Across Local Authorities 23
     Figure 15   Salary Arrears, 2015 (US$ millions) 24
     Figure 16   SEPs Contribution to GDP by Sector (Average 2012-2014) 28
     Figure 17   SEPs Employment by Sector 28
     Figure 18   Aggregate SEPs Financial Balance 30
     Figure 19   SEPs Employment and Compensation 30
     Figure 20   Current Assets and Liabilities 31
     Figure 21   SEPs Net Contribution to the Treasury (Average 2011-2015) 32
     Figure 22   Explicit Contingent Liabilities by Sector 32
     Figure 23   Executive Compensation by Sector 34




iv
          Tables
Table 1   Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, Estimated and Projected, 2014-2019 12
Table 2   Distribution of Budget to Service Delivery Areas, (Selected Local Authorities % total) 22


          Boxes
  Box 1   A Consolidated Public Sector? 13
  Box 2   SOE Performance in the Electricity Sector 29


          Annexes
Annex A   Commercial SOEs included in the analysis in Chapter 3 36
Annex B   Jointly prepared by the Government of Zimbabwe and the World Bank (www.worldbank.org),
          Executive Summary 37
Annex C   46




                                                                                                      v
       ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

     This edition of the Zimbabwe Economic Update (ZEU) was prepared by a World
     Bank team led by Johannes “Han” Herderschee (Senior Country Economist), with
     contributions from Jason Hayman (Consultant), Marko Kwaramba (Economist)
     and Nyasha Munditi (Consultant). The team benefited from the valuable support
     provided by Camille Nuamah (Country Manager), Sebastien Dessus (Lead
     Economist and Program Leader) and Ivailo Izvorski (Acting Practice Manager).
     Paul Noumba Um (Country Director) provided overall guidance. The team
     is grateful for the comments received from peer reviewers Cecile Valadier
     (Senior Economist), Smriti Seth (Economist), and Kjetil Hansen (Senior Public
     Sector Specialist). Finally, the team would like to express its gratitude to Bruno
     Bonansea (Cartographer), who designed the map on the cover, Sean Lothrop
     (Consultant) who edited the report, Cybil Maradza (Consultant), who formatted
     the draft and prepared it for publication, and Farai Sekeramayi-Noble (Program
     Assistant), who supervised the finalization of the report.

     Chapters 2 and 3 of the ZEU summarize and elaborate on information first
     reported in Volumes 2 and 3 of the Zimbabwe Public Expenditure Review (PER)
     jointly prepared by the Government of Zimbabwe and World Bank staff. Mr. Z.R.
     Churu supervised the preparation of the PER series at the Ministry of Finance
     and Economic Development, while Senior Economists Johannes Herderschee
     and Leif Jensen led the World Bank team. Volume 2, “Local Government Service
     Delivery,” was prepared by a team consisting of Mr. Tatenda Mandeya and Mr.
     Alpha Nhamo (both Ministry of Local Government, Public Works and National
     Housing), Janine Mans (Consultant), Ngoni Mudege (Senior Water and Sanitation
     Specialist), and Marko Kwaramba (Economist). Volume 3 “State Enterprises
     and Parastatals” was prepared by a team consisting of Samuel Phiri (Ministry
     of Finance and Economic Development), Marko Kwaramba (Economist), and
     Consultants Nikeisha Russell, Sonny Mabheju, Norman Mukwakwami, Tawana
     Nyabeze, and Peter Rundell. The PER was completed in October 2016, and
     its macroeconomic indicators were updated on March 6, 2017. All volumes
     of the PER are available at the World Bank website (www.worldbank.org). The
     information in the ZEU is current as of June 1, 2017.




vi
   Executive Summary

Zimbabwe faces complex fiscal and macroeconomic challenges, and well-designed
policies will be vital to accelerate growth and poverty reduction. Government
debt to the banking sector increased dramatically since 2015 and contributed to
a protracted financial crisis that severely limited credit to the economy, negatively
affecting the private sector. Meanwhile, the drought experienced during the
2015/16 agricultural season reduced agricultural output and exacerbated rural
poverty. However, favorable rains received in 2016/17 are projected to boost
growth of the agricultural sector in 2017 and per capita output is projected to
increase this year.

The GDP growth rate fell from 1.4 percent in 2015 to just 0.7 percent in 2016,
continuing negative per capita income growth. Severe credit constraints have
caused a significant contraction in private demand. Per capita consumption fell
by some 5 percent and the investment-to-GDP ratio shrunk from a level that was
already well below the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. A fiscal expansion and an
increase in net exports partially offset the contraction in private demand. While a
drought caused a drop in agricultural production and hydroelectricity generation in
2016, mining grew strongly and output in the manufacturing, and services sectors
increased modestly. Consequently, economic growth remained positive on balance.

Slowing growth has disproportionately affected poor households. Rural areas
are home to 67 percent at least two-thirds of Zimbabwe’s population, including 79
percent of the poor and 92 percent of the extremely poor. The agriculture sector
remains the primary livelihood for many poor households, and a combination
of poor weather and financial shocks in 2016 adversely impacted vulnerable
households: the drought reduced the output of smallholder farms, while cash
shortages delayed payments to agricultural workers. By 2016 the number of people
experiencing food insecurity had increased to an estimated 2.8 million, or 17.5
percent of the country’s total population. This is estimated to fall to 2.2 million or
13.8% of the total population as food security improves in 2017.



The central government shifted to an expansionary fiscal stance in 2016,
resulting in the financial sector turmoil and crowding out credit to the private
sector. Slowing growth reduced public revenue, while emergency food imports,
the public distribution of agricultural inputs, payment of domestic arrears and a
burgeoning public-sector wage bill increased expenditures. The decision in 2016
to increase agriculture-related spending despite the decline in revenue and the
continued growth of the wage bill substantially widened the fiscal deficit. The
government’s fiscal position expanded by some 8 percentage points of GDP. The
banking sector bore the brunt of the government’s financing needs, which led to
liquidity shortages in the economy.




                                                                                         vii
                 Fiscal expansion in 2016 triggered a
             liquidity crunch and prompted banks to
                              limit cash withdrawals.
                                         Prior to 2016, the Zimbabwean central government maintained a prudent
                                         fiscal-policy stance, but other public institutions developed large financial
                                         imbalances. Zimbabwe’s public sector accounts for roughly 50 percent of GDP,
                                         yet the central government’s expenditures averaged about 25 percent of GDP
                                         during 2012-16. Statutory extra-budgetary funds, spending by local authorities
                                         (LAs), the operations of state-owned enterprises and parastatals (SEPs), user
                                         fees imposed by schools and medical facilities, and support from development
                                         partners account for over half of the Zimbabwean public sector and a quarter of
                                         the national economy.1


       ZIMBABWE’S                        The fragmentation of the public sector poses considerable fiscal challenges,
                                         which are exacerbated by the limited oversight of many public institutions
       PUBLIC SECTOR                     and parastatals. Oversight of extra-budgetary funds, LAs, and SEPs is largely
                                         limited to expenditure auditing. Delays in the publication of audited financial
       ACCOUNTS FOR                      reports prevents timely fiscal assessments of the consolidated public sector.
         ROUGHLY                         Chapters two and three of this Economic Update provide an indication of the



         50%
                                         scale of the government’s fiscal challenges, particularly those involving LAs and
                                         SEPs. Given the important role SEPs play in Zimbabwe’s economy, the government
                                         guarantees their debt, and the contingent liabilities generated by SEPs have
                                         increasingly strained the public finances. According to audited reports of State-
           OF ITS GDP                    owned Enterprises, as of end 2015 SEP debt guarantees accounted for US$ 2.1
                                         billion of Zimbabwe’s total public and publicly-guaranteed debt.

                                         Zimbabwe’s growing public debt burden and large, fragmented public sector
                                         continue to threaten fiscal sustainability. Zimbabwe’s total public debt stock
                                         has grown rapidly, reaching 70 percent of GDP in 2016. External debt, most of
                                         which is in arrears, accounts for two-thirds of the debt stock. With limited access
                                         to international capital markets, Zimbabwe has increasingly turned to domestic
                                         debt financing, largely through the banking system. The domestic financial sector
                                         covered most of the widening fiscal deficit in 2016, and as banks depleted their US
                                         dollar reserves, many were unable to accommodate withdrawals. Cash shortages
                                         developed in early 2016, forcing banks to limit both cash withdrawals and import
                                         payments. Severe liquidity constraints also increased premiums for cash payments.

                                         New bond notes introduced in November 2016 have eased liquidity shortages1
                                         but are unable to address the underlying macroeconomic imbalances.2 The
                                         bond notes have increased the cash supply, boosting liquidity and attenuating
                                         deflationary pressures. However, further issues of bond notes will need to be
                                         carefully monitored to contain inflationary pressures.



       1 This estimate is based on Central Government public finance data, audited reports of local authorities and state-owned
       enterprises, Zimstat Consumer Price Index and Balance of Payments data as Zimbabwe does not currently compile nor
       publish consolidated public sector accounts. It may over/under estimate the size of the consolidated public sector because
       of cross linkages between different parts of the state. For more detailed figures, see Zimbabwe Public Expenditure Review
       (2017), Government of Zimbabwe and World Bank. Donor funded projects as part of Official Development Assistance (ODA)
       are included in the public sector regardless of whether they are implemented by state bodies or through other mechanisms.
       2 As of May 10, 2017 the total value of bond notes in circulation reached US$140 million.




viii
The liquidity crisis contributed to a narrowing of the current account deficit.
While a decline in imports has narrowed the current-account deficit, Zimbabwe’s
external position remains precarious. A combination of tight credit conditions,
the inability of Zimbabwean banks to honor international payments, and import
restrictions caused imports to contract by about 14 percent. Meanwhile, exports
increased by about 2.4 percent, and the current-account deficit contracted by 6
percentage points to 4.1 percent of GDP in 2016.

Policies favoring exporters have facilitated the current account adjustment.
Exporters of selected manufactured goods and agricultural products (except
tobacco) have been able to retain their export earnings in US dollars, which
enables them to benefit from the depreciating value of the dollar-denominated
deposits in Zimbabwean banks. This policy has successfully encouraged certain
export sectors, but it reflects a tacit recognition that prices in Zimbabwe no
longer reflect international US-dollar prices. While some firms have been able to
increase exports to take advantage of this price differential, thus far this effect
remains modest.


Outlook and Challenges

The GDP growth rate is expected to recover to 2.8 percent in 2017, though medium-
term projections remain relatively modest. Favorable rains and a revitalized           ESTIMATED ARREARS
agriculture sector are expected to underpin GDP growth in 2017. However, the           OWED TO SELECTED
incomplete implementation of fiscal-adjustment policies and structural reforms,        MULTILATERAL CREDITORS:
and the possibility that a rising money supply will boost inflation, are likely to
dampen Zimbabwe’s medium-term growth outlook.

The clearance of external arrears could expand the government’s access to
                                                                                       Afdb:
international capital, but only notably so if sound fiscal management and structural   us$610 MILLION
reforms successfully restore fiscal and external sustainability. In October 2016,
Zimbabwe settled US$108 million in arrears to the IMF’s Poverty Reduction and
Growth Trust. The authorities are committed to expediting the clearance of arrears
to other multilateral creditors, including the African Development Bank (US$610
                                                                                       WORLD BANK:
million), the World Bank (US$1.2 billion), and the European Investment Bank            US$1.2 BILLION
(US$212 million). However, resorting to non-concessional lending to clear arrears
in a context of tight liquidity conditions and depleted international reserves
could add pressures to an already tight budgetary situation if not accompanied
by fiscal, monetary and investment reforms.                                            EUROPEAN
Zimbabwe’s long-term growth prospects are positive, but to restore fiscal
                                                                                       INVESTMENT BANK:
and debt sustainability the government must adopt policies that reduce the
country-risk premium in international capital markets. Despite the turbulence
                                                                                       US$212 MILLION
of recent years, Zimbabwe’s economic fundamentals remain strong: the country
has considerable human capital and a wealth of natural resources, and it continues
to spend more on education as a percentage of GDP than any other country in
Sub-Saharan Africa. A reduction in the country-risk premium would improve the
government’s access to affordable capital, enabling it to complete much-needed
infrastructure investments and revive its major industries.




                                                                                                                 ix
                                          CHAPTER 1
                                       R EC EN T E C O N O M IC DE V E LO PM E N TS ³
                                       1.1 Growth and Poverty
                                       Zimbabwe’s economy grew by 0.7 percent in 2016 despite the combined effect of
    THE GDP GROWTH RATE                the El Nino drought and domestic financial turmoil. The drought reduced agricultural
                                       output and increased food prices towards the end of the year, despite the government’s

    FELL TO                            efforts to boost production and stabilize prices. The public provision of agricultural
                                       inputs, the creation of food-for-work programs, and the establishment of price supports



    0.7%
                                       for staple foods accentuated the government’s expansionary fiscal-policy stance.
                                       Meanwhile, the government also increased spending on a cash basis to clear domestic
                                       arrears. The authorities financed much of the widening fiscal deficit by issuing Treasury
                                       bills purchased by commercial banks and a US$ 1 billion overdraft with the RBZ. As
    PERCENT IN 2016                    domestic borrowing reduced liquidity and crowded out credit to the private sector,
                                       demand fell, imports contracted sharply, and economic growth slowed (Figure 1). Good
                                       rains are projected to boost growth in 2017 but other sectors remain lackluster. To
                                       allow GDP growth to recover in 2017 and beyond, the authorities will need to improve
                                       public expenditure efficiency and ensure adequate liquidity in the financial sector.

                                       Economic Growth by Sector

                                       Growth slowed across almost all sectors in 2016. Manufacturing growth dropped
                                       modestly, hindering the expansion of the industrial sector, though renewed
                                       mining activity boosted output in the natural-resource sector. The drought
                                       reduced agricultural production and caused a sharp contraction in both the
                                       water sector and the hydropower-dependent electricity sector. Following a robust
                                       expansion from 2010-15, the service sector’s growth rate fell just to 1.7 percent.


              Figure 1: Growth Rates and Investment-to-GDP Ratios,
              Zimbabwe and Selected Comparators, 2012-16

                   A. Zimbabwe’s GDP growth rate has                            B. And private demand has contracted
                      fallen dramatically since 2012                                sharply over the past two years.




        Source: World Bank 2017 Global Economic Prospects and                 Source: IMF 2016 World Economic Outlook
       Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) data



    3 GDP data as revised by Zimstat in May 2017 are used in this report.




1
Agriculture

The drought caused the agricultural sector to contract for the second
consecutive year. Agricultural output fell by 5 percent in 2015 and by another                      AGRICULTURE
3.6 percent in 2016. Major production declines were observed in the cotton (-71
percent) and maize (-31 percent). However, tobacco showed modest growth
                                                                                                    FELL BY 3.6%
(1.8 percent) and production of beef went up substantially (13 percent) partly                      IN 2016 AFTER
because of destocking.
                                                                                                    A 5% DECLINE
To mitigate the drought’s impact on the agricultural sector, the government
launched the “command agriculture program”, expanded public food-for-work
                                                                                                    IN 2015
programs, distributed seed and fertilizer for the poor, and continued to use a
price floor on key crops such as maize. The newly introduced command agriculture
program provided farmers with inputs which are to be repaid by delivering grain
to the Grain Marketing Board at the end of the growing season. These policies are
projected to boost agricultural output in 2017. However, government intervention
is both expensive and inefficient—especially the use of price support, as floor
prices are set far higher than import competing prices.4 Favorable rains during
the 2016/17 agricultural season are expected to drive a robust recovery, and the
agricultural sector is projected to make a sizeable contribution to GDP growth
in 2017. Improving weather conditions will be complemented by the ongoing
suspension of import duties on some fertilizer products through end-2017, and
by the ongoing allocation of underutilized land managed by the parastatal ARDA
and other government agencies to experienced farmers.

Mining

After contracting in 2015, the mining sector grew by 8.2 percent in 2016.
Despite persistently low commodity prices and a difficult domestic economic
environment, mining output increased markedly in 2016. Sectoral growth was
driven by increases in platinum (19.4 percent) and gold (8.9 percent) production,
which together accounted for about half of the mining sector’s total output.
Artisanal gold production increased rapidly, due in part to the government’s
decision to provide a US$20 million loan facility to unregistered artisanal miners
and in part to the temporary reallocation of labor from the drought-stricken
agricultural sector to the mining sector. However, diamond production fell by
more than 25 percent, as the industry is currently transitioning from alluvial to
hard-rock mining. Moreover, the Zimbabwe Consolidated Diamond Company was
only able to operate two of the six concessions that it recently acquired, as its
claim on the other four concessions was challenged in court. Nevertheless, the
mining sector is expected to continue growing in 2017, mainly driven by gold




4 For example, the intervention price for maize is US$390 per ton, more than 50 percent above the import price of US$250.
The import price of maize may decline this year as other countries in Southern Africa also have an exceptionally good harvest.




                                                                                                                                 2
    and chrome production.

    Despite its strong performance, the mining sector will face major challenges over the medium term. The cost
    of doing business in the sector remains high due to an outdated capital stock, a difficult business climate, and
    high royalty rates relative to other countries. Significant investment will be required to improve productivity, lower
    costs, and sustain sectoral growth rates. The government’s commitment to the transparent, credible, and consistent
    application of its indigenization policy will remain crucial to attract and retain investment in the mining sector.


              Figure 2: Growth of the Mining Sector, 2012-16 (%)




                                                          Source: MoFED




    Manufacturing

    The manufacturing sector’s growth rate remained low at an estimated 0.3 percent in 2016. Growth remains low in
    spite of the fact that since mid-2016 the sector benefits from import restrictions on goods that compete with domestic
    production (Statutory Instrument 64, SI64). Following import protection capacity utilization increased as firms that
    serve the local market expanded production. However, the expansion of firms benefiting from import protection
    is limited by the size of the domestic market. On balance, the short-term benefit of SI64 was offset by continued
    closures of other firms. Exporting firms that could boost long-term growth lost competitiveness. Further, the sector
    continues to suffer from (i) escalating financing costs, (ii) a restrictive regulatory framework, and (iii) deteriorating
    infrastructure and an inadequate electricity supply. In this context, a combination of structural reforms and large-
    scale investment will be necessary for a sustained growth of manufacturing in 2017 and beyond.

    Services

    While finance has been among Zimbabwe’s best-performing sectors over the past five years, the recent
    liquidity crisis cut the overall growth rate of services to about 1.7 percent. Credit constraints also negatively
    impacted transport and communications and distribution, though rising tourist arrivals kept the growth rate for the
    hotels and restaurants sub-sector positive at 2.7 percent. Despite a turbulent economic environment, growth in the
    construction sector slipped only slightly to about 3.5 percent. However, public administrative services contracted by
    about 3 percent. The growth of the services sector will remain constrained in 2017 as liquidity shortages are projected
    to continue. Further, it may not be possible to meet the rapidly expanding demand for storage of agricultural products,
    possibly leading to deterioration in the value of stored products which would hold back growth.

    Poverty

    The drought and the liquidity crisis both exacerbated poverty. Contracting agricultural output disproportionately
    affected poor households, particularly in rural areas. The number of Zimbabweans in extreme poverty rose from
    2.3 million in 2014 to 2.6 million in 2015 and reached an estimated 2.8 million in 2016 (Figure 3C). However,
    this increase was less than previously predicted, as government intervention alleviated the impact of the drought
    on the poor. In 2017, extreme poverty is projected to return to its 2014 level as the agricultural sector recovers.




3
          Figure 3: Economic Growth and Poverty Rates, 2012-2016

       A. Contribution to GDP Growth at Market Prices (%)                                  B. Growth by Sector (%)




          C. Due in part to the government’s expansionary                       D. However, the contraction of GDP per capita
      fiscal policies, the number of people living in poverty is               observed since 2015 has reversed the declining
            well below the level of previous projections.                                 trend in the poverty rate.




                                          Note: 2016e and 2017e are World Bank staff estimates
                                          Source: MoFED, ZIMSTAT, and World Bank staff estimates




1.2 Fiscal Policy
After nearly a decade of fiscal prudence, the central government’s shift to an
expansionary fiscal stance in 2016 resulted in an economy-wide credit shortage
and liquidity crisis. Revenue and expenditure dynamics both contributed to the
                                                                                                           THE FISCAL DEFICIT
deterioration of the government’s fiscal position. As the economy weakened,
public revenue fell by 6.3 percent—the first such drop since 2009. Meanwhile,                              WIDENED
the public-sector wage bill continued to rise, and drought-response policies
drove a dramatic increase in total spending of around US$870 million, or 5.3                               TO OVER 9%
percent of GDP. In addition, the government started to issue Treasury bills to honor
outstanding domestic arrears accrued by the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ)
                                                                                                           OF GDP IN 2016
and several SEPs. The combined impact of falling revenues, rising expenditures
and the repayment of arrears widened the fiscal deficit to around 10 percent of
GDP in 2016. The government turned to the domestic banking sector to finance
the widening fiscal deficit, resulting in an acute credit and liquidity shortage.




                                                                                                                                4
    The public debt stock increased from US$9.4 billion (or 58 percent of GDP) in December 2015 to US$11.4 billion
    (or 70 percent of GDP) in 2016. In addition to the fiscal deficit, purchase of NPLs through the Zimbabwe Asset
    Management Company (ZAMCO) and the assumption of pre-2008 arrears in the fiscal accounts contributed to
    the increase in the debt stock (see below under financial sector issues). Domestic debt rose from US$2.3 billion
    to US$3.9 billion. Eighty percent of Zimbabwe’s domestic debt is held by commercial banks. Most public debt
    is short-term weakening the debt profile.


             Figure 4: Total Public Debt Stock




                                                       Source: MoFED




    The liquidity shortage has also highlighted the medium-term fiscal-policy challenges stemming from Zimbabwe’s
    large and complex public sector. Zimbabwe’s sizeable public-sector workforce and generous wages and benefits
    relative to the private sector have generated substantial personnel costs that crowd out priority spending on
    operations, maintenance, and poverty-reduction programs.5 The central government wage bill accounted for about
    90 percent of public revenue and 66 percent of public spending in 2016.

    Rising personnel costs have also constrained the finances of LAs and SEPs, reducing their ability to deliver public
    goods and services. As their expanding wage bills have reduced the fiscal space for other current and capital
    spending, LAs have increasingly turned to user fees and other forms of extra-budgetary own-source revenue, further
    expanding the size and complexity of the public sector. Meanwhile, rising wage costs have deepened operating
    losses among SEPs, which already suffer from structural inefficiencies and a difficult economic environment.

    The government will need to accelerate the implementation of structural reforms to restore fiscal
    sustainability while freeing resources for infrastructure investment and poverty-reduction programming.
    The government is currently designing measures to limit the growth of the wage bill and taking steps to improve
    the efficiency and accountability of SEPs. Accelerating growth and re-establishing sustainable fiscal dynamics
    will require integrating these efforts into a comprehensive reform program, which includes refocusing public
    spending on priority capital investment projects and social programs, improving the business environment
    through the transparent and consistent implementation of modern investment policies, and addressing the
    country’s debt burden and governance challenges.



    The central government wage bill is
    equivalent to 90% of public revenue
    and 66% of public spending.
    5 Government of Zimbabwe and World Bank (2017), Public Expenditure Review.




5
          Figure 5: Key Fiscal Indicators, 2012-16

    A. Zimbabwe’s fiscal deficit increased significantly in 2016,          B. Zimbabwe’s central government collects more
    and as a share of GDP it is now almost double the average                    revenue than most African countries
                      for Sub-Saharan Africa




             C. Indirect taxes dominate public revenue                 D. The wage bill, including pensions, consumes most public
                                                                             revenue, making fiscal adjustment more difficult




                         Source: MoFED, World Economic Outlook and the World Bank Public Expenditure Review




1.3 Monetary and Financial Sector Policy
In the wake of the liquidity shortage, credit to the private sector remains severely limited. In 2016, the
government borrowed the equivalent of roughly 11 percent of GDP to finance the fiscal deficit and to pay for
other commitments such as arrears. It raised the majority of this financing by an overdraft with the RBZ and by
issuing Treasury bills to the private sector. Most of the Treasury bills were eventually bought by commercial banks
at discounted rates. While this boosted the profitability of banks in the short term, the scale of the borrowing
resulted in liquidity shortages across the financial sector. In response, banks placed daily restrictions on cash
withdrawals, while the RBZ issued bond notes since November 28, 2016 and promoted the use of mobile
payments (“plastic money”).6 Nevertheless, net outflows of US dollars have continued.

The financial sector remains vulnerable to both systemic weaknesses and policy risks. Bank assets continue to
perform poorly, which coupled with balance-of-payments issues, operational inefficiencies and severe liquidity


6 Bond notes are issued by the RBZ and legal tender in Zimbabwe at par with the US dollar and serve as a five percent
export incentive.




                                                                                                                                    6
                                          restrictions have significantly reduced profitability of the financial sector. Moreover,
                                          the sector remains vulnerable to further economic shocks, despite authorities’ efforts
                                          to purchase NPLs through the Zimbabwe Asset Management Company (ZAMCO) until
                                          March 2017. Although capital adequacy levels have recovered to reasonable levels,
                                          assets are not sufficiently diversified with the financial sector particularly exposed
                                          to the public sector.

    Deflation eased from an               The domestic -interbank payment system continues to function, but Treasury bills
    average of -2.4%                      are heavily discounted relative to cash. Depositors are unable to fully access cash
    in 2015 to -1.6% in 2016              deposits. Bank lending is limited, and lending interest rates are high, while deposit
                                          interest rates are too low to compensate for the risks involved. As a result, credit to the
                                          private sector remains scarce, and reduced lending rates are only generally available
                                          to a limited number of customers with exceptionally strong credit ratings (Figure 6D).

                                          Year-on-year inflation turned positive in February 2017. Consumer prices began
                                          to increase in October 2016, driven by rising food prices and the appreciation of
                                          the South African rand against the US dollar. A well-functioning electronic payment
                                          system has increased liquidity, which was further bolstered by the introduction of
                                          bond notes in November 2016. As of May 10, 2017, the total value of bond notes
                                          in circulation was US$140 million.

              Figure 6: Financial Sector Indicators, 2012-2016


        A.The government issued Treasury bills to meet its payment         B. Commercial banks purchased these Treasury bills, significantly
          obligations, contributing to the growth of domestic debt            increasing the share of government paper on their balances


                  Total Domestic Debt Stock, 2012-2016




              C.The RBZ also directly lent to the government via
            its commercial bank balances, which caused reserve                     D. Government borrowing increased significantly from
                  backing to fall to 32% in December 2016.                       mid-2015 through 2016, crowding out private-sector credit




                                                                   Source: RBZ



7
1.4 The Balance of Payments
The liquidity shortages negatively affected the balance of payments. In 2016,
Zimbabwe experienced net outflows of portfolio investment and other long-term                         LIQUIDITY SHORTAGES
capital, excluding foreign direct investment. This represented a dramatic reversal                    SUPPRESSED IMPORTS
from the previous year, when Zimbabwe recorded a US$650 million inflow. By
end-2016, gross international reserves had fallen to US$310 million, or just over
                                                                                                      WHICH FELL BY 13.6%
2 weeks of import cover—an inadequate buffer against a contraction in net capital                     IN 2016
inflows equal to 5 percentage points of GDP. As investor confidence shrank and
capital inflows declined (Figure 7A) the current account adjusted (Figure 7D).

A decline in imports strengthened the current account balance, while exports
increased modestly. The liquidity shortages eroded the purchasing power of
importers, and goods imports fell by 13.6 percent between 2015 and 2016.
Credit constraints have also prevented importers from making regular payments,
causing an increase in the stock of private external arrears. Meanwhile, goods
exports grew by 2.4 percent in 2016, driven by rising output in the mining sector.
Data for the first quarter of 2017 suggest that this trend is continuing, though
not as dramatically as in 2016.


         Figure 7: Balance of Payments

                 A. Capital inflows declined by                                B. Imports fell as external financing
              two-thirds between 2014 and 2016                                     became increasingly scarce




                    C. Exports increased for                             D. The current-account deficit narrowed in 2016,
                   the first time since 2012                             dropping below the Sub-Saharan Africa average




                                        Source: IMF 2017 World Economic Outlook and RBZ




                                                                                                                            8
                              Outlook and Challenges
    KEY CHALLENGES INCLUDE:
                              While the GDP growth rate is expected to recover to 2.8 percent in 2017, several
    1
        REDUCING THE          important challenges threaten Zimbabwe’s medium-term outlook. As rainfall
        FISCAL DEFICIT        patterns return to normal, a revitalized agricultural sector is expected to underpin
                              GDP growth in 2017. However, the 2016 fiscal deficit has largely exhausted
                              the government’s access to financing and limited the resources available for
    2
        ATTRACTING            the 2017 budget and subsequent budgets. Domestic financial markets are too
        INVESTMENT ON         small to absorb the Government of Zimbabwe US$1 billion overdraft with the
        COMPETITIVE TERMS     RBZ. Replacing this overdraft with Treasury bills and a domestic bond would
                              further constrain the supply of credit to the private sector. Conversely, adding
                              to the overdraft to finance the 2017 budget will increase the money supply
    3   MANAGING              and intensify inflationary pressures, which to date have been largely contained
        INFLATIONARY          by administrative measures. Going forward, inflationary pressures and tighter
        PRESSURES             controls are projected to limit growth. Although structural reforms, including
                              improvements in the business climate, remain vital to Zimbabwe’s economic
    4   RESTORING FINANCIAL   development, in the short run they are not likely to fully offset the cost of foreign-
        SECTOR SOUNDNESS      exchange rationing. Critical fiscal adjustments and effective monetary policies
                              will be required to reduce inflation.

                              Economic reforms and clearance of external arrears could lower Zimbabwe’s
                              risk premium and expand its access to international capital. Fiscal adjustment
                              would reduce the government’s reliance on monetary financing of the deficit and
                              strengthen the financial sector. Similarly, structural reforms could help unlock
                              Zimbabwe’s agricultural and mining potential. Combining these reforms with the
                              settlement of external payment arrears would amplify their impact. In October
                              2016, Zimbabwe settled US$108 million in arrears to the IMF’s Poverty Reduction
                              and Growth Trust, but the country remains in arears to the African Development
                              Bank (US$610 million), the World Bank (US$1.2 billion), and the European
                              Investment Bank (US$212 million). The government’s Lima Proposal envisaged
                              settling these arrears, then rescheduling Paris Club bilateral debt while launching
                              a reform effort supported by an IMF financing program. Executing this plan would
                              greatly strengthen Zimbabwe’s fiscal position and improve its debt profile.

                              Zimbabwe’s long-term growth prospects are strong. Zimbabwe possesses
                              substantial human and natural resources, and it continues to spend more on
                              education as a share of GDP than any other country in Sub-Saharan Africa.
                              Continued growth in agriculture and mining could boost other sectors through



9
backward and forward linkages. Moreover, investors could leverage Zimbabwe’s
well-educated workforce to expand non-traditional service exports. Though
Zimbabwe’s infrastructure has deteriorated in recent years, a lower risk premium
on international credit could facilitate access to capital and help to revive
major industries.

While a good harvest is projected to boost GDP in 2017, sustaining robust
long-term growth will require addressing underlying fiscal and financial-sector
imbalances. A projected 20 percent rebound in agricultural output is expected
to push the GDP growth rate to 2.8 percent in 2017. The recovery of agriculture
will have positive spillover effects on other sectors, such as transportation, agro-
processing, and manufacturing. Growth in 2017 is expected to be positive in
per capita income terms, and positively impact on poor households. However,
the recovery will have a much more modest effect on the fiscal sector, with
public revenues growing only slightly. Meanwhile, it will take strong political
commitment to reduce expenditures in the medium-term. Consequently,
the resulting fiscal deficit will have to be primarily financed by the domestic
financial sector. The resulting US dollar liquidity shortages will slow growth in
the manufacturing and services sectors.

Given Zimbabwe’s ongoing fiscal challenges, liquidity shortages are expected to
continue for the foreseeable future, and exports are projected to grow modestly.       ADMINISTRATIVE
Despite the anticipated liquidity shortages, the domestic electronic payment
system is projected to continue to function effectively, allowing consumers            MEASURES MAY BE
and investors to access their bank deposits. However, inflows of cash deposits         CIRCUMVENTED BY A
into the banking system are unlikely to recover swiftly after a period in which
withdrawals were subject to quantitative restrictions. Export earnings will
                                                                                       PARALLEL MARKET
increase banking-system resources, but cash reserves will remain insufficient
to meet demand for cash withdrawals. RBZ guidelines will direct export earnings
to priority imports.

The current account deficit is projected to narrow further. A difficult investment
climate and the administrative allocation of export earnings have discouraged
investment and reduced capital inflows. Portfolio investment and long-term
capital inflows are unlikely to recover in absence of a major policy change. In
this context, the current-account deficit is projected to narrow, as exports and
current transfers will largely finance imports of goods and non-factor services. If
the government continues to adopt complex administrative measures to manage
foreign-exchange earnings, market-based pricing systems will also likely evolve,
and importers who are ineligible for an administrative allocation may resort to
these price-based systems in the parallel market.

The government is likely to continue to partially finance the fiscal deficit through
financial sector intermediation. Financing the budget through bonds and Treasury
bills would continue to crowd out lending to the private sector, while monetary
financing through the RBZ overdraft will further undermine private sector
confidence and may eventually boost inflation. Over the near term, inflation is
projected to remain contained, boosting fiscal revenues. While expenditures
will remain elevated, revenue growth will shrink the deficit and limit domestic
financing of the budget.




                                                                                                           10
                                     Sector Projections

                                     The agricultural sector is projected to return to its long-term growth trend
     Agriculture & mining            after 2017. Good rainfall in 2017 is expected to produce an unusually robust
     SHOULD GROW BUT                 maize harvest, but after 2017 agricultural output will continue to fluctuate around
     REMAIN VULNERABLE:              its long-term average growth rate. Moreover, the 2017 harvest is threatened
     manufacturing &                 by late rains in May, which caused flooding, as well as limited warehouse
                                     capacity and the risk of “army worm” infiltration. Sustained agricultural growth
     SERVICES REQUIRE                will require investment in irrigation infrastructure, improved inputs, and more
     MACRO ADJUSTMENTS               effective management. The authorities have liberalized some fertilizer inputs,
                                     and the Zimbabwe Asset Management Company has reallocated some land from
                                     commercial farmers who defaulted on their loans to contract farmers, whose
                                     management skills may boost output.

                                     The mining sector is expected to continue growing, but it will remain vulnerable
                                     to macroeconomic conditions. Gold production, which accounts for half of the
                                     mining sector’s foreign-exchange earnings, is expected to increase by 10 percent,
                                     and global gold prices are projected to remain broadly stable.7 However gold
                                     producers are not legally regarded as exporters and cannot hold nostro (foreign
                                     exchange-denominated) accounts, which leaves them particularly exposed to
                                     liquidity constrains. Platinum and nickel production are expected to remain stable,
                                     as are projected prices. Chrome and diamonds are expected to drive growth in the
                                     mining sector following the removal of an export ban on unprocessed chrome and
                                     the anticipated resolution of lawsuits that are keeping some diamond mines closed.

                                     The manufacturing sector requires investment and access to imports. Manufacturers
                                     have been protected from international competition since mid-2016 by administrative
                                     measures, but a sustained recovery will require investment and predictable access to
                                     capital- and intermediate-goods imports. In the absence of renewed capital inflows,
                                     investment in the manufacturing sector is projected to remain insufficient to trigger
                                     a recovery. Administrative management of liquidity shortages and the prioritization
                                     of certain imports further inhibits the recovery of the sector.

                                     The services sector is unlikely to resume its role as the engine of economic
                                     growth. The sector comprises a broad range of activities, some of which are
                                     projected to grow rapidly while other remain exposed. The new airport in Victoria
                                     Falls should continue to have a positive impact on growth and tourism, but it is
                                     too isolated to trigger a broader recovery in the services sector, which remains
                                     constrained by liquidity shortages and controls on import payments. In 2018,
                                     new regulations to revalue securities at their market price will expose the fragility
                                     of the banking sector.


                                     Risks and Opportunities
                                     The authorities are aware of the risk that the fiscal deficit poses to banking-
                                     sector liquidity. The Minister of Finance and Economic Development highlighted
                                     this issue in Parliament on April 6, 2017. However, in the absence of consolidated
                                     fiscal accounts and an integrated debt-management system, government financing
                                     requirements may continue to rise (Box 1).

                                     The use of administrative measures to manage fiscal and external imbalances
                                     could have unintended consequences. Administrative controls on import
                                     payments have helped narrow the current account deficit. These controls are
                                     designed to ensure that Zimbabwe’s limited foreign-exchange earnings finance
                                     priority imports, but a lack of transparency could undermine public confidence


     7 World Bank Group. 2017. Commodity Markets Outlook, April. World Bank, Washington, DC.


11
in this policy.

The authorities have an opportunity to combine macroeconomic management reform with measures to enhance
the business climate. In September 2015, the authorities began preparing legislation targeting key aspects of the
business climate. These draft laws, several of which have already been submitted to Parliament, will:


      Codify the President’s announcement of Zimbabwe’s Indigenization policies made on April 11, 2016,
 1
      providing greater predictability to foreign investors;


 2    Implement measures that allow for an efficient allocation and use of the most productive farmland in Zimbabwe
      including creation of an electronic registry of titles to land and other real property;


 3    Improve transparency in and access to public tenders by local companies;


 4    Establish a registry of movable assets that could be used as financial collateral;


 5    Streamline processes for declaring insolvency and liquidating assets;


 6    Modernize the judicial framework for settling commercial disputes;


 7    Improve the business climate by easing the regulatory burden associated with founding and administering
      firms and by strengthening protections for minority investors.

 8    Strengthen corporate governance and performance accountabilities in SEPs.




          Table 1: Selected Macroeconomic Indicators, Estimated and Projected, 2014-2019

                                                           2014         2015         2016         2017f        2018f    2019f

 Real GDP Growth, at constant market prices                 2.8          1.4           0.7          2.8          0.9     0.2
 Private Consumption                                        -4.9         7.8         -16.2          7.4         -1.3    -0.2
 Government Consumption                                    19.6          2.7          11.5         -2.3         -3.9    -1.8
 Gross Fixed Capital Investment                             8.4          4.7          21.2         -9.0         -2.8    -0.6
 Exports of Goods and Services                              -3.1         -5.5          2.3          2.2          2.1     3.3
 Imports of Goods and Services                              -8.4         13.7        -13.4         -0.1         -13.0   -4.1
 Real GDP Growth by sector                                  2.8          1.5           0.7          2.6          0.9     0.2
 Agriculture                                                25           -4.7         -3.7         20.0          3.0     2.5
 Industry                                                   -1.4         0.0           0.8          1.1          1.4     1.2
 Services                                                   1.3          3.9           1.7         -0.5          0.1    -0.9
 Inflation (private consumption deflator)                   -0.2         -2.4         -1.6          3.2          9.6     8.8
 Current-Account Balance (% of GDP)                        -16.9        -10.6         -4.7         -4.1         -1.0    -0.4
 Fiscal Balance on cash basis (% of GDP)                    -1.0         -2.3        -10.0         -7.0         -4.9    -4.7
 Debt (% of GDP)                                           51.6          55.6         70.2         73.3         72.2     71
 Primary Balance on cash basis (% of GDP)                   -0.7         -1.7         -9.2         -5.9         -3.5    -2.8

                  Note: These projections assume no change in Zimbabwe’s risk premium and access to capital inflows.
                                                           Source: MoFED




                                                                                                                                12
           Box 1: A Consolidated Public Sector?



     The public sector in Zimbabwe is estimated to account for roughly 50 percent of GDP (see footnote
     1 on page viii). This size of the public sector is very unusual in fast growing economies, as it generally
     crowds out private enterprises. The exceptions to this are several of the Nordic countries where the
     public sectors are highly efficient, and rarely fragmented.

     Central government revenues and expenditures only account for around half of the public sector and
     are used mainly to pay wages of a large civil service. Zimbabwe’s wage bill as a share of government
     revenues is more than double the average shares in SADC, sub-Saharan Africa, and low income countries.
     The remaining half of public spending is divided across a range of entities, including statutory extra-
     budgetary funds such as Zimbabwe National Road Authority, local authorities, state-owned enterprises
     and parastatals (SEPs), other extra-budgetary funds such as user fees at schools and medical facilities,
     and donor-funded projects.

     The Government, the Parliament and the public in general have had incomplete and piecemeal
     information with which to manage and hold accountable the public sector. Central government has
     published monthly and quarterly consolidated financial statements regularly since 2011 and audit
     reports have been submitted on time to Parliament since 2015. However, accounts of extra-budgetary
     funds, local authorities and SEPs have not been published in a timely manner. In many cases these
     have not been easily accessible even within government by different oversight entities.

     The fragmentation of resources makes it difficult to coordinate spending and policy implementation,
     and to ensure clear accountabilities. The combination of 27 line ministries, 107 SEPs, 95 local
     government units raises the likelihood of duplication or inconsistencies, if not coordinated through
     an effective spending accountability framework. Overlapping programs with their own structures/staff
     may be duplicating fixed administrative costs across government which limits their actual coverage and
     impact on the ground. Fragmentation also makes it difficult to ensure that resources are well-targeted,
     and may in fact exacerbate rather than address inequalities.

     Efforts are underway to consolidate information toward better accountability:

     •	   Since 2015, Government collates spending estimates from different sources, including donor-
          financed projects, in the Estimates Book of Expenditure (“Bluebook”) for information, but these are
          not yet consolidated into public sector accounts against which actual spending could be monitored.

     •	   The authorities are expanding coverage of the Integrated Financial Management Information
          System (IFMIS), which currently operates in all ministries and provincial capitals, to local authorities.

     •	   The Government is strengthening the link between the Human Resources Management Information
          System and the IFMIS to better monitor spending on the wage bill.

     •	   The State Enterprises Restructuring Agency has collected all the audited accounts for SEPs for the
          past five years and established a new website to make these accessible to the public.

     •	   The 2010 Audit Act expanded powers of Auditor General to local authorities, SEPs and foreign
          missions. In 2016, audit reports were submitted and considered by Parliament for 47 local
          authorities, 20 foreign missions, 80 miscellaneous funds and 84 SEPs.

     •	   The Public Accounts and other Committees in Parliament have received extensive training and
          capacity building to better review accounts and audits of public spending and Parliament has
          established a new Parliamentary Budget Office.




13
   CHAPTER 2
LOCAL AUTHORITIES




2.1 Introduction

Local authorities (LAs) deliver many vital public services in Zimbabwe, but
they face serious financial imbalances and capacity constraints. This chapter        LOCAL AUTHORITIES REVENUES
examines the role of LAs in the Zimbabwean public sector, with a focus on urban      HAVE STRUGGLED TO
councils. The analysis reveals key financial challenges that weaken the ability of   KEEP PACE WITH SERVICE
LAs to provide quality public services while undermining the fiscal stability of     DELIVERY NEEDS AND
the government as a whole.                                                           EXPENDITURE GROWTH
LA revenues are not commensurate with their administrative responsibilities.
LAs are responsible for a wide range of policy areas, including housing and
land management, local road networks, public lighting, solid waste disposal,
and public water and sanitation systems. LAs are financed by a combination of
central government transfers, various user fees, and proceeds from the sale of
local assets such as real estate. However, LA revenues are often insufficient to




                                                                                                                  14
                               meet their financial obligations, leading to mounting subnational debt burdens
                               and widening gaps in service delivery.

                               LA revenues are neither reliable nor sustainable. While the 2013 Constitution
                               mandates that the central government to share revenues with LAs, this provision
                               has not yet been implemented. LAs rely on user fees to cover the cost of public
                               service delivery, but these fees are approved by the central government or sectoral
                               regulators. Inadequate revenue potential is exacerbated by the limited capacity
                               of many LAs to collect revenues efficiently or manage their finances effectively.
                               Persistent financial imbalances have led many LAs to turn to one-off income
                               sources, such as sales of public land, and to unsustainable debt accumulation.

                               Personnel costs consume the largest share of LA budgets, leaving little room
                               for capital investment or spending on operations and maintenance. Since
                               2011, employment costs have represented, on average, over 40 percent of
                               total LA spending. During 2011-14, LA revenues fell while employment costs
                               increased. Administrative, financial, and management costs represent nearly a
                               quarter of all LA spending, and these costs are increasing relative to spending

     The majority of           on service delivery. An analysis of water supply, sewerage, and solid waste
                               disposal expenditures by eight LAs found low levels of spending on operations
     LOCAL AUTHORITIES RAISE   and maintenance, leading to a decline in service delivery over time.
     most of their revenues
     INTERNALLY                Going forward, LAs will need to strengthen their financial management
                               capacity. LAs must establish systems to better manage spending, control deficits
                               and debt levels, improve revenue collection, maintain hard wage-bill ceilings, and
                               ensure that adequate resources are available for priority nonwage expenditures.
                               Meanwhile, the central government must fully implement the Constitutional
                               provision mandating revenue-sharing with LAs.

                               2.1.1 Legal and Institutional Context

                               The Urban Councils Act and the Rural District Councils Act govern the
                               establishment of LAs in urban and rural areas. The Ministry of Local Government,
                               Public Works, and National Housing oversees urban councils, while the Ministry of
                               Rural Development and Preservation of National Cultural Heritage oversees rural
                               communities. These two ministries provide the legislative and policy framework
                               within which LAs operate. The Ministry of Finance and Economic Development
                               plays an important role in financing capital investments implemented by LAs.
                               The Local Government Board established under the Urban Councils Act approves
                               appointments and dismissals of senior local council members, and the Minister
                               is empowered to dissolve local councils and to dismiss councilors and mayors.
                               LAs also work with a range of civil-society organizations, including professional
                               networks, community groups, and resident associations.

                               The 2013 Constitution greatly expanded both the powers and responsibilities
                               of LAs. The Constitution authorized LAs to raise own-source revenues, subject to
                               the approval of the Minister of Local Government, and established a framework
                               for intergovernmental transfers. The Urban Councils Act allows urban councils,
                               with the consent of the Ministries of Local Government and Finance, to issue
                               stocks, bonds, bills, and other debt and equity instruments.




15
2.2 LA Revenues and Expenditures

2.2.1 Revenues                                                                          LA REVENUES ROSE BY
LAs receive some transfers from the central government, but user fees for
local services finance a large and growing share of local expenditures. While
the Constitution states that at least 5 percent of national revenues should be
                                                                                              60%
                                                                                        BETWEEN 2011 AND 2014
allocated to LAs, actual intergovernmental transfers do not always reach this
level. Most LAs now raise the majority of their own revenues internally through
various fees, levies, fines, permit and license charges, as well as property taxes,
and asset sales. LAs impose fees for services such as parking, sewerage, solid
waste disposal, and commercial/industrial and domestic water services. LAs also
charge user fees at local hospitals, clinics, schools, libraries, and other community
facilities. Some LAs raise funds through income-generating activities, and some
have access to loans and grants from external donors.

LA revenues rose from US$570 million (5.2 percent of GDP) in 2011 to just over
$800 million (6.4 percent of GDP) in 2014. Much of this increase came from
                                                                                        THE MAJORITY
                                                                                        OF THIS INCREASE CAME FROM
residential and industrial real-estate sales which grew by 75 percent, as land
prices have risen sharply in recent years. Rising land prices have also boosted         ESTATE SALES
property-tax revenue. In addition, revenue from fees, fines, and charges for            WHICH GREW BY 75%
permits and licenses rose by 37 percent between 2011 and 2014 (Figure 8).



         Figure 8: Trends in LA Revenue by Source, 2011-2014 (US$ millions)




                                       Source: Local Authorities and Auditor General




However, the growth of some revenue sources did not meet expectations. Tightening fiscal constraints at
the central level limited the flow of intergovernmental grants and investment transfers. The limited flow of
grants intensified pressure on LAs to increase their own-source revenue capacity, but challenging economic
circumstances and constraints on fees and rates limited their ability to do so. There is no system in place to
execute the Constitutionally-mandated transfer of revenues from the central government to LAs. The government
has not yet defined the formula or mechanism for revenue-sharing. In addition, most income-generating projects
run by LAs (such as farming activities and entertainment halls) failed to cover their operating expenses, and
these projects were often poorly managed and/or economically unviable.



                                                                                                                 16
     Most income-generating projects run
              by LAs failed to cover their
                    operating expenses.

          In 2009, the authority to license vehicles on behalf of the Ministry of Transport
          and Infrastructure Development — and to collect the associated fees—was
          transferred from LAs to Post Office and Savings Bank. Prior to the transfer the
          LAs received 10 percent of the license fees as payment for their services. In
          addition, Ministry disbursed a portion of its licensing revenue to LAs based on
          local traffic levels and road classes and condition. The loss of the 10 percent
          license fees was not compensated after the transfer of the collection of the fees.

          A debt write-off in 2013 was followed by a rapid increase in payment arrears
          for local services, as residents appear to be delaying payment in the hope of
          another write-off. In 2013, the Ministry of Local Government issued a directive
          requiring LAs to write off arrears owed by residential taxpayers. Residential tax
          revenue has since continued to underperform.

          Some LAs are also bound by restrictions on user fees. For instance, certain LAs
          are required to charge customers rates for water services that are only marginally
          higher than what Zimbabwe National Water Authority (ZINWA) charges the LAs for
          water supply. The inability of LAs to cover the cost of local services is particularly
          acute in low-income areas. To improve collection efficiency and reduce waste, about
          a third of Zimbabwe’s urban LAs are now piloting the use of prepaid water meters.




17
Ultimately, resource mobilization performance depends on LA’s revenue
structures and the strength of their local economies.8 For example, city
and town councils often depend primarily on revenue from asset sales,
followed by property taxes, while municipal councils and local boards
tend to rely on fees, fines, permits and licenses, with property taxes again
playing a secondary role (Figure 9).




          Figure 9: Disaggregated Local Government Revenues (US$ millions)

                         A. City Councils                                                 B. Municipalities




8 Urban councils classified according to status, structure, power, authority and resources. City Councils are the largest, followed
by Town Councils, Municipal Councils, and finally Local Boards.




                                                                                                                                      18
                           C. Town Councils                                                   D. Local Boards




                                              Source: Local Authorities and Auditor General




                                      Given the varied financial performance and management capacities across
     Higher cost recovery             LAs, there is inadequate legislative guidance to promote both equity and
     WOULD SUPPORT EXPANDED           efficiency in own-source revenue collection at the local level.9 The Ministry of

     COVERAGE OF                      Local Government has the authority to approve tariffs and has adopted a broad
                                      mandate to ensure local revenue generation is adequate. However, in practice
     WASTE COLLECTION,                the focus tends to be on achieving cost recovery for water and sewerage tariffs

     SEWERAGE AND                     applied to urban consumers. Data from a recent Service Level Benchmarking
                                      Survey suggest that greater cost recovery would enable LAs to provide better
     WATER SERVICES                   waste collection, sewerage, and water-service coverage (Figure 10).




     9 These include water utilities, solid-waste disposal services, residential and commercial sewerage, and other services
     provided by LAs under the Urban Councils Act and the Rural District Councils Act.




19
         Figure 10: Cost Recovery among Water Utilities and Water-Service Coverage,
         All Urban Local Authorities, 2012-2015 Average




                                 Source: Service Level Benchmarking Surveys, 2012-2015




2.2.2 Local Government Spending

Since 2013, LAs have assumed responsibility for an expanding range of public services. Administrative, finance,
and management costs represent the largest share of LA expenditures (Figure 11). Roads and related public works
make up the second largest share, though these costs have fallen in recent years due to the changes in vehicle-
licensing authority described above. Other large LA spending categories include water utilities and education
and health services. Transfers from the central government are unevenly distributed across expenditure areas.
For example, intergovernmental transfers fund mainly the health and education wage bill, while user fees tend
to cover administrative costs, maintenance, and capital investment.




         Figure 11: Aggregate Budget of Selected Local Authorities by Expenditure Area, 2011-15 Total


                                                                Administration, Finance & Management: 23.3%
                                                                Roads & Works: 17.2%
                                                                Water Provision: 15.5%
                                                                Health & Education: 11.2%
                                                                Police & Emergency Services: 8.5%
                                                                Housing & Public Buildings: 7.9%
                                                                Water Sanitation: 5%
                                                                Solid Waste & Environment Management: 4.9%
                                                                Welfare, Community Infrastructure & Parks: 3.9%
                                                                Income Generating Activities: 2.6%
                                      Source: Local Authorities and Auditor General




                                                                                                                  20
                                        From 2011 to 2014, rapidly rising personnel costs, administrative and interest
     from 2011 to 2014                  expenses caused LA expenditures to grow by 132 percent, from US$556 million to
     LOCAL AUTHORITIES’                 US$1.3 billion. Rising personnel costs have crowded out capital investment and
                                        nonwage recurrent expenditures, including spending on repairs and maintenance.
     EXPENDITURES                       Personnel costs dominate local government expenditures, accounting for an

     GREW BY                            average of over 40 percent of LA spending since 2011 (Figure 12), although the
                                        Ministry of Local Government has set a target ratio of 30:70 for personnel to



     132%
                                        non-personnel spending. From 2011 to 2014, just 7 percent of LA expenditures
                                        was devoted to repairs and maintenance, including spending on council roads
                                        and transportation-related services.10




              Figure 12: Revenue and Expenditure Trends among Local Authorities, 2011-14 (US$ millions)

              A. Local government expenditure and revenues                                       B. Expenditure trends




                                                 Source: Local Authorities and Auditor General




              Figure 13: Local Authorities’ Aggregate Fiscal Deficit

                       A. Percent of total revenue                                                B. Percent of GDP




                                                Source: Local Authorities and Auditor General




     10 LAs with capital expenditures below the recommended level include Bulawayo, Chegutu, Epworth, Gweru, Harare, Lupane,
     Marondera, Plumtree and Rusape. Together, these areas are home to over half of Zimbabwe’s urban population.




21
Persistent deficits are a threat to service delivery. Among selected LAs, spending
on service delivery—including health and education, roads and public works,
social welfare, and community infrastructure—declined between 2012 and
2015 (Table 2). The largest expenditure category is administrative, financial,
and management costs. The growth of this category is narrowing the resource
envelope for all other forms of spending.



         Table 2: Expenditures by Category, Selected Local Authorities, 2012-14 (%)


                                                                            Actual
                                                       2012           2013           2014     2015           Ave

 Administrative, Finance, and Management               21%             18%           29%      26%           23%
 Health and Education                                  13%             10%           12%      11%           11%
 Water Supply                                          12%             15%           19%      16%           15%
 Water Sanitation                                       4%             7%            3%        5%            5%
 Solid Waste and Environ. Management                    5%             6%            4%        4%            5%
 Roads and Works                                       24%             18%           11%      16%           17%
 Welfare, Community Infra., and Parks                   5%             3%            4%        3%            4%
 Housing and Public Buildings                           4%             13%           6%        6%            8%
 Income Generating Activities                           3%             2%            2%        3%            3%
 Police and Emergency Services                          9%             7%            10%       9%            8%
 TOTAL                                                100%            100%           100%     100%         100%

                                           Source: Ministry of Local Government



2.3 Fiscal Challenges

Expenditure growth among LAs has outpaced revenue growth, and small
intergovernmental transfers have exacerbated fiscal imbalances at the local level.
Central government debt to LAs reached US$36 million in March 2016. Moreover,
the central government’s control over changes in fees and tariff rates constrains
the ability of LAs to respond to financial shortfalls.

In addition to financial constraints, LAs face a range of other factors that limit
their ability to fulfill their mandates. These include: (i) an ongoing urbanization         THE AVERAGE DEBT
process that has strained the country’s ageing urban infrastructure;11 (ii) the 2008        OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES
cholera epidemic exposed the inadequate state of local water and sanitation
infrastructure; and (iii) hyperinflation and dollarization, which contributed to the
                                                                                            INCREASED BY
decline of intergovernmental transfers and loans for local investment. An annual
benchmarking survey found that just under half of participating urban LAs could
provide at least 15 hours of water service per day.
                                                                                            21.2%
                                                                                            FROM 2014 TO 2015
LAs face three major challenges, the first of which will be to improve service
provision despite inadequate funding for either capital investment or recurrent
expenditures. Local officials must frequently divert capital budgets to cover
recurrent expenditures, especially wages. Consequently, much of the local




11 In the wake of the cholera epidemic, the central government, LAs, and donors implemented emergency investments in
water and sanitation infrastructure. However, these investments were insufficient to meet the needs of the population.




                                                                                                                     22
                                        infrastructure stock is outdated and poorly maintained. Many LAs also lack the
                                        institutional capacity to deliver quality services across multiple sectors.

                                        The second challenge will be to manage a rising debt stock. LAs have
                                        accumulated large debts in recent years, as the aggregate LA fiscal deficit rose
                                        from 9.3 percent of total revenue in 2011 to 60.7 percent in 2014. City councils,
                                        and, to a lesser extent, municipalities, have run especially large deficits. The
                                        average LA debt stock increased by 21.2 percent between 2014 and 2015.
                                        The total LA debt burden reached an estimated US$555 million in 2015, or
                                        about 105 percent of total LA revenue (Figure 13).¹² LAs have financed their
                                        deficits primarily by taking out expensive loans from the financial sector, opening
                                        overdraft facilities, or in many cases running salary and payment arrears (Figure
                                        14). The rising debt burden has contributed to rising finance costs (Table 2) that
                                        drain resources away from service delivery.




              Figure 14: Debts Across Local Authorities

                                A. Cities                                                  B. Municipalities




                         2014               2015                                          2014           2015



                                C. Towns                                                    D. Local Boards




                         2014               2015                                          2014           2015
                                                   Source: Ministry of Local Government




     12 In the wake of the cholera epidemic, the central government, LAs, and donors implemented emergency investments in
     water and sanitation infrastructure. However, these investments were insufficient to meet the needs of the population.




23
The third challenge will be to cope with the end of exhaustible revenue
streams. Many LAs have supplemented their revenues by selling off public
assets. While this has helped cover financial gaps in the short run, it is inherently
unsustainable. In some cases, the sale of public assets has negatively affected
the ability of LAs to deliver services.


         Figure 15: Salary Arrears, 2015 (US$ millions)




                                           Source: Ministry of Local Government




2.4 Policy Options

Though the performance of LAs has improved since 2011, progress has been
slow. Efforts to improve the quality and quantity of services provided at the
local level are hindered by: large and growing fiscal deficits among LAs; a
steady increase in demand for local services without a commensurate increase
in resources; the low operational efficiency of most LAs; and weak governance
systems among some LAs




                                                                                        24
     P ol icy O p t i o n s t o a d d r e s s th e s e ch a lle n ge s in c lude :

     MINISTRY OF LOCAL           1    Reform the Intergovernmental Transfer System

     GOVERNMENT                 Revenue disparities among LAs reflect local economic differences, which are
     OBJECTIVES:                compounded by the inconsistent application of revenue rules. The authorities
                                could improve distributional equity by aligning intergovernmental transfers with
     - LIMIT PERSONNEL COSTS
                                local needs and revenue capabilities, particularly in areas with a large share of
     	 TO NO MORE THAN 30% OF
                                poor households.
     	 TOTAL SPENDING
     - REDUCE SUBNATIONAL
     	 DEBT LEVELS               2    Rationalize Personnel Costs

     - IMPROVE LOCAL
     	 PFM SYSTEMS              The Ministry of Local Government’s target for personnel spending (30 percent of total
                                spending) would be more useful if it were integrated into a broader effort to improve
     - STRENGTHEN REVENUE       public administration at the local level. As part of this effort, LAs should establish
     	CAPACITY                  systems to monitor recruitment, wages, benefits, and personnel performance.



                                 3    Control Subnational Debt Accumulation


                                LAs must tighten control over their fiscal deficits to maintain debt sustainability
                                and mitigate financial risks. To curtail excessive borrowing, the Ministry of Local
                                Government should consider implementing a “traffic-light system” similar to
                                that used in Colombia, which regulates the ability of LAs to assume debt based
                                on transparent, objective evaluation criteria.



                                 4    Improve Financial Management


                                Building the financial management capacity of LA staff could enhance expenditure
                                efficiency. A combination of staff training and institutional reform could enable LAs
                                to better manage resources and deploy them more effectively while maintaining
                                a sustainable financial stance.



                                 5    Strengthen the property tax policies and enforcement


                                Property taxes represent one-fifth of all LA revenue. However, many LAs lack
                                functional property-registration systems, while others lack complete and up-to-
                                date property valuations. Efforts to strengthen property registration and valuation
                                mechanisms could increase LA revenue.




25
   CHAPTER 3
State-Owned ENTERPRISES




3.1 Introduction

State-owned enterprises and parastatals (SEPs) play an important role in the
Zimbabwean economy, but their poor financial and operational performance
has limited their impact. In 1980, Zimbabwe had just 20 SEPs. Despite
privatization efforts undertaken since the 1990s, that number has since risen to   107 SEPs
107. Zimbabwean SEPs drive investment and job creation in key sectors, provide     OF WHICH 43 ARE
vital public services, and implement public policies. The analysis presented in
this section focuses on 38 of the 43 commercial state enterprises that operate
                                                                                   WHOLLY COMMERCIAL
on a cost-recovery or for-profit basis, most of which are active in the energy,
transportation, communications, and agricultural sectors.13




13 See Annex 1 for a list of the 38 commercial SEPs examined in this section.




                                                                                                       26
                            Most Zimbabwean SEPs operate at a loss and require public subsidies to remain
                            solvent—and some have accumulated significant tax arrears. Of the 38 SEPs
                            examined here, only five do not require public support. Expensive or unavailable
                            financing, low rates of revenue collection, and operational inefficiencies have
                            prevented some SEPs from covering their long-run marginal costs. Moreover, the
                            recent deterioration of the macroeconomic environment, combined with weak
                            SEP governance and oversight, has further undermined their performance.

                            SEPs are a major source of fiscal risks. The sector is a net drain on public
                            finances. Taxes and dividends paid by commercial SEPs have declined, SEP tax
                            liabilities have grown, transfers from the government to SEPs have increased
                            and the central government has accumulated some payment arrears to SEPs
                            that deliver public services. The absence of effective oversight has also allowed
                            SEPs to accumulate liabilities through extensive financial linkages and complex
                            cross-debts, which intensify systemic fiscal risks.

                            Although various institutions are responsible for SEP governance and
                            oversight, accountability and monitoring have been weak. SEPs have
                            traditionally reported to individual ministries in their respective sectors, while
                            agencies with broader mandates, such as the State Enterprises Restructuring
                            Agency, the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development (MoFED) and even
                            the Office of the President and Cabinet have not received adequate information
                            to provide broader oversight.

                            The government has prepared a new draft law on SEP corporate governance
                            and is taking steps to strengthen enforcement of reporting requirements.
                            Improving corporate governance, operations management, financial transparency,
                            and subsidy targeting among SEPs, while also containing personnel costs, would
                            limit the fiscal risks posed by SEPs, and enhance their contribution to the economy
                            as a whole.



                            3.2 The Role of SEPs in the Zimbabwean Economy

                            SEPs make a significant contribution to economic activity in Zimbabwe, but their
     SEPS REPRESENT ABOUT   relative economic importance has declined in recent years. Just 43 of Zimbabwe’s


        15.3%               107 SEPs are wholly commercial enterprises. Commercial SEPs are concentrated
                            in the energy, transportation, communications, and agricultural sectors, where
                            they both provide essential public services and implement government policies.
      OF ZIMBAWBE’S         Most noncommercial SEPs are regulators, research organizations, and tertiary
                            education institutions. Some SEPs combine regulatory and commercial functions,
         GDP AND...         which can create conflicts of interest and undermine performance incentives.
                            SEPs contribute to public revenue through taxes and dividends, but the net flows

          18%               today are negative.

                            SEPs represent about 14 percent of Zimbabwe’s GDP, with commercial SOEs
     OF PUBLIC SECTOR       contributing about 7.5 percent. SEPs’ combined share in GDP fell from an
        EMPLOYMENT          estimated 16.4 percent in 2009 to 12 percent in 2014, while the contribution
                            of solely commercial SEPs slid from 8.3 percent to 6.9 percent. SEPs in the energy
                            sector were the largest contributor to GDP at just over 3 percent, followed by
                            SEPs in the services and financial sectors, each of which represent just over 1
                            percent (Figure 16).




27
       Figure 16: SEPs’ Contribution to GDP by Sector, 2012-2014 Average (%)


       Mining: 0.9
                                                                                   Postal & Telecommunications: 0.7
       Media & Comm: 0.1
                                                                                                       Transport: 0.5
       Ind & Commerce: 0.1
                                                                                                      Agriculture: 0.3
       Health: 0.1

       Fin Services: 1.3
                                                                                                          Energy: 3.1


       Environment &
       Water: 0.3


                            Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff




SEPs accounted for 5 percent of formal employment and 18 percent of public
sector employment during 2011-14, but these shares have also fallen over time.
Zimbabwe’s SEPs employed an estimated 36,171 people in 2015, down 18 percent
from a peak of about 44,000 in 2011. The transportation sector remains the largest
employer, followed by the energy sector (Figure17). SEPs in the energy and mining
sectors maintained employment, even as total SEP employment has declined.



       Figure 17: SEP Employment by Sector




                            Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff




Many SEPs assist the central government in implementing social policies,
particularly those involved in the electricity, water, and agricultural sectors.
These policies include increasing service access and lowering costs for poor
households, stabilizing markets for small producers, and encouraging private
investment in certain sectors. The Grain Marketing Board (GMB) maintains a
strategic grain reserve, stabilizes grain prices, and finances the provision of inputs
to farmers. The Zimbabwe Electricity Supply Authority (ZESA) and the Zimbabwe
National Water Authority (ZINWA) provide access to affordable electricity, water
supply and sanitation. How these social policies are financed and targeted has an




                                                                                                                         28
                                       important impact on the long-term sustainability of the services that SEPs provide.
                                       For example, while ZESA and ZINWA receive public funds to expand coverage to
                                       affordable electricity and water services, these transfers plus their own-source
                                       revenues are not sufficient to cover their total costs, and both operate at a loss.



               Box 2: SOE Performance in the Electricity Sector



         ZESA dominates Zimbabwe’s electricity sector. Despite a recent increase in private-sector participation,
         ZESA still controls most of the country’s electricity generation and transmission capacity through
         its subsidiaries, the Zimbabwe Electricity and Transmission and Distribution Company (ZETDC) and
         Zimbabwe Power Company (ZPC).

         However, ZESA has been operating at a loss since 2012. ZESA has faced corporate governance
         challenges, including the lack of a board of directors and a performance agreement for its major
         subsidiary, the Zimbabwe Power Company, while a significant increase in personnel costs has crowded
         out spending in other areas.

         ZESA’s customers do not make timely payments for services, and they pay below-cost rates. The
         government’s 2013 decision to write off more than US$80 million in consumer arrears to ZESA further
         weakened its financial position, and by September 2016, consumer arrears had risen to US$987 million.
         Sectors with unpaid electricity bills included mining (US$52 million), manufacturing (US$210 million),
         and other commercial activities (US$436 million). In addition, domestic consumers owed US$294
         million, and farmers owed US$84 million. Moreover, Zimbabwe’s electricity tariffs remain below both
         ZESA’s long-run marginal cost levels and the regional average.14 Due to below-cost tariffs, ZESA incurred
         US$517 million in losses between 2009 and 2016.




     3.3 SEP Financial Performance

     Among most SEPs, gross expenditures have grown much faster than revenues, undermining their financial
     viability, with the notable exception of the energy sector. The 2013 Constitution requires SEPs to “conduct
     their operations so as to maintain commercial viability.” However, a difficult macroeconomic environment
     has depressed SEP revenues, while financing is constrained and rising interest rate cost have increased
     borrowing costs. Customer arrears are mounting, including arrears from the central and local governments
     and from other SEPs.

     The aggregate revenue of Zimbabwean SEPs averaged US$3.2 billion (or 22 percent of GDP) during 2011-
     15. Aggregate revenue peaked in 2013 and declined thereafter. SEPs in the energy sector generate half of
     total SEP revenue and have followed the same pattern. By contrast, revenues among SEPs in the finance and
     communications sectors grew steadily from 2011 to 2015, reflecting the strong overall performance of the
     Zimbabwean services sector.




     The Constitution requires SEPs to “conduct
     their operations so as to maintain
     commercial viability.”

     14 Tariffs are set at US$0.0986 per KWh, considerably below the regional average of US$0.14 per KWh.




29
          Figure 18: Aggregate SEP Financial Balances, 2011-15




                          Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff




Tariff policies and collection rates have an important impact on the financial
balances of SEPs. In some cases, below-cost tariffs are intended to support                         SEP EXPENDITURES
consumption among poor households, while in other cases financial losses are
due to operational inefficiencies. The 2013 cancellation of consumer payment
                                                                                                    ROSE BY ABOUT
arrears to ZINWA and ZESA’s subsidiary, the Zimbabwe Electricity Transmission
and Distribution Company (ZETDC), benefited both rich and poor households,
                                                                                                    5.9% PER YEAR
and it significantly reduced willingness to pay among customers. ZINWA’s stock
                                                                                                    DURING 2011 TO 2014
of customer arrears grew by 20 percent between 2011 to 2015, and ZETDC’s                            WHILE REVENUES GREW
increased by 51 percent. Meanwhile, the communications SEP TelOne, which
focused on strengthening collection, reduced its customer arrears by 17 percent.
                                                                                                    BY 2.9%
Total SEP expenditures rose by about 5.9 percent per year during 2011-14,
while annual revenues grew by just 2.9 percent. Aggregate annual expenditures
averaged US$3.5 billion during 2011-15. Personnel costs, which account for about
one-fifth of SEP spending, increased by an average 5.5 percent per year even as
SEP employment declined. Debt-service costs also increased by 6.1 percent.




         Figure 19: SEP Employment and Compensation




                          Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff




                                                                                                                          30
                                      These trends severely weakened the finances of commercial SEPs, as aggregate
     SEP LOSSES HAVE                  net losses (before comprehensive income) nearly doubled each year during
                                      2011-2014. Overall, commercial SEPs moved from close to the break-even
     PRACTICALLY DOUBLED              point in 2011 to reporting combined losses of just under US$340 million (or 2.1

     EACH YEAR                        percent of GDP) in 2015. Some sectors, such as agriculture and water, consistently
                                      register losses, while others, such as mining, have seen their profitability decline in
     DURING 2011 - 2014               recent years. Only the financial services and health sector SEPs have traditionally
                                      generated profits. In addition, the aggregate working capital position of SEPs is
     REACHING 2.1% of gdp             precarious. Twenty-five of the 38 reviewed commercial SEPs have become illiquid,
                                      with current liabilities exceeding current assets, and seven are insolvent. Finally,
                                      the state’s return on SEP assets has deteriorated from -0.2 percent in 2011 to -2.3
                                      percent in 2015.



               Figure 20: Current Assets and Liabilities




                                  Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff




                                       3.4 Fiscal Contributions and Risks from SEPs

                                       Large SEP financing gaps pose significant macroeconomic and fiscal risks. As
     TRANSFERS TO SEPS AVERAGED
                                       public enterprises, commercial SEPs are expected to contribute to government
     US$ 135 MILLION                   revenue in addition to advancing their policy objectives. SEP dividends accrue

     SEP TAXES AND                     to the Treasury, which is also implicitly responsible for SEP losses. Consequently,
                                       the poor performance of SEPs can create contingent liabilities that weaken the
     DIVIDENDS AMOUNTED                government’s fiscal position.
     TO US$ 50 MILLION
                                       SEPs’ overall net contribution to the Treasury is negative, as transfers from
                                       government exceed dividends and taxes paid. Public transfers to SEPs averaged
                                       US$135 million between 2011 and 2015, while SEP taxes and dividends amounted
                                       to just US$50 million. Dividends plummeted from US$73.4 million in 2011 to
                                       US$7.3 million in 2015, with only 4 of the 38 commercial SEPs paying into the
     85% OF GOVERNMENT                 Treasury. Annual SEP tax payments have been much more stable, averaging about
                                       US$20 million, but tax liabilities have more than doubled from US$32 million
     TRANSFERS ACCRUE                  in 2011 to US$69 million in 2015. These aggregate figures mask considerable
     TO ZINWA & GMB                    heterogeneity among SEPs, as a combined 85 percent of government transfers
                                       accrue only to ZINWA and GMB.




31
         Figure 21: SEPs Net Contribution to the Treasury (Average 2011-2015)




                                  Transfers                    Taxes                  Divdends
                             Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff



Meanwhile, contingent liabilities are mounting. Explicitly government-guaranteed
debt represents 90 percent of all quantified contingent liabilities of SEPs, while
implicitly guaranteed debt of strategically important SEPs make up the remaining
                                                                                                       CONTINGENT
10 percent. Infrastructure investment financed by external loans but guaranteed
by MoFED drove the accumulation of contingent liabilities, which rose from US$1.6
                                                                                                       LIABILITIES
billion in 2011 to an average of US$2.1 billion during 2014-15. Energy-sector SEP’s
were responsible for more than half of the growth of quantified contingent liabilities,
                                                                                                       REACHED 13%
and they currently hold 43 percent of the total stock, followed by communications-
sector SEPs, which hold about 25 percent (Figure 22). Transportation-sector SEPs
                                                                                                       OF GDP IN 2015
also experienced a sizeable increase in contingent liabilities during this period. In
addition to these quantified contingent liabilities, unquantified contingent liabilities
may exist through SEP performance offtake or other contractual obligations.


          Figure 22: Explicit Contingent Liabilities by Sector, 2011 and 2015




                             Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff




                                                                                                                        32
                                    Some SEP contingent liabilities have become public debt. Some liabilities have
                                    not been serviced by either the government or the relevant SEP since 2000 and
     THE PUBLIC DEBT                are now recorded as debt in the government accounts. Approximately US$1.1
     MANAGEMENT ACT                 billion of Zimbabwe’s external payment arrears to bilateral and multilateral
     (2015) PROVIDES FOR STRONGER   creditors stem from government-guaranteed SEP debt.
     OVERSIGHT OF SEP
     BORROWING AND                  Complex financial linkages and cross-debts between SEPs amplify fiscal risks
                                    and hinder reform efforts. During 2011-14, related-party loans payable exceeded
     GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES
                                    related-party loans receivable, indicating poor payment discipline between SEPs
                                    in terms of both accounts receivable and payable.

                                    The Public Debt Management Act, passed in December 2015, provides for
                                    stronger oversight of SEP borrowing and government guarantees, but its
                                    implementation procedures require further elaboration. Most outstanding
                                    guarantees were issued prior to the passage of this law.

                                    3.5 SEP Governance

                                    SEP oversight involves many institutional actors and requires significant
                                    coordination. Some commercial SEPs operate under the Companies Act,
                                    while others are governed by specific institutional legislation. Line ministries
                                    provide the overall policy direction for SEPs and appoint the boards of directors
                                    that oversee their management and operations. The boards of directors are
                                    responsible for appointing senior management, establishing organizational
                                    strategies, strengthening commercial and operational performance, and meeting
                                    appropriate accountability, transparency, and reporting standards. The Office of
                                    the President and Cabinet designs the overall corporate governance framework
                                    for SEPs, while MoFED is responsible for approving SEP budgets and borrowing
                                    and assessing their financial status. The State Enterprises Restructuring Agency
                                    coordinates the SEP reform program, and sectoral regulators approve tariffs and
                                    technical operating rules.

     EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION         Despite these extensive oversight structures, the governance of commercial

     AMONG SEPS                     SEPs has deteriorated over time. The appointment process for SEP leadership
                                    often fails to comply with basic corporate governance requirements, resulting in

     DOUBLED                        boards of directors that are not well equipped to manage their respective SEPs.
                                    Thirty percent of commercial SEPs have neither a board charter nor a code of
     BETWEEN 2011 - 2015            ethics. Numerous boards have had little training, and do not effectively manage
     DESPITE DETERIORATING          conflicts of interest. Some members sit on as many as seven different SEP boards.

     PERFORMANCE                    Executive compensation among SEPs doubled between 2011-15 despite
                                    their deteriorating financial and operational performance (Figure 23). Senior
                                    management generally set their own remuneration levels, in many cases ignoring
                                    statutory limits on compensation. CEO performance contracts are often based
                                    on inadequate data, and some CEOs bypass their board of directors entirely and
                                    report directly to the respective line ministry.




     30% of commercial SEPs have
     neither a board charter nor
     a code of ethics
33
         Figure 23: Executive Compensation by Sector




                          Source: Audited Financial Statements: Data compiled by World Bank Staff



A combination of poor SEP performance and weak oversight has prompted
ad hoc government interventions, which have further undermined the
                                                                                                    ZIMBABWE HAS ADOPTED
credibility of SEP governance. Many SEPs are locked in a vicious cycle in which                     A NATIONAL CODE OF
poor performance leads to government interventions, followed by inadequate                          CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
short-term oversight and weak compliance with corporate governance practices,                       BASED ON OECD STANDARDS
resulting in poor performance. Some SEP managers lack the capacity to implement                     WHICH COULD BE APPLIED
good-practice principles for corporate governance, and in many cases diminished                     TO SEPS
accountability has weakened expenditure discipline.

The government is working to improve corporate governance, administrative
oversight, and financial transparency among SEPs. In 2015, Zimbabwe adopted
a National Code of Corporate Governance based on OECD standards that reflects
international good practices. While compliance with this code is voluntary, the
government is currently considering a draft bill that would make many of its
provisions mandatory for SEPs. If enacted and adhered to, this new law should
enhance the transparency and performance of SEP operations.




                                                                                                                              34
     3.6 Policy Options

     Consolidating and clarifying institutional responsibilities for SEP oversight
     could strengthen monitoring and accountability. The government could even
     restructure the institutional framework for SEPs, designating a single entity to
     coordinate the SEP reform agenda. The government could also pilot a more
     centralized ownership approach for commercial SEPs as has been implemented
     in several other developed and developing countries.

     Reforming SEP management could enhance performance. Developing a
     comprehensive SEP policy with clear objectives for each SEP and enforcing
     corporate governance standards—including management selection processes,
     performance evaluation mechanisms, and reporting requirements—could
     strengthen the institutional and policy framework for the SEP sector. The
     authorities should align SEP management policies with principles of good
     corporate governance, including a comprehensive remuneration policy that links
     executive compensation to the financial performance of SEPs.

     Clarifying the financial relationships between the central government budget
     and SEPs, as well as relationships among SEPs, would improve transparency. SEP
     annual reports should include payments arrears, outstanding tax liabilities, and
     transfers from the central government. The central government’s budget should
     summarize this information and record bilateral transfers, cross-debts, and quasi-
     fiscal operations between SEPs. This would provide the basis for cleaning balance
     sheets without direct fiscal transfers. A cost-benefit assessment of social policies
     implemented through SEPs would shed light on their efficiency and impact on
     the public finances.

     Strengthening SEP reporting requirements provides the foundation for evidence-
     based policies. The authorities should insist that SEPs immediately begin
     publishing annual reports, strategic plans, and progress reports. Establishing a
     central database that systematically consolidates performance information could
     improve SEP management by allowing policymakers to rapidly identify emerging
     problems and take swift corrective action.




35
     ANNEX A
     Commercial SEPs included in the analysis in Chapter 3


             Company                         Sector                       Company                     Sector

Allied Timbers                              Agriculture       Transmedia Corporation                 Media and
                                                                                                   Communication
Agricultural Marketing Authority            Agriculture
                                                              Printflow                              Media and
Cold Storage Commission                     Agriculture                                            Communication


Agricultural and Rural Development          Agriculture       Zimpapers                              Media and
Authority                                                                                          Communication


Grain Marketing Board                       Agriculture       Zimbabwe Broadcasting Corporation      Media and
                                                                                                   Communication
Petrotrade                                    Energy
                                                              Minerals Marketing Corporation of        Mining
ZESA Enterprises                              Energy          Zimbabwe


National Oil Infrastructure Company of        Energy          Zimbabwe Mining Development              Mining
Zimbabwe                                                      Corporation


ZESA Holdings (Company not the                Energy          Hwange Colliery Company                  Mining
Group)
                                                              Powertel                                 Postal and
Zimbabwe Electricity and Transmission         Energy                                              Telecommunication
Company
                                                              Zimbabwe Posts                           Postal and
Zimbabwe Power Company                        Energy                                              Telecommunication


Zimbabwe National Water Authority          Environment        TelOne                                   Postal and
                                                                                                  Telecommunication
Small Medium and Enterprise              Financial Services
Development Corporation                                       NetOne                                   Postal and
                                                                                                  Telecommunication
People's Own Savings Bank                Financial Services
                                                              Road Management Services                Transport
Agricultural Bank of Zimbabwe            Financial Services
                                                              National Handling Service               Transport
Infrastructure Development Bank          Financial Services
Zimbabwe                                                      Zimbabwe United Passenger Company       Transport


National Social Security Authority       Financial Services   CMED                                    Transport


National Pharmaceutical Company               Health          Air Zimbabwe                            Transport


Industrial Development Corporation         Industry and       Civil Aviation Authority Zimbabwe       Transport
Zimbabwe Group                              Commerce
                                                              National Railways of Zimbabwe           Transport
New Ziana                                   Media and
                                          Communication




                                                                                                                   36
        ANNEX B
     ZIMBABWE PUBLIC EXPENDITURE REVIEW 2017
     Jointly prepared by the Government of Zimbabwe and the World Bank (www.worldbank.org), Executive Summary.


     Zimbabwe is at a critical juncture. After dollarization and favorable economic factors fueled a
     recovery during 2009-12, Zimbabwe today faces slowing growth, a financial crisis, increasingly
     erratic weather patterns and rising poverty and inequality. To help respond to these issues, the
     Government of Zimbabwe (GoZ) has sought to examine and ultimately better manage its public
     expenditures, with a view to ensuring public spending is effective, efficient, equitable, and well-
     targeted to the needs of its changing population, especially the poor.

     A joint product of the GoZ and World Bank, this Public Expenditure Review (PER) aims to inform
     GoZ’s efforts to reform and improve fiscal management. The report, which draws on government
     revenue and expenditure data from 2011 to 2016, seeks to provide a common evidentiary framework
     for collaboration between the GoZ and the World Bank, and stimulate debate on the nature and
     orientation of public spending among representatives of the GoZ, the private sector, and civil
     society. To be productive, such a debate should consider all public revenues and expenditures –
     irrespective of agency and how they are managed. To ensure a complete narrative, this PER reviews
     information on public sector expenditures of the central government, extra-budgetary funds, local
     authorities, State-owned Enterprises and Parastatals (SEPs), and development partners.

     In brief, this report argues that Zimbabwe’s ability to formulate and implement effective fiscal
     policy – a key function of government – is slipping away given the lack of robust controls over
     public finances, and the deferment of key policy choices on the role and structure of the state.
     Zimbabwe’s comparatively large public sector provides opportunities to boost investment and
     growth, but, absent strong controls and management, can become a stumbling block for economic
     development. Total government revenues and expenditures in Zimbabwe exceed 50 percent
     of GDP, which is comparable with public sectors in high-income European countries, further
     underscoring the importance of appropriate controls. The initial observations below help to
     elucidate this premise.

     Fiscal policy is a main power of government and more so under Zimbabwe’s dollarized economy.
     Governments apply their fiscal power to raise taxes and revenues, and finance goods and services
     in the public interest. In areas where public and private interests diverge and the private sector
     underprovides critical goods and services, governments use fiscal policy to finance and provide
     public services. Fiscal policy can be leveraged to achieve inclusivity and equity, though achieving
     such goals sustainably, requires balancing the needs of present and future generations. To promote
     sustainable growth and protect social welfare, fiscal policy must create an environment where
     private effort and investment can yield steady incomes for households. In addition, governments
     use fiscal policy to help stabilize macroeconomic fluctuations from exogenous shocks.

     But Zimbabwe’s fiscus today is not healthy. Past developments and choices made in difficult
     circumstances have created a bloated fiscus, which is difficult to maneuver, and may be
     inadvertently creating – rather than resolving – inequities. As such, Zimbabwe’s fiscus is severely
     limited as an effective tool for Government.

     Today, Zimbabwe has very little fiscal space to stimulate the economy amid slowing growth,
     despite the GoZ’s high effectiveness in raising taxes and revenues. Occupying about half of the
     economy, Zimbabwe’s state has become so unwieldly that it may impede rather than support
     households, families, communities, and firms to improve social welfare. Employment costs for
     public servants, who represent some two percent of the population, consume more than 20
     percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), while the state’s high domestic borrowing crowds out
     credit to the private sector, including large and small businesses. Overall public debt, including



37
international arrears, represents 79 percent of gross domestic product. Meanwhile, State-Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) and local governments continue to generate contingent liabilities for the
sovereign.

Today, Zimbabwe’s fiscus has limited flexibility to respond to economic and social challenges.
Public wages represent 87 percent of the central government revenue, and 40 percent of local
government expenditures and over 20 percent of total SOE expenditure, leaving little for Operations
and Maintenance (O&M) and capital investments. The state faces difficulties redirecting public
expenditure from government consumption to investments. Each new hire creates a long-term
liability, including pensions for government workers, yet Ministries, Departments, and Agencies
(MDAs) continue to demand more personnel without effective hiring and HR planning systems.
Despite limited flexibility, pressing concerns remain. Though school enrollment has increased,
many children still attend schools without adequate infrastructure and qualified teachers,
especially in Early Childhood Education (ECD). Limited O&M for facilities and infrastructure across
sectors has required expensive rehabilitation and reconstruction, increasing the costs of public
services. Moreover, such inefficiencies limit the quantity and quality of basic services that the
fiscus is able to finance for the public. 	

The state also faces difficulties in protecting the poorest households. The El Nino drought
revealed the extent to which social safety nets have deteriorated. In education, the Basic
Education Assistance Module (BEAM), which covers school fees for economically disadvantaged
children, has all but ceased to operate, and reports suggest that schools periodically turn away
vulnerable students. Though families contribute directly to public education through school fees,
this financing model may perpetuate rather than reduce inequities, as children from wealthier
families consistently reap better education outcomes than those from poorer households. Poor
households continue to defer medical care because of rising fees and charges needed to maintain
health facilities and services.

Finally, the state may have overstretched through its direct interventions and is no longer
supporting private sector development. Zimbabwe’s public sector has a long tradition of directly
participating in the market economy to support industrial development, as embodied in the long
list of Zimbabwean SEPs. Yet some functions of SEPs have not evolved, despite large structural
changes in the economy. Many SEPs are now a drag on the fiscus, even as the private sector has
filled gaps that SEPs left in the market. In other cases, the GoZ’s investment, tariff and subsidy
policies are not sufficiently coordinated to achieve desired impacts, while protecting state
revenues.

Nevertheless, the Zimbabwe state can leverage its strengths and emerging opportunities to
recover a healthy fiscus that can support growth and ensure the public good.

First, the institutional framework for control over central government public spending is
comparatively well developed but remains to be comprehensively applied. The 2013 Constitution
re-affirmed the principles of good stewardship by the state at all levels. Efforts are underway to
modernize and update legal and regulatory instruments for Public Financial Management (PFM),
public procurement, and external audit in line with these principles. Authorities will need to
extend and implement these principles at the local level and within SEPs.

Second, Zimbabwe’s ability to raise taxes and revenues is proven, and citizens and firms are
willing to contribute to the exchequer and pay for public services. Yet the GoZ should work to
ensure current approaches for mobilizing resources, including private fees, are progressive, and
transfers and subsidies support equitable development. In addition, the state must refrain from
crowding out the private sector. Fortunately, innovations in financing mechanisms, such as results-
based financing (RBF) of rural health clinics and the Harmonized Social Cash Transfer Program
(HSCT), have potential to rapidly improve service delivery and outcomes. Zimbabwe’s private
sector is also willing to partner on financing and providing infrastructure and services, but these
arrangements must be scrutinized and transparent to protect the public interest.




                                                                                                  38
     Finally, the authorities’ plan to fully re-engage with the international financial system should
     increase access to both development financing and private investment flows. In October 2015,
     the GoZ submitted a proposal to clear its arrears to the World Bank, the International Monetary
     Fund (IMF) and the African Development Bank (AfDB), and to reschedule bilateral debts to Paris
     Club members. In October 2016, the GoZ subsequently cleared IMF arrears. The settlement process
     is expected to expand Zimbabwe’s access to international resources, including funding from the
     World Bank and the AfDB.

     Seizing these opportunities will require the GoZ and the country to confront policy questions that
     have been deferred for some time. These include questions about: (i) whether and how the size
     and role of the state might evolve to respond to new economic realities; (ii) the division of labor
     across all state arms for financing and equitable service delivery; and (iii) the balance between
     promoting private sector development, preserving benefits of public servants, and protecting the
     poor. Zimbabwe would benefit most from a fiscus based on deliberate national choices informed
     by a broad, government-led debate on such questions, rather than one that evolves unevenly
     responding to fluctuating challenges, shifting interests, and entrenched positions.

     As such, this PER reviews the options facing the Zimbabwe fiscus in terms of: (a) challenges;
     (b) capacities; and (c) choices. Past policy choices have gradually limited the GoZ’s control over
     the fiscus. Renewed control of the public sector will allow the GoZ to effectively implement
     public policy options. To effectively implement these policy choices, Zimbabwe will need to
     ensure strong coordination among policy makers, and transparency and accountability.


     The Macroeconomic and Fiscal Context
     Zimbabwe is suffering from declining growth and serious macroeconomic challenges, including
     a financial crisis. Zimbabwe adopted a multi-currency regime in early 2009, with the US dollar
     as reference currency, which effectively dollarized the economy. From 2009 to 2012, Zimbabwe
     achieved high economic growth, partly due to the stabilization effort, high commodity prices, and
     an unfettered credit boom. Yet since 2012, economic growth has fallen as the commodity super-
     cycle ended, the South African Rand depreciated, and credit contracted following a sharp rise in
     Non-Performing Loans (NPLs) and capital inflows contracted. Zimbabwe has taken steps to improve
     its business climate, but continues to face low credit for businesses and consumers, acute cash
     shortages in banks, and a severe drought hurting agriculture production and rural incomes. As a
     result, per capita GDP has fallen by two percentage points in 2016 and poverty has also increased.

     Macroeconomic and fiscal policy options to stimulate the economy have narrowed during the
     review period. As growth decelerated since 2012, pressures intensified to use macroeconomic
     and fiscal policies to buttress growth, but the GoZ has increasingly exhausted instruments to
     implement fiscal policy. During the high-growth years after adopting the multi-currency regime in
     2009, Zimbabwe did not adopt a counter cyclical fiscal policy that would have helped the GoZ to
     manage growth over the long-term, thus few reserves were accumulated.

     As Zimbabwe remains in arrears to external creditors, the GoZ has tapped domestic capital
     markets to finance its budget, which has reduced liquidity and exacerbated cash shortages.
     During 2016, the GoZ rapidly expanded its use of Treasury bills to cover pre-existing arrears to
     the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe (RBZ) and other liabilities, which has limited scope for further
     domestic financing of the budget deficit. In parallel, the GoZ’s practice of using commercial banks
     to finance the public budget has destabilized the banking system and constrained liquidity, as
     evident in sharp limits on cash withdrawals from bank deposits, and irregular payment of imports.

     The financial crisis is linked to the fiscal situation and a successful resolution of the crisis will
     require very strong fiscal policy credibility. This means addressing the current fiscal imbalances
     and making the system much more transparent to assure depositors and investors.




39
Structural impediments, including weak investor protection and uncertain land tenure arrangements,
continue to deter capital inflows. The World Bank Doing Business Indicators for 2017 rank Zimbabwe
as 161 out of 190 countries, with similar rankings from other classifications. Without capital inflows,
Zimbabwe has seen a rapid contraction in imports and a narrowing in the current account deficit.

Zimbabwe faces deeper challenges when considering the consolidated public sector. Since
public sector wages consume most central government resources, non-wage expenditures were
increasingly paid by user fees and debt of SOEs and local governments. Zimbabwe’s public sector
deficit expanded even during the period of high growth, so the fiscus now has limited resources
to address the deceleration.



KEY CHALLENGES
          Government’s gross expenditures as a share of GDP, when considering all funding
          sources, has rapidly grown to the level of some high-income countries. Zimbabwe’s
          central government revenue-to-GDP ratio of 27 percent from 2011 to 2015 was
          comparable to those of most regional peers, and the country leads peers in collection
          of Value-added Taxes (VAT).15 The revenues of central government, including statutory
          extra-budgetary funds, are complemented by other sources: local government revenues
          of 5.6 percent of GDP; official development aid estimated at 8.4 percent of GDP;
          statutory revenues mobilized and spent at source of about six percent of GDP; and SEP
          revenues – unconsolidated estimates of which are 29 percent of GDP. Zimbabwe’s lack of
          consolidated public accounts makes it difficult to determine the full size of Government,
          but a conservative estimate suggests the public sector commands resources of about 50
          percent of GDP. Such a level is comparable to high-income European countries, which have
          achieved commensurate levels of government performance, suggesting that Zimbabwe
          still is under-performing for its size.

          While a large state may create many important opportunities, the difficulties to
          prioritize, monitor, account and coordinate can ultimately limit the government’s
          ability to support economic development and sustain gains in social welfare. States like
          Zimbabwe must be able to effectively coordinate, prioritize, monitor, and account for all
          revenue and expenditure, or decisions on policies and programs risk constraining economic
          development and social welfare. Loss of control over expenditure can translate into
          accumulation of arrears, debt, and contingent liabilities, and force disorderly adjustments,
          which may hinder or even reverse the impact of well-intentioned public policies. A state
          that is too large may also inadvertently crowd out personal and private efforts to create
          value, and create its own dependency syndrome among households and firms. Such a
          state may enter a vicious cycle similar to Zimbabwe’s experience during 2007-08.

          Though Zimbabwe has taken steps to better fiduciary controls and monitor spending,
          further gains are stymied by inadequate reporting and coverage of the PFM system.
          Zimbabwe has improved the availability of expenditure reports for decision making by
          rebooting the Integrated Financial Management Information System (IFMIS), which covers
          central government accounting, but still has limited coverage. For instance, no interfaces
          are yet in place between the IFMIS and the public service human resource management
          information system, and the local government and parastatal accounting systems. There
          are limited controls over the quality of spending and core controls on wages and staffing
          numbers are insufficient. In addition, Local Authorities have varying capacity to report
          on their finances: some implement International Public Sector Accounting Standards
          (IPSAS), while others have difficulties preparing basic monthly and annual financial


15 The increased emphasis on indirect taxation may raise vertical equity concerns in the future.




                                                                                                      40
     statements. Zimbabwe has just recently started to estimate information on the fiscal
     role of SEPs, and regularly collect consolidated financial, performance and debt data.
     To accurately determine the size of Zimbabwe’s consolidated public sector accounts,
     officials must integrate the PFM systems of central government, local authorities, SEPs,
     and development partners.

     Zimbabwe faces other difficulties in accounting for public expenditures, especially as
     public services are increasingly funded outside the remit of the Parliament’s budget
     process, where oversight and coordination is weak. Budget transfers, which make up
     about 20 percent of the central government budget, are allocated outside the overall
     budget prioritization framework. By dollar value, half of these transfers support recurrent
     costs in SEPs, universities, and other institutions. But Zimbabwe does not have a clear
     mechanism for monitoring or controlling explicit budget guarantees to SEPs. In addition,
     multiple institutions oversee SEPs, but they lack clearly demarcated roles, which has
     allowed SEPs to build up complex mutual debt, which contributes to systemic fiscal risk.
     Local governments face increasing deficits partly because central government transfers
     and local revenues have not kept pace with their greater mandates for service delivery.
     Splitting the oversight of urban and rural local authorities into two different ministries
     requires strong coordination to avoid spending overlaps and duplications, and ensure a
     consistent policy on fees, charges and tariffs

     Zimbabwe’s allocation of public sector resources has evolved to be neither effective,
     efficient, nor equitable. As mentioned, recurrent expenditure, particularly the public
     sector wage bill, has crowded out expenditures for O&M and capital investments.
     Despite the GoZ’s commitment to channel at least 30 percent of expenditures to capital
     development, capital expenditure as a percent of budget fell from 15 to eight percent
     between 2011 and in 2015 – exacerbated by weak budget execution as low as one
     percent in some categories. Zimbabwe’s social protection system once a model in terms
     of coverage, no longer meets the needs of its population.

     Spending on personnel has increased dramatically in recent years, driven by the
     growing number and remuneration of public employees. The wage bill dominated
     the growth of public expenditures from 2011 to 2015. Today, Zimbabwe’s central
     government personnel-related expenditures are unsustainable, reaching 22 percent of
     GDP, 82 percent of total current expenditure, and 87 percent of total domestic revenue
     in 2015. In key service areas, such as basic education, employment costs represent
     98 percent of line ministries’ budget, which has left little to fund pressing capital
     and program-related needs of schools. Within employment costs, allowances such as
     pensions have grown at rates significantly higher than government salaries. Zimbabwe’s
     pension costs of four percent of GDP outstrip those of African middle income countries,
     and are driven by comparatively high government subsidization, and very low employee
     contributions.

     Local governments and SEPs face high and rising employment costs, and some SEPs have
     accumulated arrears for salary payments. In SEPs, employment costs rose from 2011
     to 2014 and constituted 22 percent of SEP expenditures in 2014, despite employment
     numbers declining somewhat. In SEPs, Board costs and remuneration to key management
     staff increased by 35 percent from 2011 to 2014, though some enterprises accumulated
     arrears for paying the salaries of rank-and-file staff. In local governments, employment
     costs rose rapidly to reach 40 percent of total spending in 2015, while administrative,
     finance and management costs (not directly linked to service delivery) rose to 26 percent.

     The high costs of public sector employment raise issues about equity, given the wage
     gaps between the public and private sectors, and low funding of social services. For
     example, civil servants make up only 1.6 percent of the population, but consume more than
     20 percent of GDP. Even after taking into account that civil servants support their families,
     their benefits are significantly above average. Real wages have fallen in the private and



41
        informal sectors as firms and workers adjust to be competitive in a dollarized economy,
        but real wages in the public sector have risen (i.e., nominal wages remained flat, but in
        a deflationary environment). Zimbabwe spends almost five percent of its GDP on social
        protection, but most expenditures do not benefit the poor. Two-thirds of social protection
        spending is for civil service pensions. Expenditure on social safety nets to reach the
        extreme poor, who represent 22 percent of the population, has fallen, reaching only 0.72
        percent of GDP in 2015. Skewed deployment of personnel also raises equity questions.
        For instance, Zimbabwe’s ratio of 1.66 in spending per capita between secondary and
        primary education far exceeds the OECD country average, despite secondary schools’
        already benefiting from a much lower pupil-to-teacher ratio. Inequities extend across
        the education sector, as secondary and urban schools tend to be better resourced than
        primary, ECD, and rural schools.

        To compensate for the lack of resources for non-wage expenses, the GoZ has expanded
        the use of user fees and charges, creating regressive financing of some basic services.
        MoPSE’s own funding for education is progressive (i.e., weighted toward the poor). But
        the collection of revenue from private fees is skewing resources in a highly regressive
        manner. As already noted, growing mandates of local governments to provide services
        have not been accompanied by increases in targeted transfers, which complicates an
        already difficult situation. Without appropriate mechanisms to equalize financing of basic
        services, Zimbabwe could find itself reversing recent gains in improving equity.

        Zimbabwe’s complex government interventions and vague or conflicting policy
        objectives on user fees, tariffs, subsidies, and transfers across government also raises
        concerns about equity and sustainability. For instance, the inconsistent decision to
        impose fees in all schools, while not financing the BEAM, but funding teacher salaries
        in private schools, left many vulnerable children at risk, and transferred benefits to less
        poor households. In addition, Zimbabwe supports a highly varied, diffuse mix of social
        safety nets interventions, bucking the trend of many African countries toward backing
        single flagship interventions. For SEPs, Zimbabwe’s complex mix of below-cost recovery
        tariffs, debt guarantees and write-offs, central government arrears and transfers, quasi-
        fiscal activities, and web of inter-SEP debts, make it all but impossible to clearly unravel
        the benefits of SEPs to households and the economy. Complexity in the SEP realm
        also reveals fiscal and economic risks. Representing 26 percent of GDP, most SEPs are
        accumulating losses, losing equity, and accumulating short term debt. Profits (before
        comprehensive income) were negative from 2011 to 2014, and explicit contingent
        liabilities represented 13 percent of GDP in 2014. Most enterprises are illiquid, and just
        under one-fifth are insolvent.



Recommendations
Building on Zimbabwe’s institutional heritage and renewal in the 2013 Constitution, this PER
presents recommendations in each of its chapters that could be implemented in the short to
medium-term to address the challenges noted above. These have been summarized under six
consolidated headings below:

Controlling the wage bill

Besides the step already taken by the GoZ, which estimates suggest will save about 1.2 percent
of GDP (in full fiscal year impact), the GoZ might undertake the following measures, which could
imply short-term savings of an additional one to three percent of GDP:

•	   Continue the freeze on personnel and wage increases.




                                                                                                   42
     •	   Continue to implement recommendations of the 2015 public employment audit, which call
          for eliminating staff duplications and redundancies; reviewing leave policies; rationalizing
          posts; and reducing employment cost obligations to grant-in-aid institutions, and top-ups to
          teachers in private schools.

     •	   Adjusting personnel allowances (e.g., removing accommodation and transport from the “13th
          cheque”).

     •	   Increasing public employee pension contributions.

     •	   Strengthen wage controls, mandate reviews of promotions, and establish clear rules for
          contract workers.

     •	   Establish specific short- and medium-term targets for the wage bill and employment numbers,
          including spending as a share of public expenditures.

     •	   Integrate the personnel management system with the IFMIS, and consolidate the mandate
          for all personnel-related expenditures for the civil service, including pensions.

     •	   Improve employment planning and budgeting in all MDAs, Local Governments, and SEPs,
          including undertaking a review of ‘service levels’ (i.e., the number of staff required to
          deliver a particular service, or to support the economic and general administrative
          functions of government).

     •	   Define a remuneration policy for SEPs, and a mechanism for enforcement.

     •	   Systematize and improve performance contracting for SEPs’ Boards and CEOs.

     •	   Convert salary arrears to debt and establish a payment plan.


     Effective planning and budgeting

     •	   Include all budget and externally-funded activities in the RBB framework and in the budget
          bill with a view to enhancing Parliamentary oversight.

     •	   Ensure the RBB framework is supported by a thorough review of fragmentation and duplication
          in program areas.

     •	   Ensure that all new policies and strategies are effectively costed in terms of financial and
          human resources before approval.

     •	   Strengthen the medium term planning of expenditure levels and composition to inform
          medium term priorities.

     •	   Establish budget floors for key policy priorities, such as social service delivery and the capital
          development budget.

     •	   Apply RBB solutions and performance measurement and management systems in local
          government


     Improving PFM practices

     •	   Strengthen central government commitment and expenditure controls by rolling out the budget
          and commitment modules of the IFMIS, and establishing a robust internal audit function.




43
•	   Extend the IFMIS to cover all public revenues and expenditures, in addition to consolidating
     revenues and expenditure from SOEs, extra-budgetary funds, and development partner financing.

•	   Strengthen public procurement and cash management planning to improve the execution of
     capital projects, particularly in social sector ministries.

•	   Strengthen program-level controls (e.g., audits, operational assessments), and introduce
     beneficiary-level controls (e.g., grievance redress systems, citizens committees, scorecards) in
     social protection and safety net programs.

•	   Harmonize data and information management arrangements into a single social registry for
     all MPSLSW programs.

•	   Integrate all debt records into a single registry, and improve transparency of debt contracting
     and obligations.

•	   Complete the rollout of the GFMIS in local government, and strengthen key functions: revenue
     projection and collection, procurement, and asset management.


Strengthening transparency and accountability

•	   Publish consolidated public sector accounts to enable better expenditure planning and
     accountability.

•	   Ensure timely publication of publicly financed activities, and timely follow up on questionable
     activities.

•	   Streamline and strengthen oversight of SEPs, and establish and disclose a comprehensive
     central database on SEP performance and ensure compliance with National Corporate
     Governance Code.

•	   Strengthen the national student assessment system, and join international assessment
     programs to help monitor better education outcomes.

•	   Improve the governance of school fees, better track the costs of delivering education, and support
     disclosure of EMIS data to help in monitoring education spending, efficiency, and outcomes.

•	   Broaden service level benchmarking from water supply to other functions of local government,
     and monitor unit costs of service delivery.

•	   Work towards a common platform, targeting mechanisms, and harmonized administrative
     processes for all social protection programs to reduce fragmentation and inefficiencies.


Modernize resource mobilization

•	   Review the progressiveness and regressiveness of the current tax system, and monitor the
     impact of foregone revenue on tax expenditure and tax incentives.

•	   Roll-out a new debt management strategy that integrates domestic and foreign debt, and
     includes short-term measures to link debt management to the Government’s cash position,
     and medium-term measures on the risk maturity profile of debt.

•	   Set clear policy on borrowing by and between SEPs, and by local governments.




                                                                                                       44
     •	   Improve the governance of school fees and levies, and address spiraling inflation in education
          services.

     •	   Cap the share of extra-budgetary funds, including related user fees, in core areas of public
          service delivery.

     •	   Review the types of approvals required for local government rates and budgets, to ensure the
          principle of cost recovery is respected.

     •	   Improve the fiscal capacity of local governments by establishing a predictable and equitable
          transfer system, strengthening their ability to raise and collect sustainable sources of revenue,
          and achieve cost recovery tariffs for local services.

     •	   Consolidate transfers to better serve core service areas, such as health, education, and social
          protection.

     •	   Engage development partners around a short- and medium-term strategy for financing and
          expanding coverage of social protection and safety net programs.


     Longer-term choices
     In addition to the recommendations above, this PER explores longer-term solutions to Zimbabwe’s
     challenges. Zimbabwe must confront key policy questions to move forward. In certain areas, the
     2013 Constitution provides guidance, but choices on implementation remain. In other areas,
     matters remain open for policy-making. The questions below speak to Zimbabwe’s key longer-term
     policy choices, which should ideally be informed by a broad-based, Government-led dialogue.

     Public sector revenues exceed 50 percent of GDP, a level that raises concerns about the role
     of the state in the economy. Is the current level optimal in terms of effectiveness, efficiency and
     equitability? If not, what size of state would most appropriately meet Zimbabwe’s challenges?

     The high public sector wage bill creates rigidity in the budget, and undermines the role of fiscal
     policy in economic development. It also perpetuates some inequities between public and private
     sector workers. Should conditions of service for the public sector, including SEPs and local
     governments, be adjusted in line with macroeconomic and fiscal performance?

     Current macroeconomic developments have led to unequal access to public services. In particular,
     access to education and some social services is financed by fees and charges that limit access
     by low income families. In cases where household contributions finance a significant share of
     service delivery, could equalization mechanisms effectively offset the regressive impact of private
     contributions, without disincentivizing those contributions? Or should the focus be on ensuring
     that public spending is progressive enough to offset the equity impacts over time?

     The 2013 Constitution calls for more decentralization of service delivery, but revenue mobilization
     by local government remains constrained. Unfunded mandates generally lead to gaps in service
     delivery and undermine accountability and trust in government at the local level. How should
     resources be shared between central and local levels of government to support effective, efficient
     and equitable service delivery?

     State-owned enterprises are falling short of expectations in their contributions to the economy,
     and becoming a burden on the fiscus, while the private sector is actively meeting demands in the
     market. Should the state maintain commercial enterprises in areas where private sector can meet
     demand? In cases where SEPs provide purely public goods, what oversight arrangements would
     best protect the public interest in Zimbabwe while ensuring sustainable service delivery?




45
Zimbabwe recently approved an ambitious new national social protection strategy. However, a
large number of social protection and safety net programs do not effectively reach the extreme
poor. The country also has many other pro-poor programs that aim to help poor households
raise incomes, but funding is spread thinly and fluctuates a great deal, rendering many programs
unsustainable and ineffective. How should Zimbabwe prioritize across these programs over the
short-to-medium term, in the face of limited resources?




  ANNEX C
  IMAGE REFERENCES


    Image References
 1 Architecture and Design. 33 Most Beautiful and Breathtaking Places in the World. http://www.
   architecturendesign.net/33-most-beautiful-and-breathtaking-places-in-the-world/
   Posted By MMK on Oct 13, 2014: info@architecturendesign.net

 2 Bond note. Chronicle. More bond notes: Additional $12m injected into market as withdrawal limits
   reviewed upwards. http://www.chronicle.co.zw/more-bond-notes-additional-12m-injected-into-market-
   as-withdrawal-limits-reviewed-upwards/
   By Prosper Ndlovu, December 21, 2016, The Editor Phone; 26398888; Mduduzi Mathuthu mduduzi.
   mathuthu@chronicle.co.zw

 3 Business Daily. Harare City swindles $6m medical aid subscriptions. http://businessdaily.co.zw/index-id-
   national-zk-34073.html
   Published: 31 January 2014; Contact Ngonidzashe Shenjere Email: ngonis@businessdaily.co.zw or
   ngonis@bd.co.zw

 4 Construction Review Online. Zimbabwe: Bulawayo needs U.S$115mn for roads rehabilitation. https://
   constructionreviewonline.com/2015/03/zimbabwe-bulawayo-needs-u-s115mn-for-roads-rehabilitation/
   Published Mar 30, 2015 Tel: +254-20-2213607, Mobile: +254 772642042 Email: info@
   groupafricapublishing.com

 5 Global Press Journal. Citizens React: Zimbabwe to Print $75M in Bond Notes in Response to Cash Shortages.
   https://globalpressjournal.com/africa/zimbabwe/citizen-react-zimbabwe-print-75m-bond-notes-
   response-cash-shortages/
   By Linda Mujuru, Published on 31 October 2016 Contact; info@globalpressjournal.com
   Cristi, cristi@globalpressjournal.com Phone + 1 415-570-9114

 6 Housing. The Diary of a Disability Advocate. Meeting the Housing Needs of People with Disabilities in
   Zimbabwe. http://disabilityzimbabwe.blogspot.kr/2016/06/meeting-housing-needs-of-people-with.html
   Posted 27th June 2016 by Edmore Masendeke (There are no contact details on the blog. Sent a message
   on the page to request contact details)

 7 News Day. How Mine ground fall dims Metallon gold output. https://www.newsday.co.zw/2017/02/21/
   mine-ground-fall-dims-metallon-gold-output/
   February 21, 2017 in Business BY BUSINESS REPORTER Editor: Wisdom Mdzungairi: wmdzungairi@
   newsday.co.zw, millenniumzimbabwe@gmail.com ; Head of Marketing and Communications: Nancy
   Ziyambi nziyambi@alphamedia.co.zw




                                                                                                           46
      8 Newsvyb. These 5 Tips Will Keep You From Getting Your Car Clamped In Harare… https://newsvyb.com/
        heres-why-your-car-will-be-clamped-in-harare-and-how-to-avoid-it/#.WOU952-GPIU
        WhatsApp phone is +263 732 464 000 The CEO, Tinashe Nyahasha; email; tinashe@techzim.co.zw

      9 PGZAMBIA. Half of Zambia still in darkness after power failure. http://www.pgzambia.com/half-of-zambia-
        still-in-darkness-after-power-failure/
        David Ngenda Published on November 23, 2016 Tel: +260 211 234651/2 Email: info@partnersgroup.com

         The Herald. City Parking Billing Scandal Riles Motorists. http://www.herald.co.zw/city-parking-billing-
         scandal-riles-motorists/

     11 The New Yorker. One of Africa’s Biggest Dams Is Falling Apart. http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/
        one-of-africas-biggest-dams-is-falling-apart
        By Jacques Leslie February 2, 2016 Photograph by Jekesai Njikizana / AFP / Getty, Email: contentlicensing@
        condenast.com Phone number 515-243-3273

     12 Zero Hedge. Zimbabwe To Print Its Own US Dollars Amid Severe Cash Shortage. http://www.zerohedge.
        com/news/2016-05-06/zimbabwe-print-its-own-us-dollars-amid-severe-cash-shortage
        Written by Tyler Durden Published on May 6, 2016
        General: info@zerohedge.com
        Legal: legal@zerohedge.com




47
