        Transition to IFRS 9: Practical Guidance for the Foreign
                       Reserves of Central Banks1
                                                     Yunjung S. Ha

                                                     June 14, 2017


                                                       Abstract
This paper provides practical guidance to central banks on accounting practices for their foreign reserves,
in connection with the transition from International Accounting Standard 39 Financial Instruments:
Recognition and Measurement (IAS 39) to International Financial Reporting Standard 9 Financial
Instruments (IFRS 9).

The IFRS 9 preparation process can be summarized in three steps: (1) business model assessment and
cash flow characteristic test for classification, (2) impairment, and (3) transition and disclosure
preparation. Relative to IAS 39, IFRS 9 is more principles-based, which requires substantive management
judgment, such as defining the business model, assessing significance and impracticability in applying
exceptions, and determining expected credit loss methodologies. This paper focuses on step 3, transition
and disclosure preparation, with an overview of the IFRS 9 transition requirements. A case illustration of
a central bank making the transition demonstrates how the process is likely to impact a central bank’s
foreign reserve portfolio.




Keywords: Central banks, Foreign reserves, International Financial Reporting Standard 9 Financial Instruments
(IFRS9), Business model, Fair value through profit and loss (FVTPL), Amortized cost (AC), Fair value through other
comprehensive income (FVOCI), Expected Credit Loss (ECL), Impairment, Transition, Disclosures




1
  This paper is the product of a team effort, with Yunjung Ha as the principal author, numerous discussions and insightful
feedback from Diann Martin, Amit Bajaj, Wei Chen, Robert Anthony Surtees Shotter, Lott Chidawaya, Ying Li and Wei Hu. The
RAMP Accounting Team is indebted to Liudmyla Snigurska (Deputy Head of Accounting Department, National Bank of Ukraine),
Salome Skhirtladze (Head of Finance and Accounting Department, National Bank of Georgia), Rudy Wytenburg, Barry C. Yuen,
George Mubanga Kabwe, Victoria Nichipurenko and Vera Zolotarskaya from the International Monetary Fund, Robin Darbyshire
and Ken Sullivan (Central Bank Consulting) for their generous collaboration. RAMP Accounting Team is also grateful to Jani S.
Laakso, Head of WBG Finance and Accounting (WFA) Accounting Policy, and Quantitative Solutions, SAA & Analytics (QSA) team
for reviewing the paper.

                                                                                                                1|Page
I.          Overview of Transition to IFRS 9
IFRS 9 requires a new mindset for the classification of financial assets, a new framework for impairment
with a forward-looking expected credit loss (ECL) model and extensive new disclosures. This is very
relevant to central banks which hold a large number of financial instruments in their balance sheet. In
light of the significant changes introduced by IFRS 9 and the implementation challenges it presents to
central banks, the World Bank Reserve Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) 2 accounting team
published a paper,3 “Applying IFRS 9 to Central Banks Foreign Reserves,” to provide guidance on how
central banks that have adopted IFRS should classify and measure foreign reserve assets, as well as on the
issues that central banks need to consider to effectively implement the ECL impairment model.4

Following the publication of the aforementioned paper, which aimed to provide guidance concerning
classification, this paper is intended to provide practical guidance for central banks for the transition to
IFRS 9 in the context of foreign reserves, either from IAS 39 or from the first adoption of IFRS. The World
Bank RAMP accounting team has provided guidance to some central banks with their IFRS 9 conversions,
including the preparation of papers supporting classification. Implementing IFRS 9 and understanding its
impact on financial statements require close collaboration between foreign reserves management, risk
management and accounting teams. This paper is also designed to help those in various areas responsible
for preparing or interpreting financial information to be well prepared for the impact of IFRS 9 on the
transition-related disclosures.

The IFRS 9 assessment, implementation, and transition process can be summarized in three steps:


        Business model assessment &
                                             Expected Credit Loss (ECL) model
     Contractual cash flow characteristics                                           Transition & Disclosure preparation
                                               development for impairment
            test for classification


     Fair value through other
     comprehensive income (FVOCI) or
     Amortized cost (AC) classification

      Fair value through profit and loss
      (FVTPL)

This paper focuses on the final step in the process: transition and disclosure preparation. IFRS 7 Financial
Instruments: Disclosures has been updated to incorporate new and extensive disclosure requirements on
the basis of IFRS 9; central banks need to work to integrate the additional IFRS 9 disclosures into existing
IFRS 7 disclosures. This paper focuses on the foreign reserves of central banks, which normally make up
the largest part of their balance sheets: accordingly, only the relevant provisions of the standard are



2
  Reserve Advisory and Management Program (RAMP) is a capacity building service aimed towards central banks and other
official sector asset management entities. For more information, please go to:
http://treasury.worldbank.org/sip/htm/central_bank.html.
3
  See http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2016/01/25810853/applying-ifrs-9-central-banks-foreign-reserves.
4
 There are many published papers that provide detailed guidance and discussions of ECL measurement. Some of
them are listed in the references.
                                                                                                             2|Page
discussed. Several paragraphs within IFRS 9 are outside the scope of this paper: these paragraphs include,
but are not limited to, discussion of early adoption, financial liabilities, and hedge accounting.

General Principles

The application of IFRS 9 is mainly retrospective, being based on IAS 8 Accounting Policies, Changes in
Accounting Estimates and Errors. Under retrospective application, new requirements are applied to
transactions, other events and conditions as if those requirements had always been in effect. However,
IFRS 9 includes various exemptions and simplifications, which are summarized below.

          Comparative information does not need to be restated. Comparative figures can be presented
           only if the information is available without giving consideration to facts which arose after an event
           has actually happened, i.e., without the use of hindsight. If an entity restates the comparative
           period, a comparative third balance sheet must be presented in accordance with IAS 1
           Presentation of Financial Statements; and the restated financial statements must reflect all of the
           requirements in IFRS 9.
          Retrospective application need not be applied to derecognized items. Where an entity decides
           to restate the comparative period, the information for the comparative period would have a
           mixed basis. The financial assets derecognized prior to the date of initial application (DIA) will be
           prepared under IAS 39, while the financial assets outstanding as of DIA under IFRS 9.
          Any differences in the carrying amount between IAS 39 and IFRS 9 at the DIA are recognized in
           the opening retained earnings (RE) or other comprehensive income (OCI) of the annual reporting
           period.
          Specific requirements5 based on impracticability related to the assessment at the date of initial
           recognition.

The DIA is the first date of the annual reporting period beginning on or after January 1, 2018, the IFRS 9
mandatory effective date. Key assessments must be made at the DIA, including:
    Identifying the assets and liabilities to which IFRS 9 should be applied because the standard is not
       applicable to instruments derecognized by the DIA;
    Assessing the business model and applying the SPPI test, and noting that the classification is
       applied retrospectively;
    Designating an equity investment to be classified as FVOCI;
    Designating, or revoking designations of, financial assets or financial liabilities classified as fair
       value through profit and loss (FVTPL);
    Using reasonable and supportable information that is available without undue cost or effort to
       determine the credit risk at the date that a financial instrument was initially recognized.

Hedge accounting policies are generally applied prospectively, but discussion of this process6 is beyond
the scope of this paper.




5
    IFRS 9.7.2.4~9.7.2.5, 9.7.2.11, and 9.7.2.20. See the following sections for details.
6
    IFRS 9. 7.2.21 ~ 7.2.26.
                                                                                                    3|Page
Transition Process

The transition to IFRS 9 is mainly retrospective. Thus, both classification and ECL determined at the DIA
are applied retrospectively. This means that computations for the measurement and parameters for ECL
should be assessed from the time of the inception of the financial assets. The transition process requires
collaboration across a wide range of departments within a central bank. Accounting should work closely
with the foreign reserves department to document the assessment of both the business model and the
SPPI tests for classifications. Following the initial documentation of the classification and measurement,
the risk, macroeconomic, finance, and IT teams will need to be involved in the ECL model development
and the implementation of data governance, policies, and methodologies prior to the DIA.

II.     Transition Requirements for Classification and Measurement
IFRS 9 applies one classification approach for all types of financial assets based on two criteria: the first is
the business model for managing the financial assets and the second is the contractual cash flow
characteristics test, which is applied to the financial assets.


Business Model Assessment [IFRS 9.7.2.3]

For transition to IFRS 9, the business model assessment must be based on the facts and circumstances
at the DIA. This assessment must be carried out with reference to several factors, including business
objectives; risks; sales activities; the use of FV information; compensation; and sources of income to
determine whether the generation of interest income is integral or incidental to the management of the
subportfolio. These six factors are not to be used as a checklist, but to provide supporting evidence useful
for gathering data to support the central bank’s ultimate conclusion, which, if well documented, can
facilitate discussions with auditors. The resulting classification at transition is applied retrospectively since
the inception of the financial asset, irrespective of the entity’s business model in prior reporting periods.
At transition, there may be reclassifications as the IFRS 9 approach to the classification is different from
that of IAS 39. IAS 39 classification was more focused on instrument types while IFRS 9 requires asset
classification to be linked to its business.


Solely Payments of Principal and Interest (SPPI) Criteria Assessment [IFRS 9.7.2.4 ~ 9.7.2.5]

For the transition to IFRS 9, the SPPI assessment is required at the DIA on the basis of the facts and
circumstances that existed at the date of initial recognition for the financial asset. For most instruments
used by central banks, the classification is straightforward. However, the SPPI assessment of a foreign
exchange reserves portfolio has become increasingly complex in the current market environment, as
central banks have been diversifying the types of instruments used in their portfolios in order to seek
higher yields and/or protect against inflation. Certain contractual terms need to be assessed to see
whether they might modify the timing or the amount of contractual cash flows under IFRS 9. This
retrospective transition requirement can be impractical for certain financial assets, for example those with
a modified time value of money element or a prepayment feature. For such case, the International
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) has provided specific requirements, which are discussed in detail in
Appendix 1.

                                                                                                     4|Page
Hybrid Contracts [IFRS 9.7.2.6 ~ 9.7.2 7]

A hybrid contract, composed of a host that is a non-derivative financial asset within the scope of IFRS 9
and an embedded derivative, should be classified and measured in its entirety under IFRS 9. This is
different from IAS 39, which required bifurcation under certain conditions. Under IFRS 9 a hybrid contract
can be classified as AC or FVOCI if it passes the SPPI test. For instance, some embedded derivatives (such
as caps and floors) that might have required bifurcation under IAS 39 but might pass the SPPI condition in
IFRS 9. For the transition to IFRS 9, if the entity restates prior periods and the fair value of the hybrid
contract that is to be classified and measured at the fair value under IFRS 9 had not been measured in
comparative reporting periods, the fair value of the hybrid contract in the comparative reporting periods
shall be the sum of the fair values of the components (i.e. the non-derivative host and the embedded
derivative) at the end of each comparative reporting period; at the DIA, the entity must recognize any
difference between the fair value of the entire hybrid contract and the sum of the fair values of the
components of the hybrid contract in the opening RE (or OCI, as appropriate) of the reporting period that
includes the DIA. If the entity does not restate prior periods, the difference between the carrying amount
of components under IAS 39 and FV of the entire hybrid contract under IFRS 9 should be recognized in the
opening RE (or OCI, as appropriate) of the reporting period that includes the DIA.

Fair Value (FV) Option Designations [IFRS 9.7.2.8 (a), 9.7.2.9 and paragraph 4.1.5]

For the transition to IFRS 9, financial assets can be irrevocably designated as FVTPL on the facts and
circumstances at the DIA, only if this classification eliminates or significantly reduces a measurement or
recognition inconsistency, referred to as an “accounting mismatch”. Hence, if financial assets designated
as FVTPL under IAS39 do not meet the IFRS 9 FV option requirements, their designations must be revoked.
If desired, previous FV designations under IAS 39 may be revoked at the transition to IFRS 9.

Equity Investment Designation as FVOCI [IFRS 9.7.2.8 (b), 9.7.2.12, paragraph. 5.7.5]

At the transition to IFRS 9, an entity may designate particular investments in equity instruments as at
FVOCI on the basis of the facts and circumstances that exist at the DIA. To qualify for the designation,
the equity should neither be held for trading nor contingent on consideration recognized by an acquirer
in a business combination to which IFRS 3 applies. The election is to be applied retrospectively. For
unquoted equity investments measured at cost under IAS 39, an entity must determine the fair value7 of
the equity investment at the DIA. The difference between the previous carrying amount and the fair value
at the DIA is recognized in the opening RE or OCI, as appropriate. Another noteworthy difference between
IAS 39 and IFRS 9 for equity instruments is that, while impairment was assessed under IAS 39 for equity
instruments classified as AFS whereas there is no need to assess and measure impairments for such
instruments under IFRS 9.




7
 IFRS 9 B5.2.3 acknowledges that cost may be an appropriate estimate of fair value in limited circumstances, such
as cases in which insufficient more recent information is available to measure fair value, or the cost falls within the
range of possible FV measurements if there is a wide range of possible FV measurements.
                                                                                                           5|Page
Effective Interest Rate (EIR) [IFRS 9.7.2.11]

When the retrospective application is impracticable, the fair value of a financial asset at the DIA is
treated as the new gross carrying amount. The retrospective application to the EIR method in the
transition to IFRS 9 can be quite complicated when there are reclassifications. For example, in the case of
reclassifying at the DIA from Trading under IAS 39 to either FVOCI or AC under IFRS 9, the EIR of the asset
is required in order to compute its carrying amount as if the asset had always been held on this basis, even
though under IAS 39 the EIR was not required for the asset previously classified as Trading. Another
complex case might occur when a financial asset, that was previously reclassified under IAS 39 from a fair
value measurement category, such as Trading or AFS, to Held-to-Maturity (HTM) category, is classified as
amortized cost or FVOCI at the DIA under IFRS 9. This asset’s carrying amount should be recalculated as if
the asset had always been measured at amortized cost or FVOCI, rather than by carrying forward its
measurement under IAS 39.

III.     Transition Requirements for Impairment8
For all financial assets which pass the SPPI test and which are classified and measured as either ‘AC’ or
‘FVOCI’, the ECL should be estimated at DIA under the new impairment requirements of IFRS 9 by
comparing the credit risk at DIA with the credit risk at the date that a financial instrument was initially
recognized. It is critical to understand the scope of work for ECL model implementation, prior to making
the transition to IFRS 9, since the ECL framework is distinctively different from other familiar credit risk
frameworks. ECL requires lifetime credit losses, rather than 12-month credit losses, in the case of stage 2
and 3 assets. Normally only 12-month ECL would be required for the foreign reserves portfolios of central
banks as they are invested conservatively. However, in developing ECL methodologies and models, central
banks will have to consider the forward-looking scenarios and the potential implication of the lifetime ECL
in case of significant increase in credit risk.

ECL measures an unbiased and probability-weighted amount that is determined by evaluating a range of
possible outcomes. [IFRS 9.B5.5.41-43, BC5.86]. This means that ECL estimates are not conservative or
biased towards optimism or pessimism. This is quite different from a prudential depiction of expected
losses, such as Value-at-Risk (VaR), a measure of investment risk commonly used by central banks. The
implementation of the ECL model is expected to be complex. The paper from the Global Public Policy
Committee (GPPC) 9 suggests that governance and controls frameworks should be set up since a lot of
additional credit risk information will now be required as inputs to the models. In addition, new ECL
methodologies and models, that are commensurate with the complexity, structure, and risk profile of the
exposure, need to be developed. This will require significant collaboration among several departments,
including finance, risk, accounting, and IT.

For operational simplification, IFRS 9 provides a practical expedient option for assets that are deemed to
have low credit risk, such as investment grade rated assets (although an external rating grade is not a
prerequisite for a financial instrument to be considered low credit risk). As a practical expedient, the loss

8
  IFRS 9 ECL, which requires the immediate recognition of expected losses, is challenging for central banks in
consideration of their unique role in purchasing credit-impaired assets for financial market stability. Leaving this
aside as a domestic policy issues, this paper focuses solely on IFRS 9 ECL requirements [IFRS 9.7.2.17 ~ 9.7.2.20].
9
  <The implementation of IFRS 9 impairment requirements by systemically important banks> was published by
GPPC on June 17, 2016.
                                                                                                          6|Page
allowance for assets with low credit risk at the DIA may be recognized equal to 12-month expected credit
losses, and interest would be calculated on a gross basis. If, at the DIA, a significant increase in credit risk
since initial recognition of the financial asset is determined with supportable information reasonably
available without incurring undue cost and effort or if this assessment requires undue cost or effort, the
loss allowance or provision is measured as lifetime expected credit losses at each reporting date.

IV. IFRS 9 Transition Disclosure

Case Illustrations Relevant to Foreign Reserves of Central Banks

The case illustrations presented below are aimed at providing clear examples of the disclosures required
for transition. For IFRS 9 classification, the business model for foreign exchange reserves of central banks
must be defined. For these illustrations, the business models are defined at tranche levels, which are quite
common among central banks, as described below:

          Working Capital (WC) to finance the central bank’s daily operations including short-term
           payments and potential foreign exchange interventions;
          Liquidity (LIQ) to finance operations as well as foreign debt service up to one year; and
          Investment (IV) to finance for obligations longer than one year; this tranche typically has
           objectives for capital preservation as well as growth.
                                                     Carrying              Tranche/                                       Carrying
                                                                                                                                       IFRS 9
IAS 39                                               Amount                Business                                       Amount
                                                                                                                                    Classification
Classification Currency Instrument Type              (in MM)               model            Currency Instrument Type      (in MM)
  Loans and               Money Market (CP)                 50    Case   1 WC/                USD Money Market (Deposits)      200    Amortized
                 USD
 receivables              Money Market (Deposits)          200             Hold-to-collect    EUR Discounted Security            37     Cost
Loans and receivables as Csh equivalent                    250             WCTR Total                                          237
                          Discounted Security               38    Case   2                           Discounted Security         59
                 EUR                                                                          EUR
                          Discounted Security               59                                       Debt Security             120     FVOCI
                GBP       Debt Security                     70    Case   3                           Debt Security               70
     AFS                                                                         LIQ/         GBP
                 USD      Debt Security                     80                                       Futures                      1    FVTPL
                                                                            Hold-to-collect
                          Debt Security (FRNs)             100    Case   4                           Money Market (CP)           49    FVOCI
                                                                               and sell
                          Equity investment                 50    Case   5                           Debt Security               80    FVOCI
                                                                                              USD
AFS Total                                                  397                                       Debt Security (FRNs)      100     FVTPL
                 EUR      Debt Security                    120    Case   6                           Equity investment           55    FVOCI
                GBP       Futures                             1   Case   7 LIQTR Total                                         534
   Trading
                 USD      Futures                             2            INV                USD Futures                         2    FVTPL
                          Debt Security                    150             (Residual)                Debt Security             150
Trading Total                                              273             INVTR Total                                         152
Portfolio Total                                            920             Portfolio Total                                     923
*Carrying amount in millions of reporting currency equivalent
Note: Regarding ECL assumptions for each case, no credit risk increase since the initial recognition and 12-month ECL
under IFRS 9 is assumed to be zero unless a specific assumption is described for a case.

The tables above are provided for easy reference to the cases. Under IAS 39 financial assets are classified
based on instrument types and management intentions without linking those assets to relevant business
models in which they are managed. In the transition to IFRS 9, assets are first mapped to each tranche
through the business model assessment at the DIA, and are classified based on both the business model
and on SPPI criteria. Accordingly the central bank decided to classify the working capital tranche as “hold-
to-collect”, the liquidity tranche as “hold-to-collect and sell” while the investment tranche as primarily to
sell for profit. It is important to note that this change in approach under IFRS 9 will result in a change in
classification even if there is no change to strategic asset allocation and the objectives of managing the
portfolios.

                                                                                                                                    7|Page
Case 1: 50 million of commercial paper (CP) is reclassified from Loans and receivable under IAS 39 to FVOCI
under IFRS 9. There is a 1 million market value adjustment and implementing forward-looking ECL results
in 0.6 million of impairment loss. Under the IAS 39 incurred loss model, it may be assumed that there were
no impairments.

Case 2: Some of the discounted securities, previously classified as AFS under IAS 39, are reclassified as AC.
Out of its market value of 38 million, 1 million of unrealized Mark-to-Market (MTM) gain under IAS 39 is
reversed, as no MTM would be calculated for the AC classification.

Case 3: GBP securities in the LIQ tranche require the lifetime ECL to be calculated as a result of a
downgrade that provided an indication that there has been a significant increase in credit risk since initial
recognition. Previously, under IAS 39, MTM unrealized loss of 5 million had been recognized in OCI.
However, no impairment was recognized under the IAS 39 incurred loss model. For the transition to IFRS
9, these financial assets are assessed to be in Stage 2. Although their credit risk has increased significantly,
they are not yet considered credit impaired (Stage 3). Under IFRS 9 for Stage 2 securities, lifetime ECL is
required and carved out of the total MTM gain or loss and recorded in P&L. Assuming that the central
bank’s risk model calculated 2 million of lifetime ECL10 at the DIA, this 2 million of lifetime ECL would be
moved out of OCI to opening RE.

Case 4: The USD FRNs in the LIQ tranche would not meet the SPPI test unless it is proved that there is an
insignificant difference in cash flows through benchmarking cash flows. At the DIA of January 1, 2018, the
central bank applies the exception specified in IFRS9.7.2.4. The FRNs of 100 million market value should
be reclassified to FVTPL under IFRS 9. Related MTM gain of 3 million is also reclassified from OCI to the
retained earnings.

Case 5: Equity investments in Bank for International Settlements (BIS) funds are held for strategic purpose.
These assets are classified as AFS and measured at cost of 50 million under IAS 39, and designated as
FVOCI at the DIA and measured at market value of 55 million under IFRS 9. Equity investments would not
be subject to impairment calculations.

Case 6: The EUR securities were initially aligned with the central bank’s EUR denominated liability related
to the IMF’s SDR loan and designated as FV asset. At the DIA, however, it was ascertained that the EUR
liability was already completely paid off with another source of funding. These assets therefore no longer
meet the FV option criteria at the DIA. Hence, the previous designation to FVTPL must be revoked, and
these assets, based on both the business model at the DIA and cash flow characteristics tests, are classified
as FVOCI. These assets, classified as Trading under IAS 39, did not apply the EIR. Under IFRS 9, at the DIA,
the fair value of the securities is treated as its new gross carrying amount by applying the impracticability
exception to the retrospective EIR application.

Case 7: The strategy for the GBP portfolio involved holding debt securities and futures. In this case, futures
will be classified as FVTPL even though they are included in the LIQ tranche, of which the business
objective is ‘hold-to-collect and sell’, they do not meet the SPPI criterion as a derivative instrument. All

10
  For a detailed illustration of ECL calculation, see “Impairments of Greek Government Bonds under IAS 39 and IFRS
9” published by the European Parliament Policy Department on October 14, 2015; also, for various simplifications in
ECL calculation and considerations for simplifications, see “The implementation of IFRS 9 impairment requirements
by banks” by GPPC published in June 2016.
                                                                                                      8|Page
derivatives are measured at fair value under both IFRS 9 and IAS 39, and their gains and losses are
recognized in profit or loss, unless hedge accounting is applied.

Disclosure for Each Class of Financial Assets at the DIA [IFRS 7.42I-J]

IFRS 9, together with IFRS 7, requires the transition process to be appropriately reflected in the disclosures
for each class of financial assets and liabilities during the period of initial adoption of IFRS 9. Detailed lists
of the disclosures required by the standards are presented in Appendix 2. Based on the illustrated cases,
each class of original vs. new classifications, and their carrying amounts can be disclosed as presented in
the table below. The notes to financial statements should explain how the classification requirements
under IFRS 9 are applied, and the reasons for any designation or any de-designations of securities
classified as FVTPL.

                                                       Previous classification New classification Previous carrying  New carrying
in millions                        Note                     under IAS 39         under IFRS 9     amount under IAS amount under IFRS
Cash equivalent                                        Loans and receivables Amortized cost              39      200       9      200
Cash equivalent                    Case 1              Loans and receivables       FVOCI                                      50                      49
Investment securities - debt       Case 2              AFS                         Amortized cost                             38                      37
Investment securities - debt                           AFS                         FVOCI                                     209 (Note)              209
Investment securities - debt       Case 4              AFS                         FVTPL                                     100                     100
Investment securities - debt       Case 6              Trading (designated)        FVOCI                                     120                     120
Investment securities - debt                           Trading                     FVTPL                                     150                     150
Investment securities - equity     Case 5              AFS                         FVOCI                                      50                      55
Derivative assets held for
                                                       Trading                     FVTPL                                       3                          3
risk management
Total Foreign exchange reserves assets                                                                                       920                     923
Note: Investment securities - debt of 209, classified as AFS under IAS 39 and as FVOCI under IFRS 9, are composed of 59 EUR discounted security, 70 GBP
debt security and 80 USD debt security.


Additional Disclosures on Transition from IAS 39 [IFRS 7.42K-S]

Based on IFRS 9 Implementation Guidance for meeting the quantitative disclosure requirements in IFRS 7
paragraphs 42K-42O, the reconciliation of changes due to the classifications and measurements is
illustrated in the table. Any differences in the carrying amounts from IAS 39 to IFRS 9 are presented as
“remeasurements” in the reconciliation which is disclosed in the notes to the financial statements. IFRS 7
requires additional disclosures for the assets reclassified to AC, such as the fair value at the end of the
reporting period and fair value gain or loss that would have been recognized in profit or loss or OCI during
the reporting period.

Also, when impracticability exceptions are applied, additional disclosures are required. For example, in
the case of reclassifying out of Trading with an EIR exception (Case 6), EIR determined on the DIA and
interest income or expense recognized should be disclosed. If exceptions are applied related to the SPPI
criteria assessment (Case 4), the carrying amounts of the relevant assets should be disclosed until they
are derecognized.




                                                                                                                                          9|Page
                                                        (i)                   (ii)            (iii)    (iv) = (i) +(ii) + (iii)
(in millions)                                   IAS 39 carrying                                           IFRS 9 carrying
                                                                  Reclassifications Remeasurements
                                              amount 12/31/2017                                         amount 1/1/2018
HTM: IAS 39 carrying amount                                   250
From available for sale (IAS 39)                                                   38 (Case 2)      -1
To FVOCI (IFRS 9)                                                                       -50 (Case 1)
Total change to amortised cost                                                          -12                     -1
Amortized Cost: IFRS 9 carrying amount                                                                                             237
AFS: IAS 39 carrying amount                                   397
From amortised cost (IAS 39)                                                            50 (Case 1)             -1
From FVTPL (FV option under IAS 39) – FV                                            120 (Case 6)
option criteria not met at DIA
AFS (IAS 39) to amortised cost (IFRS 9)                                                 -38 (Case 2)
AFS (IAS 39) to FVTPL (IFRS 9)                                                     -100 (Case 4)
Equity investment from cost to market value                                                                     5 (Case 5)
Total change to FVOCI                                                                   32                      4
FVOCI: IFRS 9 carrying amount                                                                                                      433
Trading: IAS 39 carrying amount                               273
Frpm AFS (IAS 39)                                                                   100 (Case 4)
To FVOCI– FV option criteria not met at DIA                                        -120 (Case 6)
Total change to FVTPL                                                               -20                     -
FVTPL: IFRS 9 carrying amount                                                                                                      253
        Total financial asset balances,                       920         (Note)    -                           3                  923
reclassifications and remeasurements at DIA                            Total (ii) = 0
Note: Total changes due to reclassification sum up to zero because additions in one category would be offset by
subtractions in another category.


Loss Allowance Balances [IFRS 7.42P]

New credit risk disclosures are required in order to communicate the effect of credit risk on the amount,
timing, and uncertainty of future cash flows. IFRS 9 introduces additional management judgment as a
result of incorporating macroeconomic variables and forward-looking information into the ECL model. To
make financial statements useful and to supplement subjective estimates, qualitative and quantitative
inputs are required. Disclosures include the methods, assumptions, and information used in arriving at
ECL. For the transition disclosure, it is required to reconcile the ending impairment allowance under IAS
39, or the provisions under IAS 37 Provisions, Contingent Liabilities and Contingent Assets to the opening
loss allowance or provision under IFRS 9. This disclosure would be provided by the related measurement
categories in accordance with IAS 39 and IFRS 9 for financial assets. The effect of changes in the
measurement category on the loss allowance at that date would be shown separately.

Assuming that under IAS 39 the central bank carried no allowance in both HTM and AFS, the reconciliation
of opening to closing amounts of the respective loan loss allowances can be presented, based on the
aforementioned cases, as follows:

                                               IAS 39/ IAS 37                                                               IFRS 9
(in millions)                                 carrying amount       Reclassifications         Remeasurements          carrying amount
                                                 12/31/2017                                                               1/1/2018
AFS debt securities under IAS 39 & at FVOCI
                                                               -                         -       (Case 3)        2                      2
under IFRS 9
HTM debt securities under IAS 39
                                                               -                         -       (Case 1)       0.4                0.4
reclassified to FVOCI under IFRS 9
Total                                                                                                                              2.4
                                                                                                                         10 | P a g e
Reconciliation of Retained Earnings (RE) and Other Comprehensive Income (OCI)

IFRS 9 requires recognition of any difference between the previous carrying amount under IAS 39 and the
carrying amount at the DIA under IFRS 9 in opening RE or OCI, as appropriate. As illustrated in Case 4,
scenarios impacting the opening RE at the transition include reclassification from HTM or AFS to FVTPL.
In this case the MTM amount will be recognized in RE. This would also be the case when computing ECL
for assets measured at amortized cost as was illustrated under Case 1.

There may also be situations where neither the carrying amount nor the classification has changed in the
transition to IFRS 9. However, there could still be transfers between the opening RE and OCI. Case 3 is one
of those scenarios. In this instance, the carrying value is already measured using fair market value as the
securities were already classified as AFS under IAS 39. IFRS 9 introduces a change, in that impairments are
carved out of the total fair market value, and are posted to the RE. Reclassification between Trading/
FVTPL and AFS/FVOCI will also require a transfer of the unrealized gain or loss between the opening RE
and OCI.

The following table presents the impact of transition to IFRS 9 on RE and OCI.
(in millions)                                                                      RE                   OCI
                        12/31/2017 under IAS 39                                     X                    Y
                  Debt securities from Amortized Cost to FVOCI (Case 1)                                        (0.4)
                  Debt securities from AFS to Amortized Cost (Case 2)                                            (1)
 Reclassification
                  Debt securities from AFS to FVTPL (Case 4)                                 3                   (3)
                  Equity Investments (Case 5)                                                                     5
                  12 month ECL      (Case 1)                                              (0.6)
 ECL under IFRS 9
                  Lifetime ECL      (Case 3)                                                (2)                   2
                         1/1/2018 under IFRS 9                                    X+0.4                Y+2.6


     V. First-time adoption of IFRS11
For first-time adopters of IFRS, the transition requirements are generally quite similar to those detailed
for the transition from IAS 39 to IFRS 9. One exception is that references to the DIA are generally replaced
with reference to the date of transition to IFRS. In applying IFRS 9, the date of transition is the beginning
of the first IFRS reporting period (IFRS 1.E1). Another difference is with regard to the SPPI criteria
assessment of the provisions under IFRS 1. IFRS 1 requires that the assessment take place at the date of
transition, instead of at the inception of the instrument. If an entity adopts IFRS for the first time, for
annual reporting periods beginning before January 1, 2019, it does not have to restate comparative
information in its financial statement disclosures.




11
  This section is focused only on the application of IFRS 9. For more general information on the first-time adoption
of IFRS, see IFRS 1.
                                                                                                       11 | P a g e
Appendix 1: Benchmarking Cashflows for SPPI Test
IFRS 9 clearly states that TIPS qualify for the SPPI criterion, as the inflation index is not leveraged and the
principal is protected. [IFRS 9.B4.1.13] However, U.S. FRNs and some Japanese government securities
called ‘10 year constant maturity bonds’ may not meet the SPPI criterion, depending on materiality
thresholds, due to the modified time value of money element with weekly resets to the 13 week Treasury
Bill rate and a semi-annual interest reset to a 10-year rate, respectively. The SPPI assessment of these
financial assets with the modified time value of money element should determine how different the
contractual (undiscounted) cash flows could be from the (undiscounted) cash flows that would arise if the
time value of money element was not modified.

Unless that determination can be made clearly with a qualitative assessment, it may be necessary to
perform a quantitative test by benchmarking cash flows based on a comparable financial asset that does
not contain such a modification. [IFRS 9 B4.1.9B ~ D] The appropriate comparable financial asset is a
contract of the same credit quality, and with all of the same contractual terms, with the exception of the
contractual term under evaluation. If the modification could result in cash flows that are more than
significantly different from the benchmark cash flows, it can be concluded that the financial asset does
not meet SPPI requirements.

The objective of such a quantitative assessment is to establish how different the contractual
(undiscounted) cash flows could be from the benchmark (undiscounted) cash flows that would arise if the
time value component of the interest rate were commensurate with the period for which the rate is set.
For instance, U.S. FRNs are issued for a term of two years with the index set to the most recent 13-week
Treasury bill rate; their coupon rate and payment frequency are quarterly whereas the coupon rate is
reset every week. For the quantitative assessment of these securities, forward projections of quarterly
interest rate would be required as an entity must consider factors that could affect future contractual
cash flows.

Acknowledging that a quantitative assessment of the time value of money component of an interest rate
is operationally complex, the IASB has added an exception12 on the basis of impracticability. This involves
applying the assessment of the asset’s contractual cash flows characteristics without the notion of a
modified economic relationship as set out in the requirements issued in IFRS 9 (2009). Hence, if the entity
applies this exception or cannot prove an insignificant difference via benchmarking cash flows without
using hindsight from the date of initial recognition of the financial asset, the asset would not qualify at
transition for the SPPI criterion, which means it should be classified as FVTPL.




12
     IFRS 9.7.2.4~ 9.7.2.5 and Basis for Conclusions (BC)7.54~56.
                                                                                                 12 | P a g e
Appendix 2: Checklist for IFRS 9 Transition Disclosures
The checklist below would be a useful starting point for financial statement users to assess the breadth
and depth of disclosures required.

 (1) Disclosure relevant to all cases (IFRS 7.42I-J)
      The original measurement category and carrying amount under IAS 39 or an earlier version of
         IFRS 9;
      The new measurement category and carrying amount determined under IFRS 9 for each class of
         financial assets and financial liabilities;
      Explanations to support how the classification requirements under IFRS 9 are applied;
      The reasons for any designation or any re-designations of securities classified as FVTPL;
      The amount of securities previously designated as FVTPL, distinguishing between mandatory
         and elective re-designations, should be disclosed.

 (2) Changes in the classifications of financial assets and financial liabilities as at the DIA:
       Changes in the carrying amounts on the basis of classification categories under IAS 39 (IFRS
         7.42L(a));
       Changes in the carrying amounts arising from a change in measurement attributed to the
         transition to IFRS 9 (IFRS 7.42L(b)).

 (3) The impact of the reclassifications, when reclassifying to Amortized Cost (IFRS 7.42M):
       Fair value at the end of reporting period;
       Fair value gains or losses that would have been recognized in either profit or loss or OCI during
          the reporting period, if the financial assets and financial liabilities had not been reclassified.

 (4) Interest in case of reclassifying out of FVTPL (IFRS 7.42N):
       Effective Interest Rate (EIR) determined on the DIA;
       Interest income or expense recognized.

 IFRS 9.7.2.11 states that if it is impracticable to apply the EIR retrospectively, then the fair value of a
 financial instrument at the DIA is treated as its new gross carrying amount. The disclosures in IFRS 7.42N
 must be made for each reporting period until derecognition.

 (5) If exceptions related to the SPPI criteria assessment are applied, the carrying amounts of the relevant
 assets should be disclosed until they are derecognized (IFRS 7.42R-S).

 (6) Impairments require a reconciliation of the ending loss allowance balances recorded under IAS 39
 and IAS 37, to the opening balances of the new loss allowance computed under IFRS 9. This disclosure
 must be provided by the related financial asset measurement categories in accordance with both IAS 39
 and IFRS 9. Separate disclosure should reflect the effect of changes in the measurement categories on
 the loss allowance at the DIA. (IFRS 7.42P)




                                                                                               13 | P a g e
References
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. “Regulatory treatment of accounting provisions,” October 2016. (Discussion Paper)
http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d385.pdf

Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. “Guidance on credit risk and accounting for expected credit losses,” BIS (Bank for
International Settlements), December 2015.
http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d350.pdf

BDO Global, IFRS IN PRACTICES 2016 – IFRS 9 Financial instruments, Oct 2015
https://www.bdo.global/getattachment/Services/Audit-Accounting/IFRS/IFRS-in-Practice/IFRS9_print.pdf.aspx?lang=en-GB

CFA Institute, Comment letter on Basel Committee on Banking Supervision Consultative Document Guidelines: Guidance on
Accounting for Expected Credit Losses, June 8, 2015.
https://www.cfainstitute.org/Comment%20Letters/20150608.pdf

Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (EDTF), Impact of Expected Credit Loss Approaches on Bank Risk Disclosures, November 30,
2015. (Report)
http://www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/Impact-of-expected-credit-loss-approaches-on-bank-risk-disclosures.pdf

European Parliament Policy Department, Impairments of Greek Government Bonds under IAS 39 and IFRS 9, October 14, 2015.
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2015/563462/IPOL_STU(2015)563462_EN.pdf

EY (Ernst & Young), Impairment of financial instruments under IFRS 9, December 2014.
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Applying_IFRS:_Impairment_of_financial_instruments_under_IFRS_9/%24FILE/Ap
ply-FI-Dec2014.pdf

EY (Ernst & Young), Classification of financial instruments under IFRS 9, May 2015.
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Applying_IFRS:_Classification_of_financial_instruments_under_IFRS_9./$File/App
ly-FI-May2015.pdf

GPPC (Global Public Policy Committee) “The implementation of IFRS 9 impairment requirements by banks,” June 17, 2016.
http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Implementation_of_IFRS_9_impairment_requirements_by_systemically_importa
nt_banks/$File/BCM-FIImpair-GPPC-June2016%20int.pdf

IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards), Transition Resource Group for Impairment of Financial Instruments.
“Meaning of ‘current effective interest rate,’” December 11, 2015. (Staff Paper).
http://www.ifrs.org/Meetings/MeetingDocs/Other%20Meeting/2015/December/ITG/AP7-Meaning-of-current-effective-
interest-rate.pdf

IFRS/ FASB. Financial Instruments: Classification and Measurement. “Contractual Cash Flow Characteristics: The Meaning of
‘Interest’,” September 16-18, 2013. (Staff Paper).
http://www.ifrs.org/Meetings/MeetingDocs/WSS/WSS%202013/Agenda%20Paper%206D%20Contractual%20Cash%20Flow%2
0Characteristics_The%20meaning%20of%20interest_FINAL.pdf

KPMG, Guide to annual financial statements: IFRS 9 – Illustrative disclosures for banks, March 2016.
https://assets.kpmg.com/content/dam/kpmg/pdf/2016/03/2015-ifs-banks.pdf

Lloyd, Sue and Fred Nieto. “IFRS 9 Expected losses – a paradigm shift,”, International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS),
October 2015.
http://www.ifrs.org/Meetings/MeetingDocs/Other%20Meeting/2015/November/CMAC/AP4-IFRS-9_Roadshow-
deck_2015_october.pdf

Qatar Central bank, IFRS 9 Implementation Guidelines, February 2017
http://www.qcb.gov.qa/sitelists/CircularsToBanks/Lists/Circulars/Attachments/149/Circular%20no.%209-2017.pdf



                                                                                                                   14 | P a g e
