INDEPENDENT EVALUATION GROUP




Work Program and Budget (FY18)
              and
   Indicative Plan (FY19–20)




           June 2, 2017
                    ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


ASA     Advisory Services and           IFC     International Finance
        Analytics                               Corporation
CCSA    Cross-Cutting Solutions         IPDET   International Program for
        Areas                                   Development Evaluation
CLEAR   Centers for Learning                    Training
        Evaluation and Results          IT      Information Technology
CLR     Completion and Learning         KM      Knowledge Management
        Review                          MAR     Management Action Record
CODE    Committee on Development        MDB     Multilateral Development
        Effectiveness                           Bank
CPE     Country Program Evaluation      M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
CPF     Country Partnership             MIC     Middle-Income Countries
        Framework                       MIGA    Multilateral Investment
CSC     (World Bank Group)                      Guarantee Agency
        Corporate Scorecard             PCR     Project Completion Report
DGE     Director General, Evaluation    PER     Project Evaluation Report
FCS     Fragile and Conflict-affected   PforR   Program for Results
        Situation                       PPAR    Project Performance
FY      Fiscal Year                             Assessment Report
GDI     Global Development              PPP     Public-Private Partnership
        Indicators                      RAP     Results and Performance
GP      Global Practice                         (IEG annual report)
IBRD    International Bank for          RMES    Results and Measurement
        Reconstruction and                      and Evidence Stream
        Development                     SCD     Systematic Country
ICR     Implementation Completion               Diagnostic
        and Results                     SDGs    Sustainable Development
ICRR    ICR Review                              Goals
IDA     International Development       SME     Small and Medium
        Association                             Enterprise
IEG     Independent Evaluation          SWF     Sovereign Wealth Fund
        Group                           XPSR    Expanded Project
IFAD    International Fund for                  Supervision Report
        Agricultural Development
Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................................................................ I
I.          STRATEGIC CONTEXT ................................................................................................................................... 1
       1. IEG STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS ........................................................................................................................................ 1
       2. EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL LANDSCAPE ........................................................................................................................... 2
II.         WORK PROGRAM ........................................................................................................................................ 4
       1.   MAJOR EVALUATIONS: ACHIEVING THE TWIN GOALS (OBJECTIVE 1).................................................................................. 4
       2.   MAJOR EVALUATIONS: PROVIDING REAL-TIME FEEDBACK ON WORLD BANK GROUP REFORMS (OBJECTIVE 2) .......................... 9
       3.   MESO EVALUATIONS .............................................................................................................................................. 12
       4.   COUNTRY PROGRAM EVALUATIONS........................................................................................................................... 12
       5.   PROJECT LEVEL EVALUATIONS AND VALIDATIONS ......................................................................................................... 13
       6.   LEARNING ENGAGEMENTS ....................................................................................................................................... 13
III.        ENHANCING IEG IMPACT ........................................................................................................................... 15
       1.   OBJECTIVES .......................................................................................................................................................... 15
       2.   EXPECTED IMPACT AND RESULTS FRAMEWORK ............................................................................................................ 15
       3.   IMPLEMENTING THE EXTERNAL REVIEW RECOMMENDATIONS......................................................................................... 15
       4.   REALIGNING AND STREAMLINING BUSINESS LINES ........................................................................................................ 16
       5.   ENHANCING QUALITY AND CREDIBILITY ...................................................................................................................... 17
       6.   ENHANCING KNOWLEDGE AND COMMUNICATIONS ...................................................................................................... 18
       7.   MONITORING IMPLEMENTATION OF EVALUATION RECOMMENDATIONS ........................................................................... 20
IV.         BUILDING EVALUATION CAPACITY ............................................................................................................. 21
V.          STAFFING AND BUDGET ............................................................................................................................. 23
       1. HUMAN RESOURCES............................................................................................................................................... 23
       2. BUDGET PROPOSAL ................................................................................................................................................ 24
       3. ACCOUNTABILITY FRAMEWORK ................................................................................................................................ 28
VI.         APPENDIXES .............................................................................................................................................. 30
       APPENDIX A: FY18-20 MAJOR EVALUATIONS DESCRIPTIONS .............................................................................................. 30
       APPENDIX B: IEG RESULTS FRAMEWORK.......................................................................................................................... 47
       APPENDIX C: SELECTIVITY TOOLS FOR EVALUATION TOPICS .................................................................................................. 54
       APPENDIX D: IMPLEMENTATION STATUS – RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE EXTERNAL REVIEW....................................................... 64
       APPENDIX E: STRENGTHENED QUALITY ASSURANCE FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 66
       APPENDIX F: LIST OF DGE STATEMENTS TO WBG EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS AND MANAGEMENT IN FY17 ...................................... 69
       APPENDIX G: UPDATE ON COMMITMENTS MADE IN FY16 ................................................................................................... 70
                     IEG WORK PROGRAM AND BUDGET (FY18)
                                    AND
                           INDICATIVE PLAN (FY19–20)


                                      Executive Summary

Strategic Directions for FY18–20

IEG’s strategic directions for FY18–20 have been defined to maximize alignment with the key
strategic priorities of the World Bank Group and the main development challenges expected to
affect its clients over that period. Internally, the development of a Forward Look, new agreements
under the IDA18 replenishment, a new IFC Strategy, and continuous efforts to modernize the
institution are guiding the World Bank Group’s strategic directions. Externally, the global
community has endorsed ambitious post-2015 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), but
headwinds across the globe, and a combination of long-term trends, cyclical factors, and
disruptions will also influence the development agenda. Against this backdrop, IEG’s work
program has been designed to help the World Bank Group enhance its development impact and
better address the most relevant development challenges faced by its clients.

Proposed Work Program

What remains the same. Based on a tight selectivity process, the proposed program of Major
Evaluations for FY18–20 responds to some of the biggest strategic priorities of relevance to World
Bank Group shareholders. It also benefitted from a further extended consultation with management
of the World Bank Group institutions as requested by the Committee on Development
Effectiveness (CODE). In total, IEG plans to maintain its delivery of eight Major Evaluations and
the annual report Results and Performance of the World Bank Group (RAP) except in FY18 for
which CODE has requested a postponement of the major evaluation Mobilization of Private
Capital. These resources will be used to finance meso evaluations. IEG will also continue to
undertake Project Performance Assessments (PPARs), albeit taking stock of the experience with
the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
(MIGA), and continuously introducing product improvements. Likewise, IEG expects to maintain
the coverage rate of validation products, while introducing revisions to the Implementation
Completion Report Reviews (ICRRs) in line with the World Bank’s institutional reforms in this
area.

Extending pilot phases. IEG will continue extending two pilot initiatives introduced since FY14.

   •   After a one-year hiatus and a stock-taking of the pilot to cluster Country Program
       Evaluations (CPEs), IEG will resume its program of annual CPEs. These evaluations are a
       crucial tool to enhance accountability and learning for results in country programs. World
       Bank Group management has expressed strong demand for CPEs in view of their high
       utility for client countries and meaningful role in the country engagement cycle. As agreed
       with CODE, where appropriate these evaluations will be clustered around client groups
       facing common development challenges.
                                                - ii -
   •   Supporting the World Bank Group’s learning from evidence will remain a key priority of
       IEG. IEG will extend by another year its pilot Learning Engagements. FY17 resource
       allocations for Learning Engagements have been committed. Demand for this product has
       resulted in a pipeline for FY18, testament to the strong interest from World Bank Group
       management to learn from evidence. The decision whether to continue learning
       engagements for FY19 would be taken on the basis of the results of the pilot assessment to
       be conducted in FY18.

What will be new. In response to the strong demand for medium-sized evaluations, IEG will
launch in FY18, on a limited pilot basis, meso evaluations. With only eight major evaluations per
year, IEG is unable to meet management and shareholder demand for evaluations. Both
management and CODE members have expressed interest in focused, just-in-time evaluations
from IEG to contribute to the search for effective solutions to specific development challenges as
they arise. Meso evaluations will have a strong focus on learning, and a nimble processing protocol
to maximize value added for the World Bank Group and its clients, as well as responsiveness and
timeliness.

Enhancing IEG’s Impact

IEG will endeavor to maximize its impact, not only by aligning its work program with the most
relevant priorities of the World Bank Group and its clients, but also by continuing to improve the
way it works. During the past five years, these efforts have led to a wide range of internal reforms,
including realigning business lines, enhancing quality and credibility, increasing knowledge and
communication, better monitoring implementation of evaluation recommendations, strengthening
efforts to develop evaluation capacity both externally and internally, and, most recently,
implementing the recommendations of the external review of IEG.

These efforts will continue during FY18–20, with a special focus on further investing in
strengthening outreach (especially toward World Bank Group operational staff and management,
to foster increased learning and feedback loops), and on enhancing the quality of evaluations by
relying on stronger methods, quality control, and staff training. In particular, FY18 will see the
launch of the IEG Academy, which is designed to equip IEG staff with skills in evolving and
innovative evaluation methods, among others, to enhance quality and influence.

Expected Impact and Results Framework

IEG’s proposed work program is expected to continue building substantive knowledge in strategic
areas and contribute to enhance learning and feedback loops. The choice of evaluation topics
strongly aligns with needs and knowledge gaps related to the twin goals, the 2013 Strategy, the
2017 Forward Look, IDA priorities, and IFC3.0. IEG will therefore provide CODE and
management of the World Bank Group institutions with relevant findings and lessons that should
help improve development effectiveness where possible. In addition, meso evaluations and
learning engagements should further enhance IEG’s contribution to World Bank Group learning
for greater development effectiveness.

IEG has upgraded its Results Framework to better align it with its mandate, intended outcomes,
and the format of the World Bank Group Corporate Scorecard. Based on a three-tier structure, the
                                                - iii -
revised Results Framework provides a clear logical framework for IEG’s inputs (Tier 3), its outputs
(Tier 2), and its outcomes (Tier 1). It also establishes a clear line of sight between IEG’s proposed
outcomes and its mandate.

Budget Request

The budget request to accomplish IEG’s FY18 work program is $36.93 million regular budget to
be approved by the Board and $0.6 million to be financed by trust funds. The requested budget is
consistent with the flat budget framework in real terms, excluding the institutionally mandated
increases due to the revised benefit rate and price factor. The shares of contribution from each of
the three institutions (World Bank, IFC, MIGA) remain broadly unchanged from prior years.

IEG has implemented cost savings measures foreseen in the Expenditure Review. In line with
commitments requested by the Board, a total of 8 percent savings was achieved. IEG is committed
to maintaining cost controls, through measures that include 1) the implementation of a strategic
staffing review being conducted in FY17, and the application of headcount and fixed cost ratio
caps, 2) strengthened internal budget processes, and 3) cost efficiencies resulting from a
continuous move toward more e-reports and tools. However, nominal unit costs for evaluations
will increase because of the increased benefit ratio.
                                                1


                                     I. Strategic Context

1. IEG Strategic Directions

        The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG)’s strategic directions in FY18–20 are
aligned with key strategic priorities of the World Bank Group and the main development
challenges expected to affect its clients over the same period. Internally, the development of a
Forward Look, new agreements under the International Development Agency (IDA) 18
replenishment, a new International Finance Corporation (IFC) Strategy, and continuous efforts to
modernize the institution, are guiding the World Bank Group’s future strategic directions.
Externally, the global community has endorsed ambitious post-2015 Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), but headwinds across the globe, and a combination of long-term trends, cyclical
factors, and disruptions will also influence the development agenda. Against this backdrop, IEG’s
work program is designed to help the World Bank Group enhance its development impact and
better address the most relevant development challenges faced by its clients.

        Independent evaluation is essential to help the World Bank Group tackle these
challenges and build a stronger internal culture to deliver results to clients based on evidence.
To achieve the development objectives laid out in the Forward Look, the IDA 18 agreement, and
other strategic documents, as well as its twin goals in a sustainable manner, the World Bank Group
needs to better understand what works and the reasons why, and to draw lessons and good practices
from evaluation findings and experience.

        IEG has continuously aligned with World Bank Group priorities. During the past five
years, IEG has adopted clear objectives for its work, aligned with the twin goals since they were
adopted, and aligned with the demand of the World Bank Group’s Executive Board to provide
real-time feedback on institutional changes to inform their discussion with management and
highlight the need for course corrections when needed. To ensure greater structure and
complementarity of evaluations, in FY15 IEG introduced three Strategic Engagement Areas
(SEAs) and three strategic pillars.


   •   Strategic Engagement Areas (SEAs): (1) Inclusive Growth, (2) Sustained Service
       Delivery for the Poor, and (3) Environmental Sustainability. IEG introduced these SEAs
       to review the World Bank Group’s contribution to the twin goals in segments that help
       deliver meaningful and robust evaluative evidence about the its overall achievements,
       while building complementarity of major evaluations.

   •   Strategic Pillars: (1) Helping Clients Tackle the Most Important Development
       Challenges, (2) Becoming the Solutions Bank, and (3) Working in Partnerships. These are
       three key changes introduced by the World Bank Group’s 2013 Strategy that can affect
       development effectiveness. Therefore, IEG is well placed to review, assess, and provide
       management and the Executive Board with early feedback on reforms in these three areas
       to ensure that timely course corrections are made when needed.
                                                                   -2-

                                             Figure 1: IEG’s Strategic Framework



                                                    Help WBG Achieve Its Twin Goals
                                                             Effectively

                                                           IEG Results Framework


                                      Obj. 1- What Works & Why ?              Obj. 2- Real-Time Learning
            Engagement Areas




                                                                                                                      Strategic Pillars
                                                                             Helping
                                             Sustained                    Clients Tackle
                Strategic




                               Inclusive      Service    Environmental       the Most      Solutions   Partnerships
                                Growth        Delivery   Sustainability     Important        Bank
                                               for the                    Development
                                                Poor                       Challenges




                                                              IEG Evaluations



2. External and Internal Landscape

       In setting out this work program, IEG carefully took into account external and internal
challenges to achieving the 2030 goals.

External Environment

        Although nearly 1.1 billion people have escaped poverty since 1990, cyclical and
longer-term trends may slow future progress. The SDGs and the goal of eliminating extreme
poverty by 2030 might not be achieved without accelerated economic growth and reductions in
inequalities. However, many economies are still struggling to recover from the 2008 global
financial crisis and the subsequent slowdown in global growth. Other cyclical effects that
negatively affect the achievement of the 2030 goals include the end of the commodity super-cycle;
a significant drop in net capital inflows to emerging markets and developing economies; rising
levels of corporate debt; and fiscal pressures in these countries. Furthermore, long-term trends and
various disruptions are expected to further influence development prospects. These include
demographic and growth transitions; the changing nature of globalization; rapid urbanization; and
pressures on the world’s resources, particularly as a result of climate change. Other forces could
unleash more frequent disruptions—such as financial and humanitarian crises, natural disasters,
pandemics, social instability, and crime.

        Overall, the global environment will pose new challenges for developing countries,
with implications for the development agenda. Responding to the economic slowdown will
require the use of countercyclical finance; supporting the private sector and banking systems to
weather the downturn; undertaking supply-side structural reforms; rebuilding investor confidence;
and encouraging private investment in sectors that generate sustainable growth and employment.
Increasing opportunities for women could further enhance productivity. In adopting strategies for
technological advances, countries will be challenged to balance the need for high-tech with its
implications for the labor market. Protecting the poor and the vulnerable while adjusting to cyclical
                                                    -3-


challenges must remain central to keeping development on track. Risk-based prevention will be
needed to mitigate the impact of shocks and fragility, for example by shoring up disease and
disaster prevention, addressing drivers of conflict, reinforcing climate resilience, and better
supervising the financial sector to curb illegal finance and control risks. These challenges will be
faced by all countries directly or indirectly, and thus require local, regional, and global solutions.

Internal Environment: World Bank Group Strategic Priorities

        Forward Look: A Vision for the World Bank Group in 2030. The Forward Look
reiterates the World Bank Group’s commitment to reach the twin goals in a sustainable manner. It
proposes to do so in three ways: by (1) fostering inclusive and sustainable economic growth; (2)
investing in people; and (3) fostering resilience to global shocks and threats. The Forward Look
presents the World Bank Group’s plans to serve all of its client segments, scale up private sector
mobilization, and lead on global issues, such as the Finance for Development agenda, the SDGs,
the Paris Agreement on climate, and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction. It also
promises changes to its business model to fulfill the paradigm shift that emerged from the Finance
for Development agenda “whereby official aid will need to be utilized strategically to catalyze
public and private sector investments and to mobilize additional private capital.”

         “Road to the Better World Bank Group”: The Cascade Approach. Under the Cascade
Approach, the World Bank Group has developed new principles of deployment (Figure 2). Its
institutions are working together to link reform, investment, mobilization, and catalyzation to
create, expand, or unlock private markets. The World Bank Group will also continue reforming
operational, administrative, and human resources practices to become more agile and increase
exposure in IDA and fragile and conflict-affected situations (FCSs).

                                 Figure 2: The Cascade Approach


       Cascade approach

                                   Can commercial financing be cost-effectively mobilized for
                                   sustainable investment? if not…

                                                 Can upstream reforms be put in place to address
                                                 market failures? If not …


                                                              Can risk instruments and credit enhancements
                                                              cost effectively cover remaining risks? If not …


                                                                           Can development objectives be
                                                                           resolved with scarce public
                                                                           financing?
                                                 -4-


                                        II. Work Program

        Influencing Change with Independent Evaluations. Over the past five years IEG has
increasingly moved to a strategic selection process for its major evaluations to ensure greater
influence of each individual evaluation, and of all of them collectively.

        Pursuing Two Objectives. IEG continues to pursue two objectives, each of them in three
different ways:

     •   Achieving the Twin Goals—What Works and Why? Deepening evidence about the
         results of WBG programs and activities and their contribution to the World Bank Group’s
         strategic priorities and ultimately its twin goals. This objective is addressed through IEG’s
         three Strategic Engagement Areas (SEAs) (see paragraph 3, first bullet);

     •   Real-Time Feedback on World Bank Group Reforms: Generating evidence on
         operational choices so as to enable mid-course corrections and promote a stronger internal
         culture for results, accountability, and learning. This objective is addressed through IEG’s
         three strategic pillars (see paragraph 3 second bullet).

        Strategically selecting major evaluations. In preparing this year’s work program, IEG
kept strategic influence at the forefront of its consultation process with stakeholders and in its
review of economic trends and development challenges (see paragraphs 5–6). IEG is thereby
leveraging the work it carried out in prior years, including FY17, while using a strong selectivity
process to align its future work program with priorities of the World Bank Group Board and
management, and to address evaluation gaps (Appendix C). The following paragraphs provide a
summary of past achievements and an outlook on the forward work program. Each of the listed
evaluations for FY18 and FY19 is further described in Appendix A, and presented in summary in
Table 1.

1.       Major Evaluations: Achieving the Twin Goals (Objective 1)

        Aligning IEG’s 2015 SEAs with the World Bank Group’s “3 Ways.” Following the
World Bank Group’s adoption of the Forward Look in FY17, IEG is now adjusting its three SEAs
to the “2 goals, 3 ways to achieve them” as follows: (1) Inclusive Growth becomes Inclusive and
Sustainable Economic Growth, which makes sustainability an explicit dimension of IEG’s newly
defined SEA; (2) Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor becomes Investing in People, where
IEG will continue its emphasis on service delivery to the poor and the bottom 40 percent; and (3)
Environmental Sustainability becomes Fostering Resilience to Global Shocks and Threats, which
broadens IEG’s environmental sustainability SEA. These newly defined SEAs are interrelated, so
that a number of evaluations will address several SEAs simultaneously.

Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Growth

       Inclusive and Sustainable Growth has been a key focus area in IEG’s work. In line
with the World Bank Group’s central role in promoting economic growth that is inclusive and
sustainable, IEG has had a strong set of evaluations conducted in this area. It will continue to do
so, given its importance for client countries and the significance of the World Bank Group’s
                                               -5-


services. The following provides a short retrospective of work accomplished and a brief outlook
of planned evaluations under this SEA.

        Addressing the Twin Goals. In view of the centrality of the twin goals as set out in the
2013 Strategy and reaffirmed in the Forward Look, IEG undertook two evaluations: The Poverty
Focus of Country Programs and World Bank Group Support to Shared Prosperity. These shed
light on how well the World Bank Group’s activities are already aligned with these goals, and
where adjustments are needed. The findings of both evaluations showed that the World Bank
Group has longstanding experience in poverty reduction and in addressing distributional issues
(even before the adoption of the Shared Prosperity goal). Analytical work in both of these areas
has been promising. However, translating analytics into strategic choices and operational realities
has been inconsistent and challenging. Likewise, theories of change that explain how a World
Bank Group intervention would achieve the twin goals were often neither articulated clearly nor
supported with relevant results or monitoring frameworks. Deliberate efforts will be required to
strategize and operationalize the twin goals.

        Creating an Environment for Private Sector Development. Over the past five years,
IEG addressed various dimensions of creating an environment that promotes private sector
development. In particular, IEG’s evaluations covered the following topics: innovation and
entrepreneurship development, investment climate reform, small and medium enterprise (SME)
finance, public-private partnerships (PPPs), jobs and competitiveness, higher education, and the
rural nonfarm economy. All of these play important and interrelated roles in private sector growth.
In FY18–20, IEG will expand its work in this area by addressing the following issues: Facilitating
Trade (FY18) will focus on trade-enabling infrastructure and implementation of diagnostic-based
trade policy reforms that support private sector development. This evaluation is particularly timely
in an economic environment with stagnant global trade, heightened trade policy uncertainty and
subdued cross-border investment. Renewable energy is an essential avenue to sustainable and
inclusive growth through improved energy supply, access, and energy security. Renewable energy
equally plays an important role in mobilizing the private sector and in mitigating the impact of
climate change. IEG’s FY19 Renewable Energy evaluation will focus on energy generation (a key
sector together with transport and buildings) and will deepen the FY15 review of IFC’s experience
and extend the analysis to the entire World Bank Group. Fostering Regional Integration (FY19)
will assess the World Bank Group’s transformational engagements through regional integration
interventions covering, inter alia, the IDA 2003 Regional Pilot Program and the US$2 billion
regional IDA18 window as a timely input to the IDA replenishment. Other evaluations planned
for FY20 include: Reaping Digital Dividends (impact of disruptive technologies on private sector
development); Strengthening Bank Stability and Intermediation (impact on private sector growth
and stability of deepening access to finance via the banking system); and Role of Cities in Growth
and Development (understanding the factors that help to attract, retain, and expand private sector
involvement in urban economies, and improving the competitiveness of cities as a pathway to
eliminating extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity).

       Mobilizing Finance. The Forward Look sets out an ambitious agenda for transforming the
World Bank Group’s approach to mobilization by introducing the concepts of creating markets,
that will be implemented through the Cascade. IEG’s evaluations included various avenues
through which the World Bank Group pursues mobilization of private capital: trade finance and
SME finance (debt), capital markets, housing finance, and catastrophic drawdown loans (bonds),
                                                 -6-


guarantees, including policy-based guarantees (guarantees), and PPPs (advisory). In line with the
Forward Look, reforms are under way in the area of direct and indirect mobilization of private
capital. An evaluation of direct mobilization (Mobilization of Private Capital), originally foreseen
for FY18, was postponed at the request of CODE. IEG is proposing an evaluation of the World
Bank Group’s past experience along the value chain of the ‘Creating Markets’ concept: linking
reforms, investments, mobilization, and catalyzation to help build on this experience in the
operationalization of the concept (Creating New Markets FY19).

         Institutions for Growth. IEG’s recent work on the public sector’s capacity to create
conditions for inclusive and sustainable growth has been limited. IEG’s learning product Tax
Revenue Mobilization (FY17) provided findings and lessons on factors that may increase
development effectiveness in tax policy and administration to support a growth agenda. The
Forward Look document states that in coming years, “the World Bank Group will continue to play
its historical role” of “building solid institutions of governance and improving client capacity.” A
number of proposed IEG evaluations will seek insights that can inform future efforts to pursue the
objective laid out in the Forward Look: Public Finance for Development (FY19) will provide a
body of knowledge that can help the World Bank Group to boosting the role of public institutions,
finance and policies in stimulating and supporting inclusive economic growth. Also, the fiscal
sustainability discussion in this proposed evaluation will address the economic sustainability of
growth trajectories. This evaluation is particularly timely as many countries among the WBG
clients are still suffering from depleted fiscal buffers since the 2008 global financial crisis or since
the end of the commodity super-cycle. Those countries, and many others, are struggling to find
fiscal space to provide adequate services to their population and close their infrastructure gaps to
support growth. The Decentralization and Effectiveness of Sub-National Governments (FY19)
and Institutional Capacity Strengthening (FY20) will seek insights on what it takes for the public
sector to effectively and efficiently provide better services, especially to the poor; it will thus be a
source of evaluative knowledge on better linking institutional arrangements and capacity-building
efforts to inclusive and sustainable growth objectives.

        Economic Sustainability of Growth. Global growth has been subdued in recent years
and recovery prospects are still uncertain. Weak investment and productivity growth weigh on
medium-term prospects for WBG client countries. This low growth environment and prospects in
turn will make it challenging to achieve the twin goals and the SDGs. In the coming years,
protecting the poor and the vulnerable while adjusting to cyclical challenges must remain central
to keeping development on track. Several recent IEG evaluations included issues related to the
sustainability of growth. For instance, the FY14 Public-Private Partnerships evaluation found that
only a few PPPs included analyses of the fiscal implications of PPP deals; this lack of analysis
creates risks to the fiscal sustainability of such investments. IEG will invest in providing evaluative
knowledge that can help sharpen the WBG’s support for higher and sustainable economic growth
in its client countries. IEG will address the theme in the following evaluations: A series of
individual country program evaluations in FY19 and FY20 leading to a cluster country program
evaluation in FY20, Managing Economic Transitions, will focus on how the World Bank Group
has helped countries transition from low and volatile growth to high and sustained growth. Public
Finance for Development (FY19) (see paragraph 17); Facilitating Trade (FY18) and Fostering
Regional Integration (FY19); and The Role of Cities in Growth and Development (FY20) (see
paragraph 15), which will explore and assess, inter alia, how policy and investment decisions about
urban infrastructure, buildings, and land use are critical in preventing cities from being locked into
                                                  -7-


unsustainable development pathways, with a view to identifying good practices and drawing
lessons from them.

Investing in People

        Human Capital. The gap analysis (Appendix C.3), shows that IEG has extensively
evaluated the human development sectors in recent years. In comparison to their size in the World
Bank Group portfolio, IEG has undertaken a disproportionate number of major evaluations in these
sectors (Appendix C.3, Figure C.3), except in education (Appendix C.3, Figure C.2). In FY17,
IEG delivered a major evaluation, Higher Education, which helps close this evaluation gap. IEG
will maintain coverage of human capital in its work program, consistent with the importance of
this topic for World Bank Group clients and in light of some of the long-term global forces
affecting human development. The Health Services (FY18) and Demographic and Population
Issues (FY20) evaluations will provide further insights on investing in human capital as countries
face new public health challenges (including epidemics) and different population trends in
different client segments (for example, youth-related issues in low-income countries and aging-
related issues in some high middle-income countries).

         Sustained Service Delivery for the Poor. IEG’s recent work has covered several service
delivery topics. Urban Transport, Water and Sanitation, evaluations and Gender in Community-
Driven Development learning product in FY17 provided findings and recommendations on
expanding access, improving quality, and making service delivery models or markets sustainable.
Together with older evaluations focused on service delivery, namely Access to Electricity,
Financial Inclusion, Micro-Finance in Africa, Health Finance, and Early Childhood Development,
IEG has a relatively comprehensive set of insights
                                                       Box 1: Influencing Change with Evaluative
into service delivery to the poor (see Box 1 on the Evidence: Early Childhood Development.
impact of early childhood development evaluation).
Additional evaluations in FY18–20 will enhance The World Bank introduced two notable changes
efforts to ensure good, reliable public service to the way it structures and organizes its early
delivery to the poor so they can invest in themselves childhood development work, which at least in
                                                       part were informed by IEG’s evaluation. World
and protect such investments in the event of crisis. Bank Support to Early Childhood Development:
Forced Displacement (FY18) will address the
challenges (and opportunities) that widespread First, the World Bank made an important shift in
forced displacement present from the service communicating the importance of early
provision perspectives. Decentralization and stimulation, adequate health and nutrition, and
                                                       protection from vulnerable situations, which has
Effectiveness of Sub-National Governments (FY19) helped to connect the early childhood development
will address the subsidiarity and multi-institution work with nutrition.
dimensions of the financing and provision of
services to the poor and vulnerable; and Institutional Second, the World Bank undertook a mapping
Capacity Strengthening (FY20) will address process to prioritize countries with high stunting
                                                       rates (an indicator of the risk of subsequent delay
institutional capacity issues on policy and regulation in children’s development); in these countries it
as well as the supply, delivery, and monitoring sides will increase its activities in early childhood
of services to the poor.                               development.

      Methodological framework on behavior
change. During the past two years of implementing this SEA, IEG developed methodological
frameworks to systematically assess aspects of service delivery outcomes and their effects on
                                                  -8-


behavior change. These frameworks were applied to the Urban Transport and Water and
Sanitation, evaluations in FY17 and are being applied to the Health Services evaluation to be
delivered in FY18. To date, the methodological frameworks for service delivery and behavior
change, have been shared within the World Bank Group through collaboration with relevant
operational groups, Brown Bag Lunches, Results Measurement and Evidence Stream (RMES)
sessions, policy notes, blogs, leveraging Community of Practice platforms, and the Global
Development Indicators (GDI) portal. The knowledge accrued by this set of evaluations will be
curated, in collaboration with the World Bank Group’s knowledge leads, to make it easy for
operational staff to access and apply.

Fostering Resilience

        Considerable evaluative gaps exist on environment. IEG’s last major environment
evaluation was completed in 2012. Since then, only two environment-related learning products
have been produced: one on Land Administration and one on Environmental Development Policy
Financing, both delivered in FY16. Some of IEG’s other evaluations have addressed elements of
environmental sustainability—for instance, Urban Transport or Water Supply and Sanitation
under the service delivery SEA, the SCD/CPF model, or the Clustered Country Program
Evaluation of Small States—but leaving considerable evaluative gaps in coverage of
environmental investments. Moreover, several global forces discussed in paragraph 5 call for
renewed attention to environmental issues. Through its forthcoming evaluations related to the
broad theme of environment, IEG can help inform future World Bank Group engagements in this
area so as to maximize value added and long term impact.

        Meeting the climate change agenda. The Box 2: Rapid turnaround learning
Forward Look emphasizes the World Bank Group’s engagements: Climate Change
ongoing leading role in climate change in the
follow-up to the Paris Agreement (COP21) and Climate Risk Screening Tool. IEG supported just-
IDA18 commitments. A significant effort is in-time insights on how the screening process for
                                                      climate and disaster risks is being rolled out, with
required to shift from the Kyoto Protocol to this a view to informing the potential extension of the
new agreement —a shift that should be informed by screening requirement under IDA17 to IBRD
evaluative evidence from past experience. IEG will countries.
address this need with its evaluation of Carbon
Finance (FY18). The evaluation of Renewable Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation. At
                                                      the request of the Climate Change Cross-Cutting
Energy (paragraph 15) also addresses climate Solution Area, IEG prepared a just-in-time
change and resilience dimensions: switching from lessons-focused synthesis of key findings from
carbon to renewable sources of energy is an IEG evaluations in the recent five-year period, on
essential component of the climate agenda. In the World Bank Group’s support for climate
addition, it is the sector where considerable funding change mitigation and adaptation.
from the private sector will be mobilized for climate
change, and therefore central to the World Bank Group’s commitments. Likewise, renewable
energy is an essential avenue to achieve goals for energy access and supply, energy security,
climate change, and private sector involvement. The World Bank Group’s forward orientation will
benefit from the FY19 evaluation on renewable energy that will deepen an earlier learning
engagement of IFC’s experience in FY15, based on self-evaluations, and extend the analysis to the
entire World Bank Group.
                                                -9-


        Strategic effects of environmental pollution and degradation. In addition,
environmental pollution significantly affects client countries’ inclusive and sustainable economic
growth trajectories; they also affect people’s health and ability to participate in the economy. IEG’s
evaluation of the World Bank Group’s support to client countries to address pollution control
issues, Toward a Clean World for All, will be delivered in FY18. Environmental degradation is a
consequence of climate change and pollution, and often drives migration. IEG therefore plans to
undertake an evaluation of Environmental Degradation in FY20 as a companion piece to the
previous environmentally-focused evaluations.

        Resilience. Though not an explicit part of this SEA, resilience has featured in several IEG
evaluations, which culminated in the preparation of a synthesis of findings as a background report
to an event IEG hosted during the 2017 Spring Meetings. Resilience matters in urban contexts.
When urbanization is carried out in an inclusive and resilient manner it enables the sustainable
reduction of poverty and improvements in shared prosperity. Decisions on urban infrastructure
investments are critical to building resilient communities. The World Bank Group is redefining
urban sustainability in terms of urban resilience, which includes social, environmental, and
economic and financial dimensions. Given the broad new perspective of building sustainable
urbanization via urban resilience, IEG plans to carry out a two-part major evaluation in FY19
(Resilient Cities) and FY20 (The Role of Cities in Growth and Development). In addition, IEG will
address multiple dimensions of resilience under the upcoming evaluations on Toward a Clean
World for All (FY18), Renewable Energy (FY19), Public Finance for Development (FY19),
Forced Displacement (FY19), and Strengthening Bank Stability and Intermediation (FY20).

2.    Major Evaluations: Providing Real-Time Feedback on World Bank Group Reforms
(Objective 2)

        Real-time feedback at explicit request of the Board. After the adoption of the 2013
World Bank Group Strategy, the Board asked IEG to provide early feedback on the implementation
of the reforms entailed, to ensure timely course corrections. These IEG evaluations do not focus
on results, and their timing is adjusted to ensure that the World Bank Group has gained sufficient
experience to ensure a meaningful evaluation. The three strategic pillars—client engagement,
Solutions Bank Group, and partnerships—have been reaffirmed in the Forward Look, which
prioritizes assistance to all client segments, improving the business model to become more agile,
and working in partnerships.

From Client Engagement to Assisting All Client Segments

       IEG has built, over the past three years, substantial knowledge on what works to
render country strategies effective, including three learning products in FY15: Bank-IFC
Cooperation in Country Strategies, Selectivity in Country Strategies, and Results Frameworks in
Country Strategies. Likewise, the clustered country program evaluations on Resource-Rich
Countries and Small States aimed to help the World Bank Group realize opportunities to promote
south-south learning among clients that face similar challenges. In FY17, IEG continued to build
this knowledge base through its Process Evaluation of the Early Implementation of the New
SCD/CPF Country Engagement Model as well as the early evaluation of the Program for Results
(PforR) instrument. The planned cluster of country program evaluations on Managing Economic
Transitions (FY20) will focus on several countries and how the World Bank Group has helped
                                               - 10 -


them tackle their most difficult development challenges. The proposed evaluation on World Bank
Group Role and Convening Power in Changing the Development Landscape will help in
understanding the drivers of World Bank Group’s effectiveness and value added in various client
segments. The evaluation of IFC’s Approaches to Engaging Clients for Development Impact
(FY18), for example, assesses the main modalities of working with IFC clients, across sectors and
regions, so as to inform the future implementation of IFC’s client strategy and enhance its
developmental value added.

Solutions Bank Group and the Agile Pilot

       IEG has done considerable work to support the World Bank Group’s aspiration to
be a Solutions Bank Group. Whether Solutions Bank Group or Agile Bank, learning from
experience, course corrections, and adaptation are essential. IEG’s work on managing for results
(M4R) includes evaluations of World Bank Group Impact Evaluations, Learning and Results, Self-
Evaluation Systems, and the PforR instrument, the Results and Performance of the World Bank
Group 2016, and a learning product on Transformational Engagements. These evaluations
highlighted key weaknesses and constraints in the World Bank Group’s approach to results, and
made suggestions that could help overcome these challenges. CODE expressed interest in
following up on this stream of work to support the conversation with World Bank Group
management on the Agile Pilot. IEG will evaluate (i) the Solutions Bank Group model as
implemented through the Global Practices and Cross-Cutting Solutions Areas (FY19); and (ii)
World Bank Group convening power, which will cover, among other things, the partnership with
the United Nations (FY20). The World Bank Group’s convening power will also be addressed in
other ongoing thematic and sector evaluations. Their findings will be used to inform the major
evaluation.

Working in Partnerships

       IEG continues to integrate the review of partnerships into its major thematic and
sector evaluations. Three out of six FY17 thematic evaluations covered World Bank Group
Partnerships. For instance, the evaluation of the Rural Non-Farm Economy reviewed the Global
Agriculture and Food Security Program (GAFSP); the Water Supply and Sanitation evaluation
reviewed the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), the water supply and sanitation activities of
the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), and the Global Partnership on Output-
Based Aid (GPOBA); and the evaluation on Urban Transport reviewed the Africa Transport
Policy Program (SSATP) and the role played by the PPIAF. Partnerships will be included in
relevant evaluations, but no standalone evaluation is foreseen.

       Special focus on Engaging Citizens. Apart from formal partnerships like those listed
above, IEG is undertaking an evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Approach to Engaging
Citizens and its effect on development effectiveness, scheduled for delivery in FY18.

PROPOSED MAJOR EVALUATIONS

        IEG proposes to undertake the following major evaluations. IEG will continue to
produce eight evaluations each year, except FY18, when the evaluation of direct mobilization of
private capital is to be postponed. The resources freed from this evaluation will be used to finance
                                               - 11 -


 Meso evaluations. A one-page summary for each of the proposed major evaluations for FY18 and
 FY19 is provided in Appendix A. The list of evaluations for FY20 is indicative and will be subject
 to review and confirmation in next year’s work program discussion when a total of eight major
 evaluations will be agreed.

                         Table 1: Proposed Major Evaluations for FY18–20

                        FY18                            FY19                          FY20

                                  Inclusive and Sustainable Economic Growth
             Facilitating Trade             Public Finance for              Managing Economic
                                            Development                     Transitions CCPE
                                            Creating New Markets            Reaping Digital
                                                                            Dividends
                                            Fostering Regional              Strengthening Bank
                                            Integration                     Stability and
                                                                            Intermediation
                                            Renewable Energy                Role of Cities in
Obj. 1:                                                                     Growth and
What                                                                        Development
Works &                                        Investing in People
Why?         Essential Health Care          Decentralization and          Institutional Capacity
                                            Effectiveness of Sub-National Strengthening
                                            Governments
             Forced Displacements                                         Demographic and
                                                                          Population Issues

                                              Fostering Resilience
             Clean World for All            Resilient Cities                Environmental
                                                                            Degradation
             Carbon Finance
                    Helping Clients Tackle the Most Important Development Challenges
             IFC Client Engagement          WBG Convening Power
             Model
Obj. 2:                                   Becoming a Solutions Bank
Real-Time                                  Process Evaluation of
Learning                                   GPs/CCSAs
                                           Working in Partnerships
             Engaging Citizens

                                                        RAP
             RAP 2017- Environmental        RAP 2018 – TBD                  RAP -2019- TBD
             Sustainability
                                                  - 12 -


3.      Meso Evaluations

        IEG proposes to launch in FY18, on a pilot           Box 3: From Rapid Synthesis to Meso
basis, meso evaluations, in response to the strong           Evaluation: Equity Investments
demand for smaller, more focused, just-in-time
evaluations. With only eight major evaluations per           In response to information needs of senior
year, IEG is unable to meet management and                   management at IFC, IEG prepared an analysis of
                                                             its existing data on equity investments. The
shareholder demand for additional major evaluations.         analysis compared financial and development
Both management and CODE members have                        outcomes of equity investments, with blended
expressed interest in faster, more focused, just-in-         (equity and loans), and loans (only) to understand
time IEG evaluations to contribute evaluative                their respective performance.
evidence and learning to the search for effective
                                                             The findings were useful, but they:
solutions to specific development challenges as they
arise.                                                          - Had to be caveated in that the sample size of
                                                                  existing evaluations is limited;
         Meso Evaluations will have a strong focus
on learning and a nimble processing protocol to               - Could not provide insights into factors that
maximize responsiveness and value added for the                 explain these results, due to limited
World Bank Group. Meso evaluations will focus on                information.
distilling and sharing with World Bank Group A Meso evaluation will provide additional
management evaluative findings and lessons on well- evaluative evidence to deepen understanding and
defined specific topics from past work, and will inform decision-making.
include additional focused work to deepen analysis
and insight. With one or more World Bank Group units expressing interest in the topic and ready
to act as IEG’s technical counterparts, meso evaluations will not include recommendations or
action plans; rather, they will focus on lessons for future learning and feedback loops. To promote
learning outside the World Bank Group, and in line with IEG’s access to information policy, meso
evaluations will be published on IEG’s website, and will be submitted to the Board for information.

       Flexibility to determine topics for meso evaluations during the fiscal year will
contribute to greater responsiveness. Unlike Major Evaluations, the topics of focus for Meso
Evaluations will not be determined ex ante, so that IEG can respond to just-in-time requests from
World Bank Group management. The number of meso evaluations will not exceed three in FY18.

        Implementation Arrangements. In FY18, the pilot meso evaluations will be financed by
reducing the number of major evaluations by one. Their budget and timeframe for delivery will be
limited to ensure that they are responsive and cost-effective. A process guide will be agreed with
World Bank Group management prior to the start of the first meso evaluation; it will be used in
the pilot phase, and revised and formalized afterwards should meso evaluations become a regular
IEG evaluation instrument. The experience with meso evaluations will be reviewed together with
World Bank Group management. CODE will receive a report.

4.      Country Program Evaluations

      CPEs are a crucial tool to enhance accountability and learning for results in country
programs. These evaluations relate directly to the Forward Look’s focus on serving all its client
segments according to their needs. Therefore, IEG proposes to conduct several single-country or
                                               - 13 -


clustered CPEs every year. For FY18, IEG proposes to conduct a CPE of Mexico, to complement
the evaluative stocktaking on middle-income countries in FY17, and continue building knowledge
and lessons about the World Bank Group’s role in these countries. In addition, IEG will undertake
a CPE of the Rwanda program. CPEs planned for FY18–20 will inform a clustered CPE on
Managing Economic Transitions planned for FY20. In this evaluation, IEG will assess the World
Bank’s support for countries that successfully managed to transition from low or volatile growth
paths to sustainable and higher growth, a topic that is relevant in the current low-growth context.

5.     Project Level Evaluations and Validations

       Project Performance Assessment Reports (PPARs) are a crucial tool for assessing
performance at the project level and for extracting lessons of experience for future project
design. The coverage of PPARs increased from 19 percent of closed World Bank projects in FY16
to 23 percent in FY17. IEG has used such project-level evaluation data to carry out portfolio
analysis in major evaluations and to contribute to raising awareness and building the capacity of
the World Bank Group’s operational staff, presenting the findings and lessons at corporate events
and sector weeks. IEG will continue to maintain its coverage of PPARs at around 20–25 percent
of closed World Bank projects. Regarding IFC and MIGA, the ongoing review of the PPAR
instrument will inform the way in which this business line will be adjusted before IEG continues
or modifies its implementation.

       Validations of Self-Evaluations. IEG performs an important due diligence role in
reviewing and validating self-evaluations to confirm whether project ratings are sufficiently
substantiated with evidence and warranted. IEG will aim for a 100 percent coverage of closed
World Bank project self-evaluations, which is essential to ensure validity of trend data reported in
the annual Results and Performance report (RAP). IEG will maintain its standards for reviewing
country learning reviews (CLRs), and project completion reports (ICRRs, XPSRs, PCRs and
PERs) of the three World Bank Group institutions, while working with management on any
necessary updates. For instance, the reform of the Implementation Completion Report of the World
Bank will require adjustments to IEG’s review process and system.

6.     Learning Engagements

        At the request of the Board, IEG has invested in promoting learning from
independent evaluation at the World Bank Group. Following a thorough review of IEG’s
earlier pilot of learning products, IEG significantly revamped its efforts in this area in FY17. A
new series of learning engagements is aimed at helping the World Bank Group’s staff and clients
to absorb and apply knowledge from IEG evaluations. IEG carried out a total of 11 Learning
Engagements in FY17 (Table 2), covering a wide range of topics, and demonstrating
management’s strong demand to build on IEG’s findings to improve operational processes and
development solutions.

        Given the high demand for Learning Engagements, IEG proposes to continue the
pilot in FY18, and to assess the pilot before end-FY18. IEG committed $750,000 in FY17 for
learning engagements, and demand for this product is already building up for FY18. Given World
Bank Group management’s increasingly strong interest in in learning from evidence, and the
suitability of the Learning Engagement product to support this effort, IEG proposes to extend the
                                               - 14 -


pilot by one year, allocating $750,000 of its FY18 budget to this vehicle. An additional year will
allow results from the first year to consolidate, and will support the assessment of the pilot in
FY18, which will then inform decisions regarding learning engagements for FY19.

                        Table 2: Learning Engagements approved in FY17

 S. No                                 Topics                                WBG Co-Sponsors
   1     Defining and Measuring Project Outcomes                            OPSRR
   2     Developing the Post-Completion Evaluation (PCE) Prototype          OPSPQ
   3     Service Delivery: Deriving and Sharing Lessons Learned from the    GDI
         Evaluation Evidence, & Socializing IEG's SD Evaluation
         Framework
   4     Learning from the Past, Building for the Future: Sharing Lessons   GPVGE, GWAGP,
         Learned from Evaluative Evidence, Combining Evidence with New      GINI
         Approaches, and Socializing IEG's New Behavior Change Tool
         (CRI2SP) for Future Evaluations and World Bank Operations
   5     Learning from the World Bank’s Support of Student Assessment:      GEDGE
         Stakeholders Perceptions in Brazil, Laos, and Kyrgyz Republic
   6     Developing Resilience Building Results Frameworks and              GGSCE
         Indicators: Sharing Lessons from IEG's Evaluative Evidence in
         Sustainable Development
   7     Building Resilience—A Synthesis of Recent IEG Experience           GSP05, GCCDR
   8     IEGSD Collaborative Exchanges on Performance Measurement and       GWA05, GFAGE,
         Monitoring at the Transport, Agriculture, and Water Weeks          GTISO
   9     Addressing Situations of Fragility, Conflict, and Violence in      GCFDR
         Middle-income Countries: "What to do and How to do it" with
         World Bank Operations
   10    Learning from the World Bank’s Support of Nutrition in Senegal     GHN13, GHNGF,
                                                                            GHNDR
   11    Guidance for the New "Brief” ICR Process, Developed Using a        OPSPQ
         Participatory, Evaluative Approach


       IEG has continued to deliver a range of brief, “just-in-time” learning and synthesis
summaries and notes, often at the request of World Bank Group technical units. Recent examples
include brief learning notes on advisory risk management, results measurement, global
microfinance, and capacity building for advisory teams. These engagements enabled constructive
discussion on issues related to project structuring and preparation. A series of sector highlights
provided on-time summaries of findings based on recently completed project evaluations,
organized by sectors and targeted at midlevel managers and operational staff. In addition, IEG
developed learning-focused products with user-centric approaches that made them engaging and
accessible. In collaboration with the World Bank Global Operations Knowledge Management
Department (GOKMU), all IEG FY17 learning products have been published in the World Bank’s
Open Learning Campus.
                                                - 15 -


                                 III. Enhancing IEG Impact

1. Objectives

       IEG endeavors to maximize its impact by aligning its work program with the most
relevant priorities of the World Bank Group and its clients and by continuously improving
the way it works. During the past five years, these efforts have led to a wide range of internal
reforms, including realigning business lines, enhancing quality and credibility, increasing
knowledge and communication, better monitoring the implementation of evaluation
recommendations, strengthening efforts to develop evaluation capacity externally and internally,
and more recently the implementation of recommendations of the external review of IEG.

2. Expected Impact and Results Framework

        IEG has upgraded its Results Framework to improve its alignment with its mandate
and with its intended outcomes. Following the example of the World Bank Group’s Corporate
Scorecard, IEG’s Results Framework is three-tier structure (Appendix B that relates IEG’s inputs
(Tier 3), outputs (Tier 2), and outcomes (Tier 1), and establishes a clear line of sight between IEG’s
proposed outcomes and its mandate. Furthermore, it aligns IEG’s results chain with the principles
established in the new World Bank Group Evaluation Framework to maximize the use of
evaluations. Targets have been set at ambitious yet realistic levels. In parallel, IEG is updating its
Theory of Change to align it more closely with its new Results Framework.

3. Implementing the External Review Recommendations

      Significant progress has been made on all recommendations of the External Review.
The External Review of IEG provided eight strategic recommendations to enhance IEG’s impact
(Box 4). Despite the tight timeline, most recommendations have been or are close to being
implemented, including the development of a World Bank Group Evaluation Framework
(Appendix D).

                        Box 4: IEG’s External Review—Recommendations
 1. IEG should remain an independent unit within the World Bank Group with clear accountability and
    learning responsibilities.
 2. Regular independent external reviews of IEG should normally be conducted every five years;
    however, CODE reserves the flexibility to determine the appropriateness of delaying or expediting
    the timing of the review.
 3. A single six-year non-renewable term for the Director-General, Evaluation (DGE) should be
    established, with no possibility of entry or re-entry into the World Bank Group.
 4. The World Bank Group should develop an institution-wide, principle-based living evaluation policy,
    and establish terms of reference for IEG; IEG should develop a 4–5-year strategy.
 5. CODE’s oversight functions should be strengthened.
 6. The quality, relevance, usefulness, credibility, and influence of IEG’s work should be enhanced.
 7. The process for major, thematic, and sectoral evaluations should be adjusted.
 8. IEG’s work should be broadened to build monitoring and evaluation capacity in client countries, in
    partnership with the World Bank Group, other multilateral development banks, development
    organizations, and the countries themselves.
                                               - 16 -


4. Realigning and Streamlining Business Lines

        IEG endeavors to optimize the relevance of its product lines and the efficiency and
effectiveness of its products. In reviewing its business lines and considering changes, IEG has
prioritized increasing utility, credibility, and independence as primary principles—in line with the
forthcoming Evaluation Framework. Some examples include:

   •   PPARs. IEG completed in FY17 an update of the methodology and procedures for PPARs.
       A new template will be piloted in FY18 to enhance readability and accessibility, and greater
       emphasis placed on outreach.

   •   Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA). In FY17, IEG developed guidelines for
       evaluating the World Bank’s ASA projects, which were discussed with World Bank
       management. The FY18 Carbon Finance evaluation, in particular, will use these criteria to
       evaluate ASA projects in its portfolio review. The criteria will also be piloted in ASA
       projects in the Trade & Competitiveness sector in the form of a learning engagement. This
       sector has potential for learning exchange between IFC and World Bank practices in the
       evaluation of advisory services. The ASA evaluation guidelines will be reviewed based on
       these pilots.

   •   ICRs. Following the Committee on Development Effectiveness (CODE)’s review of
       Behind the Mirror: A Report on the Self-Evaluation Systems of the World Bank Group, a
       working group of IEG and World Bank staff was set up to review the Implementation
       Completion and Results (ICR) system and identify areas where the process could be
       streamlined. The working group agreed on a simplified format and intends to launch the
       revised ICR on July 1, 2017. To encourage more constructive interactions between IEG
       and operational departments, IEG has increased outreach to PMSO/Quality staff in Global
       Practices on ICRRs. Through targeted meetings on specific topics and presentations at
       sector weeks, these interactions have been raising awareness about IEG’s ICRR
       methodology and practice, and about data and evaluation evidence available to operational
       staff. ICRRs are now being processed in a timely manner through an improved ICRR IT
       platform, which directly links to the World Bank’s Operations Portal. As indicated in last
       year’s work program, a system of markers was introduced to generate key data for
       assessing the World Bank Group’s progress on the twin goals. These markers generate key
       data on gender and safeguards, which have been incorporated in the 2016 RAP report.

   •   PCRs/ PERs/ XPSRs. IEG updated the guidelines for IFC self-evaluations and is in the
       process of updating the equivalent MIGA guidelines. The revised guidelines for advisory
       PCRs and investment XPSRs are under implementation and IEG is working with IFC to
       provide needed training. The guidelines for MIGA’s PERs are being revised and will be
       implemented in FY18. With MIGA, IEG is also developing evaluation standards for
       MIGA’s Non-honoring of Sovereign Financial Obligations.
                                              - 17 -




                                   Figure 3: IEG’s Business Lines




5. Enhancing Quality and Credibility

        In FY17, IEG strengthened its quality assurance process, portfolio analyses, and
evaluation methods, under the direction of IEG’s Methods Advisory Function (see Appendix E).
Strengthening the quality assurance framework included refining the process for selectivity and
prioritization of the work program (see paragraphs 9-11), creating a Methods Advisory Function
with the responsibility to provide methodological and quality assurance support for major
evaluations, and to reinforce their quality review process. IEG has continued to invest in testing,
adapting, and developing new methods and data to maintain cutting-edge rigor and quality in
portfolio analysis and the evaluation of World Bank Group interventions, while achieving
efficiency gains. Finally, IEG has continued to invest in the methodological skills of its staff.

        IEG has continued to mainstream gender, partnerships, and other key strategic issues
in its evaluations. IEG has continued to mainstream key strategic issues in its evaluations.
Methods to generate gender-differentiated insights and methods to assess partnership
considerations have been successfully introduced in evaluations. In addition, toolkits for
incorporating behavioral change and service delivery lenses have been developed as part of IEG’s
SEAs for evaluation.
                                              - 18 -


        IEG substantially improved its data infrastructure. DataMart, IEG’s relational database
of ICRR information, has been expanded to include more ICRR fields, and it migrated to an ITS-
managed SQL server. These changes will make more data available to evaluators and expand
access to these relevant data to all WBG staff. The external website’s data visualization of ICRR
and PPAR ratings has also been redesigned to make it easier for users to explore the data (Figure 4
below).

                     Figure 4: Extract from IEG’s Improved ICRR DataMart




6. Enhancing Knowledge and Communications

Outreach and dissemination

        The ultimate goal of IEG’s outreach and dissemination activities is to help expand
IEG’s influence with key stakeholders, thereby increasing the use of IEG knowledge. FY17
efforts have focused on three strategic priorities: 1) increasing the accessibility of IEG’s
knowledge; 2) engaging with users of IEG knowledge; and 3) partnering with the World Bank
Group’s Knowledge Management communities to incorporate IEG knowledge into their solutions.

       Increasing accessibility and tracking learning. To increase the accessibility of its
knowledge, IEG redesigned its external website in FY17 and increased the use of user-centric
design for its products. The website now has a more intuitive interface and improved tagging and
search so users can more easily find the information they are looking for (Figure 5). To increase
engagement with users of IEG knowledge, IEG scaled up dissemination support for its major
                                               - 19 -


evaluations, hosting high-visibility events to support outreach and learning. During the first half
of FY17, IEG hosted 35 learning events, which reached 846 participants. Feedback shows that
IEG events are well received by stakeholders and highly rated for content, learning outcomes, and
overall delivery quality (Figure 6). In FY17, IEG also delivered a Board Seminar on “Using IEG
Evidence to Inform Board Discussions.”

         Figure 5: IEG Revamped Webpage                 Figure 6: Learning Delivered by IEG, Key Numbers




        To partner with the World Bank Group’s Knowledge Management community, IEG
initiated several projects with GOKMU and the IFC Knowledge Management and Learning
Division. At the World Bank, IEG shared with GOKMU key findings from its Learning and
Results at the World Bank evaluation so that these could be addressed in the World Bank’s
Knowledge Management (KM) Action Plan. IEG worked with the KM team in Chennai to ensure
that lessons from IEG ICRRs and PPARs are included in the Knowledge Packages sent to World
Bank task team leads at project initiation. IEG also gave the KM team with access to several of its
databases to respond to information requests from World Bank operational teams. IEG has also
worked with GOKMU on a pilot using its project clustering tool to identify relevant portfolios for
major evaluations. At the IFC, IEG has promoted its LessonFinder tool, which experienced a sharp
increase in usage in FY17. In addition, IEG is preparing inputs to the knowledge asset inventory
which the IFC KM team is producing. Finally, IEG is a cosponsor of the WBG KnowledgeMatters
Community of Practice.

        These knowledge and communication strategies contributed to IEG’s stakeholders
rating it highly for the relevance, quality, and impact of its work in the 2017 Client
Engagement Survey. In this survey, the World Bank Group Board, staff and management, and
external stakeholders rated IEG positively on most indicators. Ninety percent of board
respondents, 82 percent of staff, and 83 percent of external stakeholders rated IEG’s independence
as high. Respondents across all three audiences perceived IEG’s work as very relevant to the World
Bank Group’s mission (55 percent for staff, 73 percent for externals, and 83 percent for the Board).
On quality, overall satisfaction with IEG products improved across all audiences in 2017 to 80
percent for staff (up from 74 percent in 2015), 86 percent for the Board, and 95 percent for external
stakeholders.
                                              - 20 -


Knowledge and Communication Infrastructure

        To enhance the ease and quality of accessibility of IEG data and knowledge by
internal and external users, in FY17, IEG improved its knowledge and communications
infrastructure in four areas: website design, email communications, ratings data management,
and access to information processes. In addition to the website redesign, IEG moved its email
marketing communications to a more robust platform that allows IEG to better target and track the
effectiveness of its communications with key stakeholders. These efforts have led to an increase
in online consumption of IEG evaluation products and in the number of IEG subscribers. IEG’s
social media channels continued to perform well, and now exceed 90,000 followers across
Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and YouTube.

Outreach, access, synthesis, efficiency

        In FY18–20, IEG will further invest in strengthening its outreach. Building on the
infrastructure implemented in FY17, IEG will continue to better target communications to serve
the unique needs of its different key stakeholder groups. Reaching more stakeholders, more
effectively, more systematically, and with timely and relevant insights, remains a priority. A key
target audience will be World Bank Group staff and management, with the goal of further
increasing the use of IEG evidence to inform project and strategy design for better outcomes.

       IEG will continue to seek opportunities to synthesize its knowledge and make it
available to stakeholders when they need it, in accessible formats. Building on its FY17
agreement with GOKMU for IEG evidence to be included in the Knowledge Packages provided
to operational staff at key steps in the project cycle, IEG will explore packaging IEG lessons to
World Bank Group staff transitioning to new roles, such as newly appointed country directors, for
example. IEG Thematic Coordinators will continue to engage with GP/CCSA staff and
management at key moments, such as before their respective Learning Weeks.

       Furthermore, IEG will continue to grow its core outreach channels (the website, social
media, newsletter, events) and to explore more innovative and accessible ways to engage its
stakeholders. IEG will continue to leverage internal World Bank Group channels such as the Open
Learning Campus, and external distribution partnerships to ensure maximum visibility for IEG
products. Significant investments will go toward growing IEG’s presence and effectiveness on
LinkedIn, because this channel has proven to be the most effective for reaching and engaging key
external stakeholders.

       IEG will also continue its efforts to increase system efficiency, and will undertake phase
two enhancements to the ICRR system, continue to enhance the user experience for the
Management Action Record (MAR) system, and explore options for a new Access to Information
tracking system while Lotus Notes is decommissioned.

7. Monitoring Implementation of Evaluation Recommendations

      In FY17, IEG collaborated with Operations Policy and Country Services and IFC and
MIGA Strategy Units to pilot new ways to engage on recommendations and action plans for
major evaluations. In line with Recommendation 7 of the External Review, IEG has been
conducting six pilots aimed to “create a more constructive working environment that improves
                                                              - 21 -


accountability and foster a stronger culture of accountability, learning, feedback loops, course
correction and solution-based continuous improvement.” These pilots started in FY16 and
continued in FY17, and although their assessment will only take place in FY18, they have already
produced valuable lessons and increased understanding between IEG and its counterparts.


        For FY18, IEG would like to go beyond the lessons from these pilots to explore how
CODE, World Bank Group management, and IEG can further reform the Management
Action Record. To this end, IEG will be piloting a strategic review of the MAR regarding three
themes for which there have been many evaluations over several years: environmental
sustainability, private sector development, and managing for results.

                                       IV. Building Evaluation Capacity

        IEG’s mandate includes encouraging and assisting developing member countries to
build effective monitoring and evaluation (M&E) associations, capacities, and systems. The
External Review recommended that “IEG’s work should be broadened to build M&E capacity in
client countries, in partnership with the WBG, other MDBs, development organizations and the
client countries themselves.” Building on CODE’s guidance for a balanced approach that deepens
IEG’s work in evaluation capacity development while maintaining IEG’s core focus on the
independent evaluation mandate, IEG’s evaluation capacity development work is undertaken
through partnerships, namely, Centers for Learning on Evaluation and Results (CLEAR),
International Program for Development Evaluation Training (IPDET), and selective direct efforts.

CLEAR

       In FY17, IEG helped the CLEAR centers adopt more strategically selected service
offerings and strengthen their business-oriented management approach. IEG also developed
and launched tools for the CLEAR centers to track outcomes and indicators of their financial
sustainability. IEG’s analytical work in FY17 for the CLEAR Annual Report 1 introduced a more
outcome-oriented approach to articulating CLEAR’s results. In parallel, IEG developed in
coordination with CLEAR partner donors, a log frame with indicators and targets, based on a
revised CLEAR theory of change.

        A partnership between CLEAR and the International Fund for Agricultural
Development (IFAD) was formalized in FY17 with IFAD’s board approving a $3.5 million grant
over three years to offer a global M&E curriculum and certification framework (in English, French,
and Spanish). The centers’ collaborative work to develop the curriculum and select and train the
trainers was launched in FY17, in preparation for the first course’s launch in Rome in the Fall of
2017.

       CLEAR donors extended the end date of the IEG-managed trust fund from 2018 to
2021. Following this extension, current donors signed agreements for supplemental contributions
to CLEAR. This increased funding and time will enable IEG to continue its work with the CLEAR


1
  CLEAR’s Annual Report, launched in early February 2017, assessed for the first time CLEAR’s progress toward achieving
intermediate outcomes. See https://www.theclearinitiative.org/resources/clear-annual-report-2015-2016.
                                               - 22 -


centers, preparing a Phase 3 strategy that will further enhance the CLEAR network’s strategic
relevance, effectiveness, and impact.

IPDET

       After publishing the FY16 IPDET Strategic Review, IEG has worked in FY17 to renew
the IPDET curriculum. Nearly 60 percent of the new class modules have been drafted and the
remaining work is expected to be completed by the end of FY17.

       IEG is revisiting its working relationship and priorities for IPDET. In March, Carleton
University, IEG’s long-term partner for IPDET delivery, decided to disengage from IPDET.
Consequently, the 2017 summer program will not be offered. This change does not mean the end
for IPDET; IEG is working with IPDET founders and donors on assessing options for the future.

       In FY18, IEG will complete its strategic reset of IPDET by:

   •   Identifying a new delivery model for the renewed IPDET program. The new model will
       be more sustainable and will incorporate the updated curriculum developed in FY17. In
       FY18, IEG will explore and assess options around what IPDET could be, with input and
       guidance from the evaluation community, donors, and IPDET’s supporters over the years,
       with a view to delivering the next IPDET program in the summer of 2018.

Selective Direct ECD Efforts

        Beyond its leadership in CLEAR and IPDET, in FY18–20, IEG will:

   •   Continue to scale up the use of local talent in IEG evaluation work, as members of
       evaluation teams and as peer reviewers, when feasible, following the targets set up for
       FY18–20.

   •   Continue to provide good practice notes and other relevant tools drawn from IEG
       evaluation work, and broaden IEG’s learning engagements with operational staff to help
       strengthen M&E systems in World Bank Group operations.

       IEG’s use of local consultants has been increasing, and new targets have been set to
consolidate this trend. IEG has set ambitious targets to continue recruiting local consultants
(Table 3) and is committed to ensuring that they learn from their contributions to IEG work.

                       Table 3: Use of Local Consultants, Targets for FY18-20

                                  Baseline       FY17          FY18         FY19      FY20
           Indicator
                                  FY14-16       estimate       target       target    target

 Number of local consultants         18            25            28             32     37

 % total IEG consultants that       6%            8%             9%             10%   11%
 are local
                                                - 23 -


       Stronger M&E systems in World Bank Group operations through learning
engagements with operational staff (for example, ‘Defining and Measuring Project Outcomes’,
‘Collaborative Exchanges on Performance Measurement and Monitoring’), its co-sponsorship of
the Results Measurement and Evidence Stream (RMES) learning days, and engagement with
counterparts involved in the self-evaluation reform initiatives. IEG has continued to respond
informally to demand from World Bank Group teams working on initiatives to strengthen client
countries’ M&E systems and capacity building by sharing good-practice evaluation capacity
development tools and by connecting them with partners engaging in M&E capacity development.

       Actively sharing knowledge, methods, and practices with development partners. For
instance, in collaboration with the Asian Development Bank and the East Asia CLEAR center,
IEG led several sessions during the Asian Evaluation Week on how to institutionalize the
production, demand, and use of evidence for measuring and improving the effectiveness of policies
and programs.

       Promoting evaluation capacity in the global public agenda, focusing on strengthening
the relevance, coherence, and impact of development partners’ investments in capacity
development, through continued collaboration with key players like EvalPartners, the OECD/DAC
EvalNet Task Group, the Evaluation Cooperation Group, and the UN Evaluation Group.

                                   V.   Staffing and Budget
1. Human Resources

         Faced with a growing fixed cost ratio, IEG has made prudent staff management a
priority. Over the past five years, IEG reduced senior level positions in line with World Bank
Group practices—for instance, dropping the number of GI positions from seven to three—with the
dual purpose of moving resources to the front line of IEG’s work and controlling the fixed-cost
ratios. In FY16, delays in filling some vacancies contributed to a decline in the fixed-cost ratio,
bringing IEG within the World Bank Group average. As the vacancies were filled in FY17, the
fixed-cost ratio increased sharply (Figure 7), placing IEG well above average rates in the World
Bank Group. Therefore, IEG has made prudent staff management a priority to reduce its fixed-
cost ratio.
   Figure 7: IEG’s Fixed-Cost Ratio: Evolution and Comparison with Other World Bank VPUs

                                                                Comparison of Fixed Cost Ratios
                   Fixed Cost Ratio                                Across WBG- As of FY16
       76%
                                                          IEG                             69%
       74%                                  74%          OPCS                             70%

       72%          72%                              Regions                                    80%

       70%                                                GP                             68%
                               69%
       68%                                               IBRD                            65%

                                                         WBG                              69%
       66%
                FY15        FY16         FY17                   0%    20%   40%    60%     80%        100%
                                               - 24 -


        Thus, a Strategic Staffing Exercise is being conducted by IEG in FY17. This exercise
aims at ensuring alignment between IEG’s skill mix and its forward-looking needs for
competencies as well as between its staffing level and budget trajectory. The exercise establishes
strategies to better manage staff and develop skills needed for the future while controlling
headcount and staff cost.
2. Budget Proposal

        Flat budget request in real terms. To accomplish its FY18 work program, IEG’s budget
request is $36.93 million World Bank budget to be approved by the Board and $0.6 million to be
financed by trust funds. In line with World Bank Group practice, all figures in Tables 4–6 are
presented in nominal terms. The requested budget is consistent with the flat budget framework in
real terms. Excluding the institutionally mandated increases due to the revised benefit rates and
price factor (see next paragraph), IEG’s FY18 budget would be $33.57 million compared with
$33.63 million in FY17. The shares of contribution from each of the three institutions (World
Bank, IFC, MIGA) remain broadly unchanged from prior years.
        FY18 budget takes into account changes in the application of institutional benefit
rates and price factor. The World Bank and MIGA are changing administrative arrangements for
the application of institutional benefit rates. The cost and budget allocation for these are being
devolved to vice-presidencies. Budgeted benefit rates in vice-presidencies will therefore increase
from 50 percent of salaries to 70 percent starting in FY18. Because of this change, IEG is expected
to receive an additional $2.56 million (for World Bank and MIGA), which will be offset by higher
staff costs. In addition, IEG will receive an inflation adjustment of $0.8 million ($0.6 million and
$0.2 million from the World Bank and IFC, respectively) in line with World Bank Group practices.
       Expenditure Review targets accomplished. IEG completed the implementation of its
expenditure review measures. As a result, its budget decreased by a cumulative $2.8 million by
FY17. IEG management continues its commitment to manage its resources prudently and to
achieve savings to finance necessary improvements.
                                                                            - 25 -

                           Table 4: IEG Budget -- WBG Institution Contributions, FY15–20
                       IEG Budget, WBG Institution Contributions (BB only), FY15–20
                                                              at 50% benefit rate                                     at 70% benefit rate
                                                                                                                                                   FY20
(in nominal dollars)                               FY15      FY16      FY17        FY18                                        FY19             Indicative
                                                 Budget $m Budget $m Budget $m Proposed $m                                Indicative $m             $m
WB Contribution                                     26.5      26.7      26.1       29.2                                        29.8                30.5
IFC Contribution                                    7.0        7.0      6.9         7.1                                         7.4                 7.6
MIGA Contribution                                   0.6        0.6      0.6         0.7                                         0.7                 0.7
Total IEG                                           34.1      34.3      33.6       36.9                                        37.9                38.7

Contribution as % of IEG Funding
WB                                                    78%             78%               78%               78%                  78%                78%
IFC                                                   20%             20%               20%               20%                  20%                20%
MIGA                                                  2%               2%               2%                 2%                   2%                 2%
Total                                                100%             100%             100%               100%                 100%               100%
1/ FY16 a nd FY17 budget number s hown a re a ctua l budgets recei ved a nd di ffers s l i ghtl y from the numbers s hown i n FY17 budget
document (FY16 wa s s hown a s 34.0 a nd FY17 wa s s hown a s 33.8).
2/ FY18-20 i ncl udes cha nges i n benefi t ra ti o from 50% to 70% for WB a nd MIGA - i mpa ct i s a bout $2.56 mi l l i on.
3/ As i n pri or yea rs , IEG's budget rema i ns a bout 1% or bel ow the Net Admi ni s tra ti ve BB Budget for a l l three i ns ti tuti ons .




                              Table 5: Expenditure Trends by Expense Category, FY15–20
                                               - 26 -

SPENDING TRENDS

        Continued trend to allocate more resources to learning. In line with earlier decisions,
IEG is continuing to prioritize learning in its work program and FY18 budget. It will (1) continue
to fund Learning Engagements for $0.8 million, (2) introduce meso evaluations on a pilot basis in
FY18 with an allocation of $0.9 million, and (iii) maintain allocations for knowledge and
communications at 16 percent of the total.
       Increasing efficiency. The trend of allocating more resources to learning will continue to
be achieved through a reduction in budget allocations for major evaluations as IEG continues to
exercise cost control on major evaluations. Although the change in the benefit rate from 50 percent
to 70 percent increases staff costs, which constitute the majority of the cost of major evaluations,
IEG will aim to avoid an increase in the budget share of major evaluations in FY18–20. The budget
share of major evaluations remains flat over the FY15–20 period at about 24 percent; however,
excluding the impact of the revised benefit rate, this budget share would decline to 22 percent in
FY18–20. It is expected that improvements in budget management, methodology, staff training, and
IT support to evaluations will lead to efficiency gains.
        Steady allocations. Spending on validation products has been projected at roughly the same
level as in FY17. The spending plans for outer-years will be revised pending further analysis and
discussions about the scope for streamlining of the ICRR and CLR validation process (which would
reduce costs) based on the planned ICR reform in FY18. As with most budget lines, sustaining costs
dynamics is driven solely by the change in benefit ratio and price factor.
                                                                               - 27 -

                                          Table 6. Summary of Sources and Uses, FY15–20
                                      Summary of Sources and Uses, FY15–20 (all sources of funds)
                                                                      at 50% benefit rate                                          at 70% benefit rate
                                                                                    FY15           FY16         FY17     FY18     FY19       FY20
(in nominal dollars)                                                               Actual         Actual      Estimate Proposed Indicative Indicative
                                                                                    $'m            $'m          $'m       $'m      $'m        $'m
     Sources
Total Budget                                                                            34.4          35.7           36.4        39.8         40.8          41.6
Expenditure Review Savings                                                              (0.7)         (1.7)          (2.8)       (2.9)        (2.9)         (2.9)
Total Trust Fund & EFOs                                                                  1.3           1.7            0.8         0.6          0.6           0.6
     Total Sources                                                                       35.1          35.7           34.4        37.5         38.5          39.3

      Uses
Major Evaluations including CPEs 1/                                                       8.5           8.3           8.6          8.9           9.0           9.1
                                 2/
Meso Evaluations (pilot)                                                                                                           0.9           0.9           0.9
Project Performance Assessments (PPARs)                                                   1.5           2.1           2.6          3.0           3.1           3.2
Validation Products                                                                       4.9           5.1           5.1          5.6           5.7           5.9
                                                               3/
Learning Products and Services (discontinued)                                             1.7           1.5           0.8          0.0           0.0           0.0
Learning Engagements                                                                      0.0           0.0           0.8          0.8           0.8           0.8
Other Evaluations (discontinued) 3/                                                       1.1           0.7           0.2          0.0           0.0           0.0
Knowledge and Communications                                                              5.2           5.8           5.5          6.0           6.2           6.4
Evaluation Capacity Development                                                           1.1           1.4           1.5          1.7           1.8           1.9
Sustaining 4/                                                                             5.6           5.4           5.0          5.5           5.7           5.9
Indirects 5/                                                                              4.8           5.2           5.0          5.0          5.2           5.2
     Total uses                                                                          34.4          35.5          35.1         37.5         38.5          39.3

                    Proportion of spending on:
                    Major Evaluations                                                   25%           23%            24%         24%           23%           23%
                    Meso Evaluations                                                     0%            0%             0%          2%            2%            2%
                    PPARS                                                                4%            6%             8%          8%            8%            8%
                    Validation Products                                                 14%           14%            15%         15%           15%           15%
                    Learning Engagments                                                  0%            0%             2%          2%            2%            2%
                    Knowledge and Communications                                        15%           16%            16%         16%           16%           16%
                    Evaluation Capacity Development                                      3%            4%             4%          5%            5%            5%
                    Sustaining                                                          16%           15%            14%         15%           15%           15%
                    Indirect Costs                                                      14%           15%            14%         13%           14%           13%
                                                        3/
                    Discontinued Product Line                                             8%            6%            3%
1/ Excl udi ng the i mpa ct of revi s ed benefi t ra te a nd i ncrea s e i n the number of Ma jor Eva l ua ti ons (FY19-20), the trend of s pend on Ma jor
Eva l ua ti on i s porporti ona l l y on a decl i ne.
2/ Mes o a l l oca ti on: In FY18, the fundi ng comes from rea l l oca ti on of Ma jor Eva l ua ti ons . If conti nued i n FY19-20, mes o eva l ua ti ons woul d be
funded from expected effi ci ency ga i ns i n other budget l i nes , es peci a l l y ma jor eva l ua ti ons .
3/ Di s conti nued product l i nes between FY15-FY17.
4/ Sus ta i ni ng cos ts repres ents ma na gement s a l a ri es a nd tra vel , a nd cos ts of ACS a nd RM s ta ff.
5/ Indi rects rel a tes to cos t of offi ce s pa ce a nd equi pment, i nforma ti on technol ogy a nd communi ca ti ons .




TRUST FUNDS

       IEG expects to disburse $0.6 million of trust funds in FY18, including: (1) $0.4 million
from the multi-donor trust to support IEG’s evaluation capacity development program, including
                                               - 28 -


the CLEAR secretariat; and (2) $0.2 million continuing from the Japan Policy and Human
Resource Development grant (staff cost) which will close in January 2018. During the year, IEG
will continue to try to leverage additional funding from Trust Funds and other externally funded
outputs (EFOs).


CAPITAL BUDGET

         IEG will move to new premises in early FY19 and will adopt open office spaces for all
its staff, to optimize efficiency and effectiveness in the use of space. Capital budget expenditures
to defray infrastructure costs for additional meeting rooms and IT enhancements will be incurred,
and IEG will depreciate these costs over the expected life of the improvements. It is anticipated
that the capital improvement expenditures will be about $1.4 million during FY18/19.
3. Accountability Framework

       IEG adheres to World Bank Group budget rules and procedures. IEG is subject to
Controller’s Quality Assurance reviews of selected expenses and has consistently received
favorable ratings on adherence to budget rules, procedures, and policies. IEG’s control
environment continues to be ranked as one of the strongest in its peer group. Likewise, IEG’s
budget is subject to regular external audits just like the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA.
       An independent budget review was conducted in FY16. Following Board approval,
CODE commissions an independent review of IEG’s budget every two to three years to validate
the adequacy of its annual budget proposal and its consistency with overall World Bank Group
budgetary principles. Accordingly, a FY16 independent review concluded that: IEG’s budget
formulation and management is broadly satisfactory. In the intervening four years the main
changes in work programming and budget practices, expenditure and outputs, have been the
following improvements:
   •   Introduction of a results framework, a “gap” analysis and a selectivity framework in
       FY14, and the three strategic engagement areas in FY15;
   •   Introduction of a quarterly review of business performance with departmental
       management teams;
   •   Reduction of cost overruns on major evaluations through strengthened oversight of task
       management; and
   •   Achievement of the cost savings targets set out in IEG’s Expenditure Review.
       Implementation of recommendations. IEG has implemented recommendations to reduce
bunching, improve costing and monitoring of deliverables, and introduce stronger tracking of
expenditures against plans. Slippages and bunching of major evaluations were a significant
problem in FY16. IEG put in place a firm program to reduce bunching in FY17 and eliminate
bunching in FY18 and beyond. In addition to real-time technical tracking of milestones, IEG
management continues to conduct Quarterly Business Reviews.
       Budget management has significantly improved. IEG management continues to
implement measures in response to the budget review to strengthen budget management, including
through Monthly Management Reports and departmental dashboards:
   •   Greater realism in developing robust budgets in Approach Papers;
                                          - 29 -


•   Instilling stronger budget discipline among task team leads, adhering to task budgets, and
    prioritizing individual components;
•   Systematic monitoring by task team leads and managers of actual costs against Approach
    Paper and evaluation budgets, and a resolution mechanism should new developments
    arise;
•   Closer focus by task team leads and managers on managing elapsed time, and staff and
    consultant costs, between the Approach Paper and Final Report Review Meetings; and
•   Regular IEG leadership team oversight of elapsed time and costs, and more proactive
    decisions on corrective actions, where needed.
•   Training of task team leads and other staff on budget management.
                                             - 30 -




                                     VI. Appendixes

Appendix A: FY18-20 Major Evaluations Descriptions

                     FY18 (Q4) Forced Displacement and Migration

                  Forced displacement is a major development challenge affecting 65 million
                  people worldwide. The World Bank Group is aiming to scale up its role in
                  responding to this challenge by emphasizing forced displacement as a
                  development issue, introducing new instruments such as the Global
                  Concessional Financing Facility and innovative project design, engaging in
                  strategic partnerships, and building up an evidence base. While the WBG
                  has a long history of supporting refugees and the internally displaced, this is
                  IEG’s first systematic evaluation of support to these communities. The
   Rationale,     evaluation builds on major analytical work completed by the WBG in FY17
    Strategic
                  ("Forcibly Displaced"; "Migration and Development"), derives lessons from
 Relevance and
                  prior Bank Group assistance as the WBG responds to the refugee crisis in
  Timeliness of
                  the Middle East, moving closer towards integrating development and
 the Evaluation
                  humanitarian approaches. The evaluation will derive lessons from a mature
                  portfolio of projects as well as offer real-time learning from more recent
                  interventions supporting both refugee and host communities. The proposed
                  evaluation will increase the WBG knowledge base in the strategic
                  engagement area of Investing in People, through the protection of
                  investment made in human capital in the face of crises and ensuring service
                  delivery to the vulnerable and poor.

                  The WBG portfolio for the evaluation is diverse and cuts across different
  Evaluation      sectors and types of instruments, such as social development (including
 Gap Analysis,    CDD, DDR), delivery of social services, and promotion of skills, jobs and
    Size of       livelihoods. A preliminary review of the portfolio identified by the FCV
  Portfolio,      CCSA comprises approximately 1,300 interventions, including a large
 Evaluability     number of knowledge products and about 200 lending operations. This
                  evaluation will build upon related work done by IEG (such as the
                  Evaluation of Situations of Fragility, Conflict and Violence (2016)).
                  IEG brings value through its expertise conducting evaluations of complex
                  themes that span across the WBG. Given the importance of close
                  partnerships, particularly with the UN, MDBs, and the EU, this evaluation
 Value Added,     will integrate an examination of how the WBG has worked and partnered to
 Audience and
                  provide early implementation insights, particularly as it develops more joint
   Usability
                  approaches. The audience of the evaluation is the WBG’s Board of
                  Directors, senior management, staff (including those in the Global
                  Concessional Financing Facility) and partners such as the UN that focus on
                  addressing and preventing displacement.
                                                   - 31 -




            FY19 WBG Convening Power and Role in the Global Development Landscape
             The World Bank Group’s client base increasingly constitutes an eclectic landscape ranging
             from low income and FCS countries to emerging markets and upper middle income countries.
             On the other hand, development institutions, including the World Bank Group, are facing a
             new reality where development finance represents a very small share of developing countries’
             needs, where private capital plays a major role in financing development, and where domestic
             resources are expected to play a much bigger role going forward. In this evolving landscape,
             and for all client segments, development solutions require more than financing. Knowledge
             intermediation – including knowledge from other developing countries – is recognized as an
             important role for the World Bank Group and other development partners. In addition to its
 Rationale, ability to deploy financing and knowledge assets at the country level, the WBG is thought to
 Strategic   enjoy substantial convening power which is an ability to bring various international and
 Relevance national actors and stakeholders together to address some of the most critical global
    and      development challenges. The Forward Look approved by the Board of Governors in 2016 sets
Timeliness out the critical role that the WBG can play in global economic development in the years
   of the    ahead. It also lays out a multi-faceted plan for how the WBG can best support its wide range
Evaluation of member countries in economic transformation, advancing technologies, and achieving
             inclusive growth. The proposed evaluation will assess the contribution of the WBG to the
             understanding of global development problems and the definition and implementation of
             solutions at the local and global levels. The evaluation will assess (a) how the Bank Group has
             carried out its convening role, in particular in supporting global public goods, addressing
             global issues, and fostering global coordination and solutions (b) the synergy or trade-off
             between the global convening role and the pursuit of development effectiveness at the country
             level, and (c) how these dynamics have evolved over time or differ across client
             segments. The proposed evaluation will contribute to the strategic pillar of Helping Clients
             Tackle the Most Important Development Challenges.
             IEG has in the past carried out a number of reviews of Global Programs that support global
Evaluation public goods (e.g. GFATM, GAVI, GEF) and several IEG evaluations have looked at the
    Gap      Bank’s convening role in specific sectors or themes. IEG has also evaluated knowledge-based
 Analysis,   activities in country programs and is starting an evaluation of the GP/CCSA model, including
  Size of    the extent to which global knowledge flows improved after a reorganization into GPs/CCSAs.
 Portfolio,  The proposed evaluation will build on the knowledge generated in these evaluations. A
Evaluability purposive selection of case studies will be carried out along with surveys and structured
             interviews of stakeholders, clients and development partners. The proposed evaluation will
             not be dependent on the size of WBG portfolio in a given sector or set of countries.
             The proposed evaluation will generate lessons from how the WBG adapted to changing and
             challenging global landscapes in the distant as well as recent pasts. The proposed evaluation
  Value
             will also provide evidence that will help the WBG strengthen its convening power where
  Added,
             necessary and deliver on the twin goals adopted in its 2013 strategy. The proposed evaluation
 Audience
             will complement the evaluation of the GP/CCSA model. While the proposed evaluation will
    and
             focus on the external side of WBG and its delivery at global and country levels, the GP/CCSA
 Usability
             evaluation will focus on the internal organization to support the delivery model. The value
             added of this evaluation will be to bring evidence into an old debate on how whether the
             WBG’s mandate needs a repositioning, on how the WBG can make a more visible difference
                                             - 32 -


          on the global stage while pursing development impact at the country-level. The audience
          includes the Board of Directors, WBG management, and the global development community.
                                 FY19 Creating New Markets

                Market Creation represents one of two key prongs of IFC’s 3.0 Strategy, the
                other being mobilizing private investors. The new strategy emphasizes the
                World Bank Group (WBG) leveraging “the full range of its capabilities to
                expand and create markets where private capital has been less forthcoming.”
                Market creation is understood to entail correcting market failures and applying
                the “cascade approach” to development assistance to mobilize private capital
   Rationale,   and entrepreneurship for development in new contexts. Although the emphasis
   Strategic    on market creation is new, the WBG has historically been substantially
Relevance and involved in market creation in many contexts and sectors, ranging from capital
 Timeliness of  markets to innovative PPPs to carbon finance to skills development to
the Evaluation irrigation water rights. WBG approach to market creation include upstream,
                enabling environment work on policies and institutions and downstream
                project design, advising and financing investments. Given the renewed focus
                on market creation, understanding the WBG’s relevant experience and success
                factors is critical. Introducing a disciplined framework for identifying and
                evaluating market creation can also create a strong basis for organizational
                learning.
                Although IEG has captured many aspects of market creation in individual
                sectors or areas of engagement (such as recent and ongoing evaluations on
                PPP, capital markets development, carbon finance and financial inclusion), it
Evaluation Gap
                has not addressed the topic systematically across the World Bank Group. A
 Analysis, Size
                preliminary portfolio review of the World Bank alone suggests that over the
  of Portfolio,
                past decade about 150 projects for a total value of USD20 billion applied the
 Evaluability
                idea of market creation in their design. Although the portfolio is broad and
                heterogeneous, IEG will focus its evaluation through a combination of
                portfolio review and crowd-sourcing among WBG staff to identify important
                contexts and instances of market creation to form the focus of the evaluation.
                The evaluation will contribute to operationalize the ongoing refinement of the
                WBG’s approach to market creation and enhance its prospects for success by
                building on lessons of experience.
 Value Added,
                  While the primary audience is the WBG Board, the evaluation exercise will be
 Audience and
                  shaped and conducted in consultation with senior management to ensure the
   Usability
                  maximum uptake and impact of its findings and recommendations. External
                  audiences include client countries and other members of the development
                  community aiming at mobilizing the power of private markets to address
                  pressing development challenges.
                                           - 33 -




                              FY18 (Q4) Facilitating Trade

                 Trade facilitation aims at reducing the costs of moving goods across
                 national borders while safeguarding regulatory standards. Trading costs
                 represent a large share of the costs of goods traded in developing countries.
                 Reducing trading costs can achieve significant inclusive gains. Trade
                 facilitation is a critical element of the World Bank Group strategy to
                 achieve inclusive growth and poverty alleviation. It is of increasing interest
                 to WBG’s Board, management and clients, particularly as the global
  Rationale,     economic slowdown creates pressure to find new sources of growth,
   Strategic     enhance efficiencies and, more recently, as the political support towards
Relevance and    globalization seems to be under increasing pressure in the context of
 Timeliness of   growing inequality. The Trade & Competitiveness (T&C) Global Practice
the Evaluation   (GP), has strengthened the WBG’s emphasis on supporting trade, including
                 facilitation and logistics. The WBG Trade Facilitation Support Program
                 (TFSP) help countries to align their trade practices with the landmark World
                 Trade Organization Trade Facilitation Agreement (WTO TFA) concluded
                 in 2014. With globalization as a major development challenge, and the
                 World Bank Group deeply engaged in both trade policy and facilitation, it is
                 relevant and timely for the WBG Board to benefit from an independent
                 assessment of the role and impact of the WBG in this area.
                 Over the last ten years, about 500 World Bank and 344 IFC advisory
                 projects totaling about USD 80 billion have supported trade facilitation and
                 policy. Yet the Board has not benefitted from an IEG evaluation of World
                 Bank Group activities regarding trade facilitation and logistics. IEG last
 Evaluation      conducted an evaluation of trade policies over 10 years ago, in 2006, but it
Gap Analysis,    did not cover trade facilitation and logistics. The findings of the 2013
   Size of       complementary evaluation of IFC’s Global Trade Finance Program will be
 Portfolio,      integrated into the new evaluation. Given a diverse portfolio ranging from
Evaluability     support to customs reform and conformity assessment, to Global Indicators,
                 to critical support to trade logistics infrastructure, and the WBG emphasis
                 on trade after the creation of the T&C Global Practice, the proposed
                 evaluation will focus on the application of knowledge, capacity
                 development and institution building, developing trade enabling
                 infrastructure and implementation of diagnostic-based policy reforms.
                  With the growth of global value chains, trade facilitation and logistics play
                 a key role in increasing the efficiency of the trading systems and the
Value Added,     competitiveness of WBG client countries. Against such background, this
Audience and     evaluation is expected to inform refinements in the WBG approach to trade
  Usability      facilitation, mid-course adjustments in the Trade Facilitation Support
                 Program, and enhancements in the M&E system for trade facilitation
                 including the theory of change and the key indicators of outcomes and
                 impacts. The T&C GP, with a significant team and tools oriented towards
                                             - 34 -


                  trade, is the natural counterpart in this evaluation. Other audiences include
                  CODE and operational staff involved in the Macroeconomics and Fiscal
                  Management (MFM) Global Practice, IFC and MIGA.
FY 19 Fostering Regional Cooperation/Integration: The World Bank Group’s Support
                                      to Regional Projects
                     According to the 2013 World Bank Group (WBG) Strategy
                     “transformational engagements are about regional integration, involving
                     both game-changing investments and action to address policy
                     constraints that require a coordinated response by several countries.
   Rationale,
                     The WBG can expand its role as a platform to disseminate and/or scale
   Strategic
                     up the impact of external development innovations with transformational
 Relevance and
                     potential”. Two main platforms support regional integration: (1) through
Timeliness of the
                     IDA regional pilot program, which was launched in 2003 under IDA13;
  Evaluation
                     and (2) regional projects not financed by the IDA regional window.
                     Under IDA18, the regional program was further enhanced with SDR5
                     billion allocation. IEG’s evaluation will be a timely input to the IDA
                     replenishment
                     A preliminary portfolio review found that in the last 10 years the WBG
                     has supported 653 lending/investment regional projects (the World Bank
                     has 354 projects with US$ 12 billion commitments and IFC has 299
                     project with US$9 billion investment) and 1,947 analytical advisory
Evaluation Gap
                     work, with a total commitment of US$21 billion --42 percent of the
Analysis, Size of
                     projects were in Africa region. Three GPs are leading the regional
   Portfolio,
                     integration support: Transport, Agriculture, and Energy. Up to now,
  Evaluability
                     about 50 percent of the World Bank lending portfolio (US$2 billion)
                     were closed, and about 50 percent of IFC portfolio (US$ 5 billion) were
                     mature. The evaluation would cover an area that has “evaluation gaps”
                     as the last review done by IEG was a Progress Update and Review of
                     IDA Regional Integration Program in October 2012.
                     The proposed evaluation will assess the effectiveness of the WBG’s
                     support for regional cooperation/integration through regional projects
                     and draw lessons that can inform future regional operations. Given the
 Value Added,
                     complex nature of regional operations which span over multiple GPs and
 Audience and
                     countries, often including FCVs, this evaluation will add value by
   Usability
                     providing new evidence on how to support regional
                     cooperation/integration and enhance resilience and growth in FCVs.
                     The audiences will be CODE, the WBG management and the GP
                     technical staff working on the regional operations.
                                            - 35 -




                         FY19 Public Finance for Development

                 The rationale for the proposed evaluation is derived from, first, the nearly
                 universal support extended by the World Bank Group to its client countries
                 to strengthen fiscal policy and management in the pursuit of fiscal stability
  Rationale,     as well as inclusive and sustainable economic growth. This evaluation is
   Strategic     timely in light of the Addis Ababa Action Agenda and given dwindling aid
Relevance and    flows, requiring not only mobilizing greater volumes of revenues, but also
 Timeliness of   strengthening the design of revenue mobilization in term of equity and
the Evaluation   efficiency of tax incidence and the use of tax bases. Moreover, the adequate
                 management of such revenues in terms of their allocation though public
                 expenditure decisions, and their use for efficient service delivery, is critical
                 for achieving improved development outcomes.
                 There has been limited core public finance evaluation, with one major
                 (albeit partial) evaluation in this area in 2009. In terms of portfolio size, a
 Evaluation      preliminary estimate puts the size of the public finance portfolio, broadly
Gap Analysis,    defined, over the period since 2008, at some 650 lending operations and
   Size of       almost 3,000 advisory interventions (ASA) and additional policy research
 Portfolio,      analysis. The initial portfolio review (as well as discussions held with, and
Evaluability     preferences expressed by, key stakeholders) also suggests a series of
                 embedded sub-topics; those clearly identified so far include revenue,
                 expenditure and public financial management, together with debt
                 sustainability.
                 The value added of the analysis would arise not only from better
                 accountability for a sizable part of the WB portfolio, but also from the
                 feedback (learning) that this would provide to teams in the MFM and
                 Governance practices in terms of the potential for strengthened operation
Value Added,
                 design, who together constitute an important part of the audience of the
Audience and
                 report. In terms of accountability, the Bank’s Board would constitute a
  Usability
                 significant audience (in addition to task teams and Bank management) as
                 there have been a large number of fiscal DPLs, not least during the Global
                 financial crisis. And provided that its recommendations can be easily
                 operationalized, which IEG seeks to ensure, its results should be usable
                 across this spectrum of stakeholders.
                                           - 36 -




     FY18 (Q1) An Evaluation of World Bank Group Support to Health Services


                 Ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity sustainably
                 require, among others, access to social services, including health services.
                 This evaluation is relevant and timely as the global health landscape has
                 changed significantly over the past decades and will change dramatically in
                 the future. Inadequate resources and institutional capacity, poor governance,
  Rationale,     demographic and epidemiological challenges, global pandemics, failures in
   Strategic     health markets and sub-optimal behaviors are among the factors
Relevance and    contributing to inadequate use of quality health services among the poor.
 Timeliness of   On the other hand, opportunities are arising. Innovations in health policies,
the Evaluation   systems, products and technologies, and services and delivery methods
                 improve people’s health and wellbeing. This evolution has been
                 characterized by greater funding, increasingly complex health challenges,
                 and new – and more diverse – actors operating within the system. The
                 proposed evaluation will increase the WBG knowledge base in the strategic
                 engagement area of Investing in People through continued investment in
                 their human capital.

                 This is the first comprehensive IEG health sector evaluation since the 2009
                 IEG evaluation of WBG support to health, nutrition and population that
                 focused on the effectiveness of policy dialogue, analytic work, and lending
                 at the country level. The evaluation complements the 2012 IEG Health
 Evaluation      Financing Evaluation that examined WBG support to revenue collection for
Gap Analysis,    health, pooling health funds and risks, purchasing and factors in successful
   Size of       WBG support to health financing reforms. The evaluation portfolio covers
 Portfolio,      1,846 projects (25.8 billion by commitment volume) approved between
Evaluability     FY2005 and 2016. It includes 619 IDA/IBRD operations, 1033 WB ASAs,
                 127 IFC investments and 67 IFC advisory services. In addition, 30
                 partnership programs and multi-donor trust funds will be examined.
                 Evaluative evidence will be drawn mainly from 259 evaluated projects (221
                 WB lending, 24 IFC investments and 14 IFC advisory evaluated projects),
                 six country case studies, four in-depth analyses of interventions and two in-
                 depth analyses of global partnerships.

                 The overarching question of this evaluation is “what has been the role and
                 contribution of the WBG in supporting health services? And, what should
Value Added,
                 be the role and contribution of the WBG in supporting Health services
Audience and
                 considering its comparative advantages?” The evaluation places a strong
  Usability
                 emphasis in understanding synergies and complementarities with other
                 actors as well as the specific role of the WBG. The primary audiences of
                 this evaluation are the WBGs Boards of Directors, management, and staff.
                 The evaluation will also be useful to WBG client governments, multilateral
                                           - 37 -


               developmental banks, development partners, the private sector, civil society
               organizations, and the ultimate beneficiaries of health services.
     FY19 Evaluation of WBG Engagement in Decentralization and Strengthening
                              Subnational Governments

                 Beginning in the 1990s, the World Bank Group has been significantly
                 expanding its engagement with many client countries on the
                 decentralization agenda. The WBG’s increased engagement in this area has
                 been driven by the recognition that subnational governments are often
                 charged with the primary responsibility for provision of various services.
  Rationale,
                 The Bank support has covered two important areas, which the present
   Strategic
                 evaluation will cover: (i) helping countries establish properly functioning
Relevance and
                 policy frameworks and systems guiding relationships between different
 Timeliness of
                 layers of government - in particular various aspects of intergovernmental
the Evaluation
                 fiscal relations; and (ii) helping improve the capacity of subnational
                 governments to deliver services effectively, especially to the poor and
                 vulnerable. Thus the proposed evaluation contributes to the strategic area of
                 Investing in People by helping understand avenues for enhancing service
                 delivery to the poor at the sub-national level.
                 In the past, IEG has conducted various evaluations that reflected on some
                 aspects of WBG activities in this area. The main examples are the 2008
 Evaluation      evaluation of Decentralization in Client Countries, and the 2010 evaluation
Gap Analysis,    of WBG Engagement at the State Level in Large Federations. In addition,
   Size of
                 some related aspects have been reviewed as part of IEG sectoral and
 Portfolio,
                 thematic work (e.g. 2017 report on tax revenue mobilization at the state
Evaluability
                 level). Considering that the WBG’s work at the subnational level has
                 continued to expand significantly during the last decade, the proposed
                 evaluation would cover a growing gap of knowledge in this area.
                 The proposed evaluation will provide a unique cross-country and cross-
                 sectoral review of WBG activities pertaining to decentralization and
                 partnership with subnational governments, distill lessons from these
Value Added,
                 experiences, and suggest recommendations for moving forward. These
Audience and
                 recommendations could feed into relevant country strategies, project
  Usability
                 documents, as well as inform partnership arrangements with central and
                 subnational governments. The potential audience for this evaluation
                 includes the Board, WBG management, WBG task teams, clients (national
                 and subnational levels), and development partners.
                                           - 38 -




   FY18 (Q1) Towards a Clean World for All: An IEG Evaluation of the World Bank
                      Group’s Support to Pollution Management
               Pollution takes an enormous toll jeopardizing the progress achieved in
               poverty alleviation. Latest data show that approximately 9 million people
               die each year from pollution, mostly young children and the elderly, largely
               in lower-middle income countries (94 percent). The 2012 WBG
  Rationale,   environmental strategy explicitly defines a “clean world” – that is, a world
   Strategic   with “low pollution and low emission” – as a strategic objective. In
Relevance and addition, the Pollution Management and Environmental Health (PMEH)
 Timeliness of program was established to complement and further intensify the World
the Evaluation Bank Group’s (WBG) engagement in this sector. Given the magnitude of
               the challenge and the WBG’s increased efforts in this area, understanding
               the effectiveness of the WBG’s previous support to pollution management
               is critical.

                 This is the first evaluation to take stock of the WBG’s pollution
                 management efforts at a time when the WBG is ramping up its efforts in
                 this space. The WBG has supported a wide range of pollution-relevant
                 interventions over the period FY04-16 through Environment and Natural
                 Resources, Water, and Transport and ICT Global Practices, dedicated IFC
                 Advisory Services, and investments by IFC, notably in the areas of waste
                 water and solid waste management. IEG has identified over a thousand
 Evaluation
                 projects that “target” pollution either as an objective or component, which
Gap Analysis,
                 account for over US$ 50 billion in commitments; lessons from these
   Size of
                 projects on what works are directly relevant to future pollution management
 Portfolio,
                 projects and to the achievement of the “clean world” strategic objective.
Evaluability
                 IEG also identified over 600 projects which aim at mitigating climate
                 change by curbing GHG emissions, accounting for over US$ 50 billion in
                 commitments; their potential for co-benefits has also been assessed by
                 juxtaposing the portfolio against a literature review. Through the
                 application of performance standards and safeguards, the WBG has the
                 potential to reduce the pollution footprint of its projects; more than 350
                 evaluated projects were assessed using this framework.

                 The evaluation reflects the cross-cutting nature of pollution management by
                 looking at WBG’s efforts across several key global practices and business
                 lines. In addition to distilling lessons on what works, the portfolio review
Value Added,
                 sheds light on whether the WBG is reaching countries with the interventions
Audience and
                 they need most. The primary audience for this evaluation are the WBG’s
  Usability
                 Board of Directors, management, and staff involved in pollution-related
                 operations. External audiences include client countries and other members
                 of the development community concerned with pollution management.
                                           - 39 -




FY18 (Q4) Cool Markets for GHG Emission Reduction in a Warming World: Evaluation
                of World Bank Group’s Support to Carbon Finance
               This evaluation is key and timely because the World Bank Group (WBG) is
               currently transitioning from its long time support to carbon finance under
               the Kyoto mechanisms into supporting the implementation of the new Paris
               Agreement and the relaunching of carbon markets under the new
               framework. Carbon finance has been one of the Bank’s longest
  Rationale,
               engagements in the climate change arena. Carbon finance operations started
   Strategic
               around 2000 and were a major precursor to the growing climate change
Relevance and
               operations in the WBG. They offer a unique opportunity to learn from
 Timeliness of
               evaluating the long time engagement in this area. This forward looking
the Evaluation
               evaluation will gather evidence on the performance and effectiveness of
               WBG’s carbon finance support and draw lessons of experience relevant to
               (i) the needs and priorities of the clients; and (ii) the emerging WBG
               strategy to support the next generation of carbon markets under the
               framework of the Paris Agreement.
               The CF portfolio has expanded over time with numerous carbon related
               projects supported with total commitments reaching about $5 billion since
               2000. There are close to 400 projects implemented mainly by the World
               Bank, through its Carbon Finance unit, supporting low-carbon activities
  Evaluation
               across sectors in more than 75 client countries. Of these, 60% are
Gap Analysis,
               generating carbon credits through emission reduction purchase agreements
    Size of
               and 40% are advisory/capacity building activities. Despite the scale of the
  Portfolio,
               Bank’s involvement, CF projects (except when part of a larger IDA/IBRD
 Evaluability
               lending) have not been evaluated by IEG through the existing accountability
               mechanisms (ICRR/XPCR/EvNote) – leaving a wide gap in understanding
               the overall performance and key lessons from these longstanding activities.
               Many of the projects have been closed; the portfolio data is large and
               growing and amenable for a major evaluation.
               The WBG has assumed many roles in implementing CF – from catalyzing
               carbon markets to building capacities in client countries and convening and
               thought leadership through various global and national partnerships for
               carbon pricing instruments. In addition to producing evidence on what has
               worked and what has not worked, the key value added from this evaluation
 Value Added,
               will be an enhanced understanding of the future roles and contributions of
 Audience and
               the WBG in helping shape future directions under the framework of the
   Usability
               Paris Agreement. In addition to WBG management, there will be a large
               audience and users of the evaluation, including national clients interested in
               the performance and effectiveness of CF, their key drivers of success, and
               how future operations can be improved; climate policy evaluation
               specialists, researchers, policymakers, and regulatory agencies at global and
               national levels.
                                                 - 40 -




                 FY 19 Building Urban Sustainability through Urban Resilience
                  Urbanization is the largest and most fundamental structural transformation of
                  national, regional and local economic systems. When urbanization is carried out in
                  an inclusive and resilient manner it enables the sustainable reduction of poverty and
                  improvements in shared prosperity. Decisions on urban infrastructure investments
                  are critical to build resilient communities. Good planning guide cities away from
                  unsustainable development pathways which expose them to social, economic and
  Rationale,
                  environmental shocks. The World Bank Group has emerged as the leading
   Strategic
                  multilateral development bank financing the development of regions, cities and
Relevance and
                  towns. In this context, since 2010 the World Bank Group (WBG) produced a new
 Timeliness of
                  Urban Strategy, comprehensive urbanization reviews for 14 countries and flagship
the Evaluation
                  regional urbanization reports for South Asia and Africa. The WBG is also
                  redefining urban sustainability in terms of urban resilience, which includes social,
                  environmental and economic/financial dimensions. Given the broad new
                  perspective of building sustainable urbanization via urban resilience, the two part
                  IEG major evaluation to be carried out in FY19 (environmental urban resilience)
                  and FY 20 (social and economic urban resilience) is timely and highly relevant.
                  IEG’s evaluations of urban service delivery have been traditionally carried out
                  indirectly via sectoral evaluations, most recently, on urban transport and urban
                  water/sanitation. IEG’s sole urban evaluation was carried out in 2009 and focused
                  principally on municipal management. Based on GFDRR analysis, the World Bank
                  urban resilience portfolio for FY12-16 includes 59 projects (USD 26.77 billion in
 Evaluation       86 countries) that are either directly or indirectly contributing towards improving
Gap Analysis,     urban resilience. In addition, the Bank financed 79 projects which had a principal
   Size of        focus on urban resilience accounting for USD 9.7 billion between FY12-16. The
 Portfolio,       evaluability of the urban resilience portfolio is high provided appropriate methods
Evaluability      are identified and implemented. World Bank staff have attempted to measure the
                  scale of support to urban resilience and the potential to contribute to strengthening
                  the resilience of urban systems (beyond disaster risk management and climate
                  change adaptation projects, which are considered to definitively contribute to
                  enhanced resilience). Verifying and building on this work, the IEG evaluation will
                  develop an understanding of the specific dynamics and the interrelationship
                  between sectors where the interventions occurred.
                  . The value added of the urban resilience evaluation has three dimensions: (i)
                  operational staff will be able to apply lessons of experience from an objective
                  assessment of urban resilience strategies, approaches and tools; (ii) the evaluation
                  will inform the rollout of Africa and South Asia regional urban flagship reports,
Value Added,
                  and the operationalization of urbanization reviews and implementation of the City
Audience and
                  Strength Initiative; and (iii) major findings will be incorporated into urban and
  Usability
                  resilience knowledge platforms and learning programs of GPSURR, other relevant
                  global practices, and GFDRR. Stakeholders throughout the WBG, including the
                  Board, management and task teams, will benefit by understanding not only what
                  works in building urban resilience but also how urban resilience contributes
                  towards achieving urban sustainability. An objective assessment of the urban
                                                    - 41 -


                    resilience agenda will enhance the knowledge base regarding the performance of
                    the WBG’s urban resilience portfolio.
 FY 19 The Power to REnew: Evaluation of the World Bank Group’s Support to Renewable Energy
                                                Development
             Renewable energy (RE) is strategically relevant to the development agenda of the World
             Bank Group (WBG) because of the rapid growth in RE’s share in meeting overall energy
             needs of the WBG’s clients, and its contribution to environmental sustainability including
             addressing global climate change. RE is now a major strategic component of the WBG’s
             commitments to global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), Sustainable Energy for All
 Rationale,
             (SE4ALL), and climate action. This sharpened focus on RE has translated into an equally
 Strategic
             rapid mainstreaming of RE within the WBG’s overall energy portfolio. However, the
 Relevance
             performance of the WBG’s RE assistance has not yet been independently evaluated at this
    and
             critical juncture when its clients are facing RE deployment opportunities and challenges
Timeliness
             related to a market and technologies that are rapidly evolving (i.e., growth in intermittent
   of the
             supply options and system integration, emergence of storage technologies, and navigating the
Evaluation
             commitments made under global climate agreements to limit greenhouse gas emissions). The
             IEG evaluation is timely by aiming to assess the WBG’s role and contribution in addressing
             the energy supply needs and environmental concerns of its clients, facilitating the utilization
             of global RE knowledge, addressing key barriers to RE investments, leveraging partnerships
             for greater impact, and mobilizing finance for RE development.
             The WBG portfolio associated with RE from FY2000 to FY2016 include 185 WB lending
             projects, 6 guarantee operations, 15 development policy loans, and 41 carbon offset-
             transactions; 340 IFC investments, and 31 MIGA guarantees. The investment and lending
             portfolios for the period total commitments of about $11 billion by the World Bank and $8
Evaluation
             billion by IFC; the World Bank and MIGA guarantees of $3.4 billion; DPLs totaling $1.8
    Gap
             billion; and, carbon offset purchases valued at $300 million. The planned evaluation will
 Analysis,
             assess 137 closed WB projects, 81 IFC investments, and 10 MIGA guarantees. The planned
  Size of
             evaluation will be the first independent evaluation of the WBG’s performance supporting RE.
 Portfolio,
             Previous assessments include a desk review of the portfolio in 2006 --when most projects
Evaluability
             were at a nascent stage-- and a 2016 IFC cluster note on RE summarizing investment level
             assessments. Given the emerging prominence of RE in meeting energy and environment
             needs in global development, and since over 80% of the World Bank and IFC RE investment
             and lending commitments was approved since 2005, the proposed major evaluation is timely,
             and will fill a useful gap in knowledge that can inform future directions.
             IEG will evaluate how well the WBG is performing in helping clients meet their RE needs by
             contributing to addressing key barriers in the context of an evolving market and expanding
             global initiatives. The evaluation will (i) assess how the WBG utilizes partnerships internally
  Value
             as a group, and also externally with donors and other development partners to mobilize public
  Added,
             and private funds towards RE development; and (ii) help generate lessons and inform the
 Audience
             WBG’s role and future directions (including future update of the 2013 WBG Energy
    and
             Directions) where clients are facing new and emerging challenges to deploying RE in
 Usability
             consideration of energy (SDG #7) and environment (i.e. Paris climate agreement) goals. Key
             audiences include the WBG’s Board (given its oversight and legitimizing roles), WBG
             management and staff working on energy sector and climate change issues in general, and RE
             in particular (to let experience inform strategic directions as well as operations), development
                                            - 42 -


      partners (to help calibrate future support based on performance), and WBG clients (to
      respond flexibly to the ever-changing RE landscape).


  FY19 The Global Practices and Cross-Cutting Solutions Areas: an evaluation of the
                    World Bank’s organizational effectiveness


                 The Global Practices and Cross-Cutting Solutions Areas were created by a
                 restructuring that took effect July 1, 2014, marking the most significant
                 reorganization of the World Bank since the creation of the matrix system in
                 1997. This evaluation will assess the organizational effectiveness of the
  Rationale,     World Bank’s operational complex, in particular the functioning of
   Strategic     GP/CCSA model. The evaluation will contribute to IEG’s second objective
Relevance and    of generating evidence on the early implementation of the WBG Strategy
 Timeliness of   and change process to enable mid-course correction. It will provide
the Evaluation   actionable and timely recommendations to the Board and Senior
                 Management on the functioning of the GP/CCSA, the role of the GPs and
                 CCSAs in global knowledge transfer and use, their relationship with the
                 regions and with each other, and ultimately, their role in pursuing the twin
                 goals at the country level. This evaluation will contribute to strategic pillar
                 of Becoming a Solution Bank.

                 This evaluation will not directly cover the development impact of the World
                 Bank but will aim to assess the organizational mechanisms that determine
                 the ability of the organization to deliver solutions to clients using the best
                 global knowledge. As such, its scope will comprise the lending, knowledge,
                 and convening services provided by the World Bank and those parts of IFC
 Evaluation
                 that are embedded in the GPs. The evaluation will provide insights on how
Gap Analysis,
                 effectively the GP/CCSA model has facilitated (i) the use of global
   Size of
                 knowledge to address country-specific challenges, (ii) the flow of global
 Portfolio,
                 knowledge between country teams and regions, and (iii) the collaboration
Evaluability
                 across WBG institutions. It will be the first comprehensive assessment of
                 the new structure, following in the wake of IEG’s Matrix evaluation (2011)
                 and the extensive internal reviews and consultations done in 2012-13 as part
                 of planning the change process. Those reviews provide a wealth of
                 documentation that will serve as the baseline for assessing the current
                 functioning of the new structure.


                 The value added of this evaluation will be to provide an independent and
Value Added,     rigorous analysis of the World Bank’s organizational effectiveness, identify
Audience and     strengths and weaknesses, and enable mid-course correction. IEG brings to
  Usability      this task its extensive experience with evaluating topics related to World
                 Bank structure, organizational culture, knowledge, and learning.
                                           - 43 -




  FY18 (Q3) Engaging Citizens for Better Development Results: An IEG Evaluation of
                        World Bank Group Citizen Engagement
               It is assumed in the development community that giving citizens a voice
               and a stake in decision-making about project design, implementation and
               monitoring contributes to the achievement and sustainability of
               development outcomes. Citizen Engagement entails interactions among a
               variety of stakeholders (such as government, private sector, and
               development institutions, including the World Bank Group) at different
               points in the project or program cycle with the purpose of improving
  Rationale,
               governance, increasing social accountability, mitigating risks, setting
   Strategic
               relevant strategic priorities and achieving durable results. The WBG
Relevance and
               Forward Look document is explicit about the goal of strengthening citizen
 Timeliness of
               engagement in WBG activities. The proposed evaluation will fill a gap in
the Evaluation
               evaluative knowledge in IEG’s strategic pillar of working in partnership.
               The evaluation will be completed in time for the Bank’s target date to
               integrate beneficiary feedback into 100 percent of Investment Project
               Financing operations financed with IBRD loans or IDA credits with
               identifiable beneficiaries (end of FY18); it will therefore provide a timely
               contribution to management’s review and update of corporate citizen
               engagement goals, targets, and approaches at that time.
               The proposed evaluation is the first IEG evaluation that systematically
               reviews the World Bank Group citizen engagement efforts (including for
               IFC and MIGA). The proposed evaluation will assess how effectively the
  Evaluation   World Bank Group has mainstreamed citizen engagement at the project,
Gap Analysis, program, country, and corporate level. It will look at quality of design
    Size of    (including attention to context factors and stakeholder capacity); quality of
   Portfolio,  implementation (including monitoring of citizen engagement activities and
 Evaluability  inclusion issues); objectives and results (stated rationale and intermediate
               and final outcomes—to the extent possible); and corporate environment
               (including responsibilities, resources, incentives and constraints). The
               evaluation will adopt a multi-level, mixed-methods design with both
               quantitative and qualitative methods.
               The value added of this evaluation will be to provide a rigorous analysis of
               the Citizen Engagement activities at various levels (project, sector, country,
               and corporate) at a time when the World Bank Group focus is progressively
 Value Added, moving from design to implementation issues. The audience include
 Audience and CODE; WBG management; the Citizen Engagement Secretariat; the Global
   Usability   Partnership for Social Accountability; operational staff, especially those
               working on CE activities in the World Bank, IFC, and MIGA; borrower and
               implementing agencies collaborating with the World Bank Group on
               Citizen Engagement; select civil society organizations and academics; and
               staff of donor agencies.
                                           - 44 -




                            FY18 (Q1) IFC Client Engagement
                 IFC’s mandate is to promote economic development by supporting the
                 growth of productive private enterprise in its developing member countries
                 -- particularly in less developed and higher risk areas -- in partnership with
                 private sector clients. IFC’s business strategy, while always working with
  Rationale,     private sector clients, has evolved over time, in particular since the early
   Strategic     2000s. The IFC has aimed at transforming itself from a transactions-focused
Relevance and    to a client-centered institution. The rationale for this shift was to improve
 Timeliness of   IFC’s development outcomes. More than a decade after the emergence of
the Evaluation   this IFC’s strategy, this evaluation will assess the extent to which IFC’s
                 approach to strategic client engagement has been implemented, enhanced
                 these clients’ project outcomes, and helped IFC improve its own
                 development impact.

                 This is the first evaluation focusing explicitly on the effectiveness of IFC’s
                 approach to strategic client engagement, since IFC results at the level of
                 client groups have thus far not been evaluated. The evaluation therefore
                 relies primarily on new analysis but also builds on existing transaction-
                 based evaluative evidence to distill relevant findings from the perspective of
                 the IFC client relationship.
 Evaluation
Gap Analysis,
                 Given the gradual implementation of IFC’s strategic client engagement
   Size of
                 model and segmentation in strategic and regular clients over the period of
 Portfolio,
                 review, IEG uses two complementary data sets to identify strategic clients
Evaluability
                 as the universe of analysis: (i) client groups involving a higher intensity of
                 IFC engagement ex post; and (ii) client groups identified by IFC, ex ante, as
                 potential strategic partners. In this regard, IEG has identified over 2,200
                 client groups with which IFC has engaged over FY2004-16, covering close
                 to $100 billion. IEG will apply appropriate filters to identify operationally
                 relevant characteristics, performance patterns and drivers.

                 The evaluation aims at deriving appropriate lessons from experience and
                 inform future efforts to improve IFC’s approach to strategic client
                 engagement in given country and client contexts, as a means to enhance its
Value Added,     development impact. The report builds on internal diagnostics regarding
Audience and     IFC’s business model, which would allow IFC to fine-tune its strategy
  Usability      related to the client engagement approach.

                 The primary audience for this evaluation is the Bank Group’s Boards of
                 Directors, and IFC’s management and staff, in addition to external
                 stakeholders focused on private sector development.
                                           - 45 -




 FY18 (Q3) Results and Performance of the World Bank Group (RAP): Environmental
                                      Sustainability
               The RAP is an annual flagship publication that: 1) provides long-term trend
               data on the results and performance of the World Bank Group operations, 2)
  Rationale,   covers a special topic or theme of current strategic interest to the WBG,
   Strategic   largely synthesizing existing IEG evaluative information, and 3) provides
Relevance and annual updates on the status of the uptake of IEG recommendations on
 Timeliness of recent IEG evaluations. The overarching purpose of RAP 2017 is to
the Evaluation provide information on results and performance of the WBG overall
               through FY16, with a special focus on the contribution of the WBG to
               environmental sustainability
               The RAP will cover the entirety of the evaluated WBG portfolio (projects
               and IFC advisory services), with a focus on recently evaluated projects,
  Evaluation
               closing in FY15-16. IEG has not specifically addressed environmental
Gap Analysis,
               sustainability since the 2008 Environmental Sustainability evaluation and
    Size of
  Portfolio,   the 2009 Annual Review of Development Effectiveness on sustainable
 Evaluability  development, but RAP17 will synthesize elements of environmental
               sustainability that have been covered in other IEG evaluations.


                 The primary audience of RAP 2017 are the World Bank Group’s Board of
                 Executive Directors. Other important stakeholders include WBG’s senior
                 management; the OPCS Vice Presidency; Global Practices and Regions (in
                 particular for Environment and Natural Resources and other Sustainable
                 Development Global Practices); IFC and MIGA Directors and Senior
                 Managers; Country Directors and Representatives; IFC and MIGA
Value Added,
                 environment and social managers/leads, and Task Teams of operational
Audience and
                 projects. WBG clients, development agencies and non-government
  Usability
                 organizations also constitute an important audience for this report. The
                 report adds value by providing analysis of the entire WBG portfolio through
                 a performance lens in a way not covered by other reports, and by
                 conducting additional analysis at the portfolio level beyond what is possible
                 from project and country level evaluation products. Usability of the report
                 will be enhanced through the creation of automated self-updated
                 performance dashboards for the overall portfolio.
- 46 -
                                                                               - 47 -
Appendix B: IEG Results Framework

                                                           Indicator                                                                 Baseline     Target (FY20)
Tier   Strategic Results
 1
       Reports the direct and medium-term outcomes that IEG is achieving in accordance to its two strategic objectives


                                                                             Accountability
 1a    IEG evaluations provide the Board with credible     Board response to client survey Q12e: "Thinking of the IEG        63% *                66%
       and relevant information to determine whether       products you have read in the past 12 months, to what extent
       the World Bank Group (WBG)’s programs and           have they improved your understanding of the WBG's
       activities are producing the expected results       development effectiveness?"
 1b    IEG evaluations provide the Board with credible     Board response to client survey Q4: " How relevant do you think   81% **               84%
       and relevant information to determine whether       is IEG’s work to the World Bank Group’s overall mission?"
       the WBG is implementing effectively its Strategy
                                                           For the future, a new question could be added to the survey
                                                           such as: "To what extent IEG’s evaluation reports and findings
                                                           was relevant to my decision-making needs as a member of the
                                                           WBG Board?" and/ or "To what extent IEG's evaluation reports
                                                           and findings was relevant to my oversight function as a member
                                                           of the WBG Board?"
                                                               Feedback Loops, Learning, and Knowledge
2      IEG evaluations inform decision-making processes    (1) Use of IEG products by the WBG - from client survey Q13:      a) 22% **            a) 25%
       at different levels in the WBG to improve the       "Thinking of the IEG products you have read in the past 12
       development effectiveness of the WBG’s              months, to what extent did you use them for the following? a)
       programs and activities, and their responsiveness   Overall use.
       to member countries’ needs and concerns
                                                           b) Designing or modifying lending or non-lending operations       b) 18% **            b) 21%
                                                           c) Designing or modifying policies and/or strategies              c) 20% **            c) 23%
                                                           d) Designing of modifying Results Frameworks                      d) 24% **            d) 27%
                                                           e) Providing advice to clients and/or staff                       e) 26% **            e) 29%
 2a    Strategic and operational debates and documents     New indicator to be developed, tracking the number of WBG         To be developed in   To be
       of the WBG refer to IEG evaluations                 internal documents that refer to IEG evaluations                  FY18Q1               developed in
                                                                                                                                                  FY18Q1
                                                                                - 48 -
2b   The WBG defines and implements action plans to         % of MAR recommendations that are implemented                         In MAR 2016, IEG and      --
     implement IEG recommendations                                                                                                WBG management
                                                                                                                                  Reviewed
                                                                                                                                  Implementation
                                                                                                                                  Progress as
                                                                                                                                  'Substantial' or 'High'
                                                                                                                                  for 77% of
                                                                                                                                  Recommendations
3    IEG evaluations support individual and                 Use of IEG products in project design (WBG CSC)                       74% of WB Projects        100%
     organizational learning to inform mid-course                                                                                 approved in FY16
     corrections and continuous improvements                                                                                      document lessons
                                                                                                                                  learned from various
                                                                                                                                  evaluation products
                                                                                                                                  (which includes IEG)
                                                                                                                                  and reflect them in the
                                                                                                                                  design
4    IEG evaluations contribute to debates and              (1) web analytics tracking citation of IEG in IFI websites and        To be developed in        To be
     repositories of knowledge on policy interventions      social media (note: in the future, option to use researchgate to      FY18Q1                    developed in
     in the policy areas and sectors in which the WBG       track IEG citations in academic research)                                                       FY18Q1
     operates                                               (2) use of IEG products by external parties (from client survey,      47% **                    50%
                                                            Q23)
                                                            (3) total IEG blog readership, Average visits to IEG publications,    As of February 2017-      To be
                                                            Views, Share, Retweet of IEG social media articles                    Blog page views =         developed in
                                                                                                                                  5,363; Product            FY18Q1
                                                                                                                                  Downloads= 6,348;
                                                                                                                                  Website Page views=
                                                                                                                                  37,581; Twitter
                                                                                                                                  followers= 13,347;
                                                                                                                                  Facebook Followers=
                                                                                                                                  80,209
                                                                    Evaluation Capacity Development
5    IEG strengthens M&E capacity, systems and              (1) % of clients who rate their increase in knowledge and skills as   85% CLEAR Clients in      To be
     culture in WBG member countries through                a result of capacity building engagement as 'high' or 'significant'   FY16; IPDET N/A           developed in
     collaborative partnerships and select direct efforts   (feedback surveys from CLEAR and IPDET - see note on IPDET                                      FY18Q0
                                                            below)
                                                            (2) % of CLEAR Center advisory clients who rate the extent to         To be developed in        To be
                                                            which the overall performance of their organization improved as       FY18Q1                    developed in
                                                            a result of CLEAR Center services high or significant (limited data                             FY18Q1
                                                            currently, to be expanded)
                                                                                 - 49 -
                                                             (3) % total IEG consultants that are local                      6% (baseline average     11%
                                                                                                                             FY14-16)
                                                             Note on IPDET: no data commitments can be made yet since
                                                             IPDET is in transition. However annual IPDET evaluations have
                                                             tracked several impact indicators for many years and this is
                                                             expected to continue under the new IPDET delivery
                                                             arrangement.
Tier   IEG Outputs
2
       Reflects the activities and outputs delivered by IEG that contribute to achieving its strategic objectives


                                                                               Accountability
 1     IEG assesses whether the WBG programs and
       activities are producing the expected results,
       including global, regional, and other programs in
       which the WBG is a participant
1a     IEG produces sector, thematic, and country            # of macro, meso, and CPE evaluations produced                  Macro= 7 + RAP, Meso=    Macro=8+RAP,
       evaluations as well as project evaluations to                                                                         0, CPE= 0 (As of FY17)   Meso= 3-5,
       assess whether the WBG programs and activities                                                                                                 CPE=3
       are producing the expected results
1b     IEG reviews and validates self-evaluations            % coverage of micro evaluations (PPAR, ICRR, XPSR, PCR, PER,    PPAR= 23%; ICRR=         PPAR= 20-25%;
       conducted by the WBG of its strategies and            CLR) produced                                                   100%; XPSR= 40%;         ICRR= 100%;
       operations, and conducts additional reviews as                                                                        PCRs= 51%; PERs=         XPSR= 40%;
       needed                                                                                                                100%; CLRs= 100%         PCRs= 51%;
                                                                                                                                                      PERs= 100%;
                                                                                                                                                      CLRs= 100%
1c     IEG produces regular assessments of the WBG’s         RAP report produced annually and discussed at the Board         Annual                   Annual
       results and performance and shares their
       conclusions and recommendations with
       management and the Boards
                                                                 Feedback Loops, Learning and Knowledge
2a     IEG ensures its evaluations are widely                # of internal events organized to disseminate the findings of   8                        To be
       disseminated, understood and valued by WBG            evaluations to WBG management and staff                                                  developed in
       management and staff                                                                                                                           FY18Q1
2b     IEG reports periodically to the Board on actions      Quarterly reporting to CODE on MAR implementation               Quarterly                Quarterly
       taken by the WBG in response to evaluation
       findings and on measures taken to improve the
       overall WBG evaluation system
                                                                                    - 50 -
                                                               DGE statements sent to the Board                                      10 as of FY17 Q3          On an as
                                                                                                                                                               needed basis


3a     IEG engages in Learning Engagements with WBG            (1) number of learning engagements carried out                        11 as of FY17Q4           40 (cumulative)
       staff to help answer relevant development               (2) # of participants in learning engagements                         To be developed in        To be
       questions on the basis of its evaluative evidence                                                                             FY18Q1                    developed in
                                                                                                                                                               FY18Q1
3b     IEG supports the development of Monitoring and          (1) # of RMES events supported by IEG                                 18 (As of FY16)           To be
       Evaluation capacity in the WBG                                                                                                                          developed in
                                                                                                                                                               FY18Q1
                                                               (2) participants’ feedback on usefulness of RMES events               5.6/7 Favorable           6.2/7 Favorable
                                                                                                                                     response                  response
3c     IEG participates in relevant learning events in the     # of IEG staff participating in relevant learning events inside the   To be developed in        To be
       WBG and shares relevant findings, conclusions           WBG                                                                   FY18Q1                    developed in
       and recommendations with Bank management                                                                                                                FY18Q1
       and staff
4      IEG organizes and participates in a broad range of      Number of internal IEG events opened to outside participants          To be developed in        To be
       learning events and debates in client countries                                                                               FY18Q1                    developed in
       and in the broader development and evaluation                                                                                                           FY18Q1
       community to share evaluation findings and its
       experience on evaluation approaches and
       methods
                                                                       Evaluation Capacity Development
5      IEG contributes to the management and                   (1) Number of activities and participants in the CLEAR program        As of FY16, No. of        To be
       implementation of evaluation capacity                                                                                         activities= 186; No. of   developed in
       development programs for development                                                                                          Participants = 13,470     FY18Q1
       professionals                                                                                                                 Quality = 87%;            Quality = 90%;
                                                               (2) % of clients who rate the quality and usefulness of CLEAR
                                                                                                                                     Usefulness= 83%           Usefulness=
                                                               trainings as 'High' or 'Significant'
                                                                                                                                                               86%
                                                               Note on IPDET: no data commitments can be made since IPDET
                                                               is in transition
Tier   IEG Performance
 3
       Measures IEG's operational effectiveness and its contribution to corporate objectives


                                                           Standards for evaluation planning, selection and resources
                                                                                  Responsive planning
                                                                            - 51 -
IEG prepares its work program and evaluation        (1) # of relevant stakeholders consulted during work program        12 groups (incl. CODE,    12 groups
plans in consultation with key stakeholders,        consultation                                                        SMT, RVPs, GP VPs, IFC,
aiming to provide timely and relevant information                                                                       MIGA, OPCS council)
to stakeholders                                     (2) % of evaluation plans discussed with key stakeholders before    100%                      100%
                                                    finalization of the Approach Paper
                                                    (3) Client survey Q10a: "Thinking of all the IEG reports you have   WBG Staff= 38%; WBG       WBG Staff=
                                                    read in the past 12 months, how satisfied were you with the         Board= 49% **             41%; WBG
                                                    timeliness of the evaluation reports?"                                                        Board= 52%
                                                    (4) Client survey Q10b: "Thinking of all the IEG reports you have   WBG Staff= 56%; WBG       WBG Staff=
                                                    read in the past 12 months, how satisfied were you with the         Board= 79% **             59%; WBG
                                                    relevance of the evaluation reports?                                                          Board= 82%
IEG avoids bunching for management and CODE in      % of evaluations in the last quarter                                44%                       25%
planning its work program
                                                                           Strategic Selectivity
IEG evaluations respond to the strategic,           New indicator to be developed as part of client survey              To be developed in
operational and/or learning needs of the WBG                                                                            FY18Q1
IEG evaluations respond to key accountability       Client survey indicator: Q5: "In your opinion, how strategically    66% **                    69%
demands                                             aligned are IEG evaluations with the World Bank Group's goals?"
                                                    (for Board members only)
                                                                       Adequate resources
IEG manages its budget and human resources          (1) % of overall IEG budget over/underrun                           1-2%                      0%
efficiently and ensures independent evaluations     (2) % of major evaluation with cost overrun                         63% of FY17               0%
are adequately resourced                                                                                                evaluations
                                                    (3) strategic staffing conducted and in implementation              Yes                       Implementation
                                                                                                                                                  to continue
                                                    (4) fixed cost ratio                                                74%                       70%
                                                    (5) % of CLEAR Center funds raised relative to total funds          To be developed in        To be
                                                                                                                        FY18Q1                    developed in
                                                                                                                                                  FY18Q1
                                                        Standards for evaluation implementation
                                                                      Collaborative approach
IEG pursues synergies and cooperation with the      (1) % of evaluations with a PROACT or a REACT workshop              ProAct= 22% of FY18       To be
WBG throughout evaluations to enhance                                                                                   Evaluations; ReAct=       developed in
owndership and the validity of findings                                                                                 25% of FY17               FY18Q1
                                                                                                                        Evaluations
                                                    (2) # of evaluations with a stakeholder reference group             0%                        To be
                                                                                                                                                  developed in
                                                                                                                                                  FY18Q1
                                                                          - 52 -
IEG pays particular attention to including local      % total IEG consultants that are local                             6% (FY14-16 baseline)    11%
expertise to enhance the validity of findings as
well as build local capacities
                                                                                Rigor
IEG evaluations are based on the best possible        (1) Completion and implementation of the method action plan        Completion of the plan   Implementation
methodological design given real world                                                                                                            of the plan
constraints of data, time and resources                                                                                                           ongoing
                                                      (2) # of IEG staff trained on relevant evaluation methodologies    0                        To be
                                                                                                                                                  developed in
                                                                                                                                                  FY18Q1
                                                                          Quality assurance
IEG ensures evaluations are subject to a strong       (1) IEG quality assurance process is enhanced                      Process defined          Process
quality assurance process                                                                                                                         implemented
                                                      (2) Client Survey Q11: "How satisfied are you with the overall     WBG Staff= 49%; WBG      WBG Staff=
                                                      quality of the IEG products that you read in the past 12           Board= 64%; External=    52%; WBG
                                                      months?"                                                           78% **                   Board= 67%;
                                                                                                                                                  External= 81%
IEG ensures the timely delivery of its evaluations    Average Time between AP and final delivery of macro                12 months                10 months
                                                      evaluations
IEG respects agreed service standards with WBG        Compliance with service standards for validation delivery (CLRs,   As of FY17Q3:            ICRRs= 100%
management                                            ICRRs)                                                             ICRRs=47%; CLRs=100%     CLRs= 100%
                                               Standards for evaluation reporting, dissemination and follow-up
                                                                        Customized reporting
Evaluation findings are adequately reported in        # of bite-size products produced to support the dissemination of   8                        To be
different formats, consistent with the needs of       evaluations                                                                                 developed in
the target audiences                                                                                                                              FY18Q1
                                                                        Broad dissemination
IEG makes findings and lessons learned accessible     See Tier 2 indicators
to relevant internal and external target audiences
                                                                         Adequate follow up
IEG monitors management responses and action          Maintenance of MAR system                                          Yes                      Yes
plans and discusses them with relevant
stakeholders
                                                               Contribution to corporate goals
IEG supports the WBG simplification process           Coordinate with WBG management on ICR Reform and                   Agreement reached        New ICR and
                                                      alignment with ICRRs                                               with management on       ICRR rolled out
                                                                                                                         ICR and ICRR
                                                                                      - 53 -
         IEG contributes to the development of a WBG            Delivery of WBG EF             Annotated Agenda to   Final EF in place
         Evaluation Framework                                                                  CODE
         IEG fosters diversity and inclusion                    IEG diversity index            0.57                  0.68
* IEG Client Survey- 2017             **IEG Client Survey - average of 2014-2017
                                          - 54 -


Appendix C: Selectivity Tools for Evaluation Topics

1.    Results from Stakeholder Consultations
                                                                                   - 55 -


2.          Results from IEG Internal Consultations and Preliminary Evaluability Review

                               Table C1: Top Ten Evaluation Topics Recommended by IEG Departments


           1. Forced displacements and Migration
           2. Role of advisory/AAAs in policy dialogue
           3. WBG convening power and role in the global development landscape
           4. Hunger and Malnutrition
           5. Fostering regional cooperation / integration
           6. The digital revolution
           7. Creating new markets, including through the IDA 18 ‘Private Sector Window’
           8. Managing Economic Transitions
           9. Institutional capacity strengthening
           10. Water resource management

                    Figure C1: Preliminary Relevance and Evaluability Analysis, Selected Evaluation Topics

 Average Selection Criteria Scores for Selected Evaluation topic
             Evaluability                                         Ability to respond in a timely manner       Addressing known gap in the portfolio
             Alignment with IEG SEAs or other strategic pillars   Strategic relevance for WBG                 Strategic relevance for client countries




                                               Forced displacements and Migration




                                           Role of advisory/AAAs in policy dialogue




              WBG convening power and role in the global development landscape




                                                            Hunger & Malnutrition




 Fos tering regional cooperation / integration through regional projects (incl. IDA’s
                                Regi onal Window)


                                                                                        0                 1               2                     3        4
                                                                                          - 56 -


                                        Evaluability                                          Ability to respond in a timely manner
                                        Addressing known gap in the portfolio                 Alignment with IEG SEAs or other strategic pillars
                                        Strategic relevance for WBG                           Strategic relevance for client countries




                                                             The digital revolution




    Crea ti ng new markets, including through the IDA 18 ‘Pri va te Sector Wi ndow’




                                                  Managing Economic Transitions




                                              Institutional capacity strengthening




                                                       Water resource management



                                                                                      0                    1                      2                3   4

    Average scores based on the scale: weak (1); fairly weak (2); fairly strong (3); strong (4)



3.              Portfolio Gap Analysis

Objective

        As one of the components of the IEG work program design, the objective of the IEG
Portfolio Gap Analysis is to help select evaluations that are timely and relevant to the Board
and to WBG operations vis-à-vis current WBG portfolio trends. In order to achieve this
objective, the gap analysis mapped IEG evaluations over the past decade against WBG portfolio
trends since FY2012 up to the current time (Q3 FY2017). This mapping exercise resulted in the
identification of areas with good coverage by recent IEG evaluations, areas where there are gaps,
and areas where current IEG evaluations will provide timely insights given growing portfolio
trends.

Methodology Brief

       IEG reviewed commitment trends in WBG portfolio over the period FY12-FY17. The
measure used was the sum of IBRD/IDA/Grant amounts for the World Bank (including pipeline
commitments for FY17), Total Original Commitments for IFC investments, and Gross Exposure
for MIGA over the two fiscal year periods FY12-14 and FY15-17 (Tables B2 and B3). 2

       IEG mapped its major evaluations, country partnership evaluations, global
partnership reviews, and major learning products based on their overall evaluation topic
against these summarized commitment trends to visualize the alignment of major evaluations

2
  Data Sources: Data was retrieved from the WBG’s management information systems, namely Business
Intelligence for the World Bank, iDesk for IFC Investment, and MIGA portal for MIGA.
                                                 - 57 -


and the WBG portfolio. Evaluations were mapped against World Bank major sectors and themes,
IFC industry groups, and MIGA sectors. For example, the FY11 “Governance and Anticorruption”
evaluation was mapped against the World Bank’s major sector code “Public Administration” and
the major theme code “Public Sector Management” while the FY14 “Health Systems Financing”
evaluation was mapped against the World Bank’s major sector code “Health” and major theme
code “Human Development and Gender.”

        Mapping IEG evaluations based on their overall evaluation topic has advantages but
at the same time is constrained by a significant caveat. By focusing on the evaluation’s overall
topic, the mapping exercise was able to zoom in to those evaluations which really targeted the
sector/theme/industry group issues head on. However, by focusing on the evaluation’s main topic,
some cross-cutting sector/theme/industry groups may appear to be under covered when in fact they
are not. A case in point are the World Bank’s major sector “Public Sector Administration” and
major theme “Public Sector Management” for which, while few evaluations tackle these issues
exclusively, most evaluation portfolios contain activities that address public sector administration
and management issues as part of their sector or thematic work. To get the complete picture and
avoid this caveat, one would have to map the underlying evaluation portfolios against the
underlying sector/theme/industry projects – something IEG may do going forward.

       For World Bank projects, the review looked at both pre-update and current major
sector and theme coding scheme. OPCS recently completed an exercise to streamline World
Bank sector and theme codes in an effort to improve their utility; projects approved before the
update were retrofit using a rules-based approach. Given that the streamline exercise was recently
completed, the review summarized portfolio data using both the pre-update and current sector and
theme coding schemes.

Descriptive Summary of Findings

        A summary of pre-update and current codes shows good coverage of most major
sectors by IEG evaluations. Seven out of the eleven major sectors received either a greater share
of evaluation coverage than the major sector’s share of the portfolio or at least ten percent of IEG
evaluation coverage. Four areas received a higher share of evaluation coverage than the major
sector’s share of the portfolio, namely agriculture/fisheries/forest, health, industry/trade, and social
protection.

        By contrast, education, energy & extractives, public administration, transportation,
and water/sanitation/waste were covered in a more limited share of IEG evaluations. These
trends largely hold when looking at both pre-update and current major sector codes with the
exception of social protection which was not available under the pre-update coding system (Figure
B2). This is why IEG included in its recent work program evaluations on Tertiary Education,
Renewable Energy, and Water and Sanitation.

       However, while there has been good coverage of major sectors, some of the evaluated
portfolios are reaching or have passed the ten-year mark and are therefore suitable for an
update. For example, in agriculture, two major evaluations stand out, the “Growth and
Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness (FY11)” evaluation and the “Food Crises (FY13)”
evaluation. The former had a portfolio that extended up to 2008 (closed projects where ICRRs
                                                                                                      - 58 -


were available) while the latter examined a cohort of emergency recovery loans that were part of
the Global Food Crises program – a subset of the agriculture portfolio. Similarly, while there has
been good coverage of electricity access (including off-grid) and there is on-going work on
renewable energy, there has not been a major evaluation of extractive industries over the past ten
years. In water, while there is an on-going evaluation on water supply and sanitation, there has not
been an evaluation on water resources in over a decade. To address these gaps, IEG proposes to
consider preparing Meso Evaluations on some of these sectors.

Figure C2: Share of World Bank Amounts by Pre-update (a) and Current Major Sectors (b) and Share of IEG Major
                                      Evaluations (right axis in a & b)


                 (a) Pre-update Major Sector Codes                                                                       (b) Current Major Sector Codes


                       nication      social Sector                                                                     Social Public             Health
                                                                                                                                                      Sector
                               Trade/Ser
                                 Industry &   Financial
                                        (H)Health     Energy  &
                                                            Education
                                                  & Extractives   Agriculture                           Waste Mgt Protection                            Financial
                                                                                                                                                              EnergyEducation
                                                                                                                                                                      and Agri, Fishin
                 Public Admin                                                                                                            and  Services      Extractives and Forestry
          Transportation
    Water/Sanit/W..       Info & Commu                                                                   Water,Transportation    Technologies
                                                                                                                 Sanit & Administration     Industry,
                                                                                                                                     Info and Comm Trade


                                                                                                             25%                                                                         25%
       25%                                                                                  25%


                                                                                                             20%                                                                         20%
       20%                                                                                  20%


       15%                                                                                  15%              15%                                                                         15%


  %C
       10%                                                                                  10%         %C
                                                                                                             10%                                                                         10%
                                                                              Share IEG Evaluations                                                                        Share IEG Evaluations

       5%                                                                                   5%
                                                                                                             5%                                                                          5%

       0%                                                                                   0%
                                                                                                             0%                                                                          0%


       FY15-17 FY15-17
          FY12-14      FY15-17
                  FY12-14      FY15-17
                          FY12-14      FY15-17
                                  FY12-14      FY15-17
                                          FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                  FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                          FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                  FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                          FY12-14 FY12-14                    FY15-17
                                                                                                                   FY15-17
                                                                                                                FY12-14
                                                                                                                      FY12-14
                                                                                                                         FY15-17
                                                                                                                               FY15-17
                                                                                                                            FY12-14  FY15-17
                                                                                                                                           FY15-17
                                                                                                                                              FY12-14
                                                                                                                                  FY12-14
                                                                                                                                        FY12-14        FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                 FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                    FY12-14
                                                                                                                                                          FY12-14  FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                                         FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                             FY15-17        FY12-14
                                                                                                                                                                      FY12-14
                                                                                                                                                                FY12-14




Source: WB Business Intelligence and IEG Major Evaluations

         Current thematic codes also show good coverage across most thematic areas but
comparing pre- and post-update trends is challenging. Five out of the eight major themes
received either a greater share of evaluation coverage than the major theme’s share of the portfolio
or at least ten percent of IEG evaluation coverage, namely economic policy, environment & natural
resource management, finance, human development & gender, and social development &
protection.

        By contrast, the thematic areas of private sector development, public sector
management, and urban & rural development received a more limited coverage given their
relative importance to the overall WB portfolio. However, comparing pre-update and current
sector codes is challenging given that the streamlining efforts resulted in the renaming and
clustering of thematic areas. While many trends hold for both periods, the new coding system
reveals gaps in areas that previously appeared well covered (e.g. private sector development) (see
Figure B3).
                                                                                            - 59 -

   Figure C3: Share of World Bank Amounts by Pre-update (a) and Current Major Themes (b) and Share of IEG
                                    Major Evaluations (right axis in a & b)


               (a) Pre-update Major Theme Codes                                                                 (b) New Major Theme Codes

                risk                                   res
       UrbanTrade &     SocialRural  govern Human                                                                                                    Policy
          integration dev/gender Rule of law        Fin &
                                                 sector   pvt Economic
                                                        dev                                                                             Finance
     development Social prot &
                           development      development
                                        Public sector        management                          Rural Dev
                                                                                                   Urban and Management and
                                                                                                        Protection                Human
                                                                                                                                   GenderDev           Economic
                                                          Envir & natural                                               Development
                                                                                                                   Public Sector
                                                                                                                          Private Sector        Env and
                                                                                                                                              Resource   Nat
                                                                                                                                                       Mgt
                                                                                                           Social Dev and


                                                                                                     25%                                                                  25%
         25%                                                                      25%



         20%                                                                      20%                20%                                                                  20%



         15%                                                                      15%                15%                                                                  15%


    %C
         10%                                                                      10%           %C
                                                                                                     10%                                                                  10%
                                                                    Share IEG Evaluations                                                                   Share IEG Evaluations

         5%                                                                       5%
                                                                                                     5%                                                                   5%


         0%                                                                       0%                 0%                                                                   0%



         FY15-17
               FY15-17
            FY12-14
                  FY12-14        FY15-17
                           FY15-17
                     FY15-17
                        FY12-14        FY15-17
                                          FY12-14
                                    FY12-14
                              FY12-14                    FY15-17
                                                   FY15-17
                                             FY15-17  FY12-14
                                                FY12-14              FY15-17
                                                               FY15-17  FY12-14
                                                                  FY12-14
                                                            FY12-14                                  FY15-17 FY15-17
                                                                                                        FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                                                                FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                                                                        FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                                                                                FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                                                                                        FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                FY12-14      FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                        FY12-14 FY12-14




Source: WB Business Intelligence and IEG Major Evaluations




        Within major sectors and themes, a growing trend in several sub-sectors and sub-
themes is matched by a relevant IEG major evaluation, proving timely coverage. For instance,
within the sector code “Water, Sanitation, and Waste Management,” sanitation is a growing area
where the IEG evaluation “Water Supply and Sanitation” can shed light on issues relevant to this
growing portfolio (Figure B4a). Within the thematic area of “Environment and Natural Resource
Management,” environmental health and pollution management is a growing area covered by the
on-going IEG evaluation on “Towards a Clean World for All” (Figure B4b). Similarly, within the
“Urban and Rural Development” sector code, urban development has increased relative to rural
development; the on-going “Urban Transport” evaluation as well as an upcoming series of IEG
evaluations on sustainable cities will cover this growing area. On the other hand, while renewable
natural resources asset management and water resource management account for approximately
21 percent (growing from 18 percent) of the “Environment and Natural Resource Management”
thematic code, these areas have not been covered in the past decade.
                                                                                              - 60 -

 Figure C4: Share of World Bank Amounts by Updated Detailed Sector and Theme Codes (left axis) and Share of
                                     IEG Major Evaluations (right axis)


                (a) Detailed Sector Codes for                                                             (b) Detailed Theme Codes for
         Water, Sanitation, and Waste Management                                                  Environment and Natural Resource Management

                            Waste                  Public
                         Management Sanitation             and Waste                                                                          Pollution Energy
                Water Supply                                    Other Water
                                                        Management                                                    Management
                                                                                                             Management         institutionsand Health and
                                                                                                                                   policies Management
                                                 Administration
                                               Water, Sanitation -
                                                              Supply, Sanitat                                  Water Resource         EnvironmentalEnvironmental
                                                                                                                                                               Climate change
                                             and Waste Manag..                                                          Resources Asset
                                                                                                                           Renewable Natural
                                                                                                               80%
                      40%
                                                                                                               60%
                      30%

                                                                                                               40%
                      20%

                                                                                                               20%
                      10%
                Pct                                                                                      Pct
                      0%                                                                                        0%



                       FY15-17   FY15-17
                            FY12-14        FY15-17
                                      FY12-14        FY15-17
                                                FY12-14        FY15-17
                                                          FY12-14   FY12-14                                     FY15-17   FY15-17
                                                                                                                     FY12-14        FY15-17
                                                                                                                               FY12-14        FY15-17
                                                                                                                                         FY12-14   FY12-14   FY15-17
                                                                                                                                                        FY15-17   FY12-14




Source: WB Business Intelligence and IEG Major Evaluations

        For IFC and MIGA, most sectors saw good coverage at the industry group / major
sector level (Figure B5). All IFC and MIGA industry groups / major sectors received at least 20
percent of IEG major evaluation coverage save Collective Investments, Telecom, Technology
(CTT) which received as much coverage as its relative share of the IFC portfolio. While coverage
appears to lag behind for the IFC’s financial industry group, the recent Capital Markets, Financial
Inclusion, and SME support evaluation covered these issues extensively. Within IFC’s
Manufacturing, Agribusiness, and Services (MAS), IEG’s recent Industrial Competitiveness and
Jobs and Rural Non-Farm Evaluations covered aspects of agribusiness, an important and growing
sub-area (“agribusiness & forestry” accounted for approximately 20 percent of MAS in FY12-14
and for approximately 30 percent in FY15-17). For MIGA, the “power” sector, which represents
an important and growing area, was covered under the recent access to electricity evaluation with
a portfolio spanning almost one and a half decades (FY2000-2014).

  Figure C5: Share of IFC and MIGA Commitments by Industry Group (a) and Sectors (b) and Share of IEG Major
                                          Evaluations (right axis)


                            (a) IFC IS Industry Groups                                                                            (b) MIGA Sectors
                      CTT            FM/FIN             INFRA              MAS                                           FM/FIN               INFRA                 MAS
                                                                                                             60%                                                                 60%
        40%                                                                             40%


        35%                                                                             35%                  50%                                                                 50%

        30%                                                                             30%
                                                                                                             40%                                                                 40%
        25%                                                                             25%


        20%                                                                             20%                  30%                                                                 30%


  Sha                                                                                                  Sha
        15%                                                                             15%
                                                                          Share IEG Evaluations                                                                    Share IEG Evaluations
                                                                                                             20%                                                                 20%

        10%                                                                             10%

                                                                                                             10%                                                                 10%
        5%                                                                              5%

        0%                                                                              0%                    0%                                                                 0%
              FY12-14 FY15-17 FY12-14 FY15-17 FY12-14 FY15-17 FY12-14 FY15-17                                        FY12-14 FY15-17 FY12-14 FY15-17 FY12-14 FY15-17




Source: WB Business Intelligence and IEG Major Evaluations
                                                        - 61 -

                                Table C2: Recent IEG Evaluations by Sector (FY10-17)


                   % of WB Lending           % of WB ASA
      Sector                                      (ESW & TA)                               Evaluations
                  FY 12-14   FY 15-17     FY 12-14       FY 15-17
                                                                    Global Food Crisis Response (FY13)
                                                                    Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development
                                                                    (FY13)
                                                                    Impact Evaluations in Agriculture (FY11)
Agriculture                                                         Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness
and Rural            8          7            5                 6    (FY11)
Development                                                         GPR: Forest Carbon Partnership (FY12)
                                                                    GPR: International Assessment of Agricultural Knowledge,
                                                                    Science, and Technology for Development (FY10)

                                                                    Rural Non-Farm Economy (FY17)
                                                                    World Bank Support to Education Since 2001 (FY11)
Education            9          7            7                 6    Higher Education for Development (FY17)
                                                                    Electricity Access (FY15)
                                                                    Clustered CPE on Resource Rich Countries (FY15)
Energy and                                                          Challenge of Low-Carbon Dev.: Climate Change and WBG -
Mining
                    13         13            7                 8    Phase II (FY10)
                                                                    Climate Change and WBG: Win-Win Energy Policy Reforms
                                                                    - Phase I (FY09)
                                                                    GPR: EITI (FY11)
                                                                    Capital Market Development (FY16)
                                                                    Inclusive Financing (FY15)
Finance              5          7            17                13   WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase II
                                                                    (FY12)
                                                                    WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase I
                                                                    (FY10)
                                                                    Health Systems Financing (FY14)
                                                                    Social Safety Nets and Gender Equality (FY14)
                                                                    Maternal and Child Health Care Systematic Review (FY13)
                                                                    What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations?
Health and                                                          (FY10)
Other Social        11         12            12                12   Social Safety Nets (FY11)
Services                                                            Improving Effectiveness and Outcomes for the Poor in
                                                                    Health, Nutrition and Population (FY09)
                                                                    GPR: GAVI (FY14)
                                                                    GPR: The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and
                                                                    Malaria (FY12)
                                                                    Jobs and Competiveness (FY16)
                                                                    Support to SMEs (FY14)
                                                                    Public-Private Partnerships (FY14)
Industry and                                                        Investment Climate Reform (FY14)
Trade
                     4          7            8                 8
                                                                    Trade Finance (FY13)
                                                                    Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Competitiveness (FY13)
                                                                    Support to SMEs (FY13)
ICT                  1          1            3                 3    Capturing Technology for Development (FY11)
                                                                    World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and
Public                                                              Anticorruption (FY11)
Administration,
Law, and
                    24         20            31                33   World Bank Engagement at the State Level (FY10)
Justice                                                             Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed
                                                                    (FY10)
                                                        - 62 -


                   % of WB Lending           % of WB ASA
    Sector                                        (ESW & TA)                               Evaluations
                  FY 12-14   FY 15-17     FY 12-14       FY 15-17
                                                                    Improving Capability and Financial Viability to Sustain
Transportation      16          14           4                 5    Transport (FY13)
                                                                    Urban Transport Services (FY17)
Water,                                                              GPR: Global Water Partnership (FY10)
Sanitation, and
Flood
                    10          12           5                 7
                                                                    Water Supply & Sanitation (FY17)
Protection



                                Table C3: Recent IEG Evaluations by Theme (FY10-17)


                   % of WB Lending            % of WB ASA
    Theme                                         (ESW & TA)                               Evaluations
                  FY 12-14   FY 15-17    FY 12-14       FY 15-17
                                                                    Clustered CPE on Resource Rich Countries (FY15)
Economic                                                            WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase II
                     2           4           11                10   (FY12)
Management
                                                                    WBG Response to the Global Economic Crisis - Phase I
                                                                    (FY10)
                                                                    Adapting to Climate Change: Assessing WBG Experience -
                                                                    Phase III (FY13)
                                                                    Managing Forest Resources for Sustainable Development
                                                                    (FY13)
Environment and                                                     The Challenge of Low-Carbon Dev.: Climate Change and
Natural
                     10         10            8                9    WBG - Phase II (FY10)
Resources
Management                                                          GPR: GEF (FY14)
                                                                    GPR: Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FY13)
                                                                    GPR: Global Water Partnership (FY10)
                                                                    Water Supply and Sanitation (FY17)
                                                                    Capital Market Development (FY16)
                                                                    Jobs and Competitiveness (FY16)
                                                                    Inclusive Finance (FY15)
                                                                    Support to SMEs (FY14)
                                                                    Investment Climate Reform (FY14)
Financial and
Private Sector       15         18           23                19   Public-Private Partnerships (FY14)
Development                                                         Innovation, Entrepreneurship, and Competitiveness (FY13)
                                                                    Assessing IFC's Poverty Focus and Results (FY11)
                                                                    GPR: EITI (FY11)
                                                                    Earnings and Growth and Employment Creation in 3 MICs
                                                                    (FY11)
                                                                    MIGA Financial Guarantees (FY11)
                                                                    Early Childhood Development (FY15)
                                                                    Health Systems Financing (FY14)
                                                                    Maternal and Child Health Care IE Review (FY13)
                                                                    World Bank Support to Education Since 2001 (FY11)
Human                                                               What Can We Learn from Nutrition Impact Evaluations?
                     14         12           11                10   (FY10)
Development
                                                                    GPR: GAVI (FY14)
                                                                    GPR: The Global Fund to Fight AIDs, Tuberculosis and
                                                                    Malaria (FY12)
                                                                    GPR: Stop TB Partnership (FY10)
                                                                    Higher Education for Development (FY17)
                                                        - 63 -


                    % of WB Lending          % of WB ASA
    Theme                                         (ESW & TA)                               Evaluations
                   FY 12-14   FY 15-17   FY 12-14       FY 15-17
                                                                    World Bank Country-Level Engagement on Governance and
Public Sector                                                       Anticorruption (FY11)
                      12         10          16                17
Governance
                                                                    World Bank Engagement at the State Level (FY10)
Rule of Law           1           1          2                 2    -
                                                                    Global Food Crisis Response (FY13)
                                                                    Impact Evaluations in Agriculture (FY11)
Rural
                      16         13          3                 5    Growth and Productivity in Agriculture and Agribusiness
Development
                                                                    (FY11)
                                                                    Rural Non-Farm Economy (FY17)
                                                                    2015 Results and Performance Report – Gender Chapter
Social                                                              (FY16)
Development,                                                        Social Safety Nets and Gender Equality (FY14)
                      4           3          5                 5
Gender, and
                                                                    Social Safety Nets (FY11)
Inclusion
                                                                    Analyzing the Effects of Policy Reforms on the Poor (FY10)
                                                                    Poverty Focus of Country Programs (FY15)
Social Prot. and
Risk                  10         11          10                11   Youth Employment Programs (FY12)
Management                                                          Social Safety Nets (FY11)
                                                                    Trade Finance (FY13)
Trade and
                      6           5          5                 6    WB Involvement in Global and Regional Partnership
Integration
                                                                    Programs (FY11)
                                                                    Improving Municipal Management for Cities to Succeed
Urban Dev.            11         12          5                 7    (FY10)
                                                                    Urban Transport Services (FY17)
                                             - 64 -


Appendix D: Implementation Status – Recommendations of the External Review

       Significant progress has been made on all recommendations of the External Review,
following a tight timeline (Figure E1).

•        Recommendation 1: The recommendation that IEG should remain an independent unit
within the WBG with clear accountability and learning responsibilities was approved by the Board
in May 2016. The implementation of this recommendation involves a revision of the Director
General, Evaluation (DGE) Mandate, now called the IEG Mandate, a draft of which has been
prepared for CODE’s review.
•        Recommendation 2: The Board approved the recommendation that regular independent
external reviews of IEG should be conducted. CODE will include in its work program, going
forward, periodic independent external reviews of IEG.
•        Recommendation 3: The Board approved the recommendation to establish a single 6-year
non-renewable term for the DGE, with no possibility of entry/re-entry into the WBG. The draft
new IEG Mandate reflects this change.
•        Recommendation 4: The principles of a WBG Evaluation Framework have been finalized
for discussion with CODE in May 2017 (see Box E1).
•        Recommendation 5: Following a CODE meeting in October 2016, CODE agreed to
consider how to strengthen its oversight functions in the new term.
•        Recommendation 6: To address recommendation 6 on enhancing the quality, relevance,
usefulness, credibility, and influence of IEG’s work, CODE members agreed at the October 2016
meeting to periodically review IEG’s products to assess their efficiency and impact vis-à-vis
accountability and learning, starting with the IFC/MIGA PPAR and CCPE. The review of the
IFC/MIGA PPAR is ongoing, while with respect to CCPEs, a hybrid approach has been agreed
with CODE relying on single or clustered CPEs based on business needs and strategic relevance.
Additionally, IEG is implementing a wide range of internal reforms to enhance the credibility and
use of its evaluations, as described in the rest of this section.
•        Recommendation 7: To address this recommendation to improve the process of
developing recommendations and formulating action plans to IEG’s evaluations, in FY 16, two
new approaches to engage WBG management during evaluations were piloted (REACT and
PROACT workshops) and the experiences from these pilots were discussed at the June 2016
CODE meeting. For FY17, six pilots were proposed to increase engagement at various stages of
an evaluation (design, implementation, and conclusion) and for the preparation of action plans.
Initial experience from these pilots will be reported to CODE in early FY18.
•        Recommendation 8: To address this recommendation on broadening IEG’s role in
building M&E capacity in client countries, four strategic directions were proposed and discussed
as part of IEG’s FY17 work program and budget document. An update to these proposals is
provided in detail in paragraphs 105.
                                                       - 65 -

                       FIGURE D1: TIMELINE OF IEG’S EXTERNAL REVIEW RECOMMENDATIONS DISCUSSIONS




                                     Box D1: The WBG Evaluation Framework

The Evaluation Framework will set out the WBG’s vision for conducting and utilizing evaluation – both self- and
independent – in ways that enhance the Institutions’ capacity to manage for results, to incorporate lessons learned
into new operations and strategies, to be more agile and responsive to clients’ needs for higher impact, and to set
new standards for evaluations.

The purpose of the Evaluation Framework is to describe the key elements of the WBG evaluation architecture,
including definitions; key concepts and principles; a theory of change underlying the evaluation function; a brief
description of each institution’s approaches to evaluation; and feedback loops between evaluations and
operations.

The Evaluation Framework will provide the overall architecture of and the shared high-level principles for
evaluation at the WBG, as well as at each institution’s level. The Evaluation Framework will refer to relevant
existing documents, and will also be complemented with updated WBG documents that define each institution’s
evaluation processes and functions. These documents will provide the depth and detail needed to govern each of
the Institutions’ evaluation functions, in line with the overall Evaluation Framework.
                                              - 66 -


Appendix E: Strengthened Quality Assurance Framework

        In FY17, a strengthened IEG’s quality assurance process has been put in place and
IEG’s portfolio analyses and evaluation methods have been further strengthened, under the
direction of IEG’s Methods Advisory Function.

Quality Assurance Framework

        Over the past few years, IEG has put in place a comprehensive quality assurance
framework. Good quality starts with the selection of the right evaluation issues; thus, IEG has
continued to refine its process for selectivity and prioritization of the work program. During
evaluation preparation and implementation, key quality elements include: quality standards for
approach papers, internal IEG review meetings of draft approach papers and evaluation reports
with external peer reviewers, and review and feedback by WBG management on draft approach
papers and evaluation reports. ReACT Workshops have been organized in the framework of major
evaluations as an additional feedback loop to deepen engagement with WBG management on the
findings of draft reports and the formulation of recommendations. The quality assurance process
ends with the implementation of an “after-action review” after the completion of evaluation
reports, where IEG staff have a structured debrief process to analyze what happened, why, and
how the work could have could have been done better.

        In FY17, IEG took several steps to further enhance the quality assurance framework
of its evaluations.

        First, the process to ensure relevance of the work program was refined. As in previous
years, an extensive consultation process took place with a large number of internal and external
stakeholders, from across the WBG institutions. Consultations aimed to ascertain alignment
between the proposed work program for IEG in FY18-20 and the main strategic priorities of the
WBG and the main development challenges likely to affect its clients going forward. In addition,
a thorough Gap Analysis was conducted aimed to identify potential gaps between IEG’s existing
stock of evaluative work and the areas where the WBG is most or increasingly active in through
lending and non-lending activities. Details on the selectivity process are provided in Chapter 3.

        Second, a Methods Advisory Function was established with the responsibility to
provide methodological and quality assurance support to major evaluations. Significant
progress was made in the three main areas that constitute the mandate of the Methods Advisory
Function: i) strengthen evaluation methods in IEG products and services, including piloting of new
and innovative evaluation techniques, with a focus on helping IEG staff select the best available
evaluation methods and design to address specific evaluation questions; ii) ensure consistent and
efficient collection, use, and presentation of data in IEG evaluation work, including by
coordinating and overseeing the work of IEG’s portfolio and data analysts; and iii) support the
development of IEG staff evaluation skills, and IEG’s global presence in professional fora on
evaluation methods and data. The Methods Advisory Function is led by the IEG Methods Adviser
and brings together IEG staff members with strong and varied methodological expertise who
provide demand-driven support to different evaluation teams on specific methodological issues.
                                               - 67 -


       Third, IEG approved a number of principles to further enhance the quality and
credibility of its major evaluations, following a review by the Methods Advisory Function of
the quality assurance framework for major evaluations. The following principles, constituting a
more efficient and systematic quality assurance framework, should be applied to all major
evaluations starting in FY18:

   •   Developing a concept note early on in the evaluation process to facilitate a focused
       discussion on the rationale and scope of the evaluation.
   •   Maintaining the approach paper one-stop process as a reference point for discussing and
       deciding on the evaluation scope and approach.
   •   Introducing a review meeting after the approval of the approach paper to further flesh out
       the details and agree upon a feasible and credible methodological design.
   •   Introducing a review meeting at mid-point to review progress in data collection and
       analysis, the breadth and depth of coverage of evaluation questions, and decide on course
       corrections where needed.
   •   Introducing a review meeting after the finalization of data collection and analysis activities
       to review the breadth and depth of coverage of evaluation questions, and discuss the
       evaluation’s main tentative findings and emerging messages.
   •   Maintaining the draft report one-stop process as a reference point for discussing and
       deciding on the finalization of the evaluation report.
       In addition to the above IEG will consider on a pilot basis the implementation of
additional quality assurance or quality enhancement mechanisms such as the use of reference
groups (on top of external peer reviewers) and evaluability assessments.

Methods and Data

        IEG has continued to invest in testing, adapting, and developing new methods and
data to maintain cutting-edge rigor and quality in the evaluation of WBG interventions. IEG
evaluation teams in collaboration with the Methods Advisory Function have been actively engaged
in the following initiatives.

       First, significant progress has been achieved in piloting innovative methods and
approaches. For example, the Shared Prosperity evaluation analyzed the geo-spatial targeting of
WBG support in relation to poverty needs. The Health Services evaluation conducted Social
Network Analysis (at different levels, i.e., global, country) to better understand the dynamics
among different institutional actors and the positioning of the WBG in the institutional landscape
of support to health sector. The Citizen Engagement evaluation piloted innovative causal inference
methods such as process tracing to rigorously analyze and understand the effects of citizen
engagement.

        Second, IEG has continued to invest in strengthening the design and implementation
of its evaluations. A number of initiatives were undertaken to further strengthen and harmonize
design principles in complex major evaluations. Structured meetings on the approach paper were
organized for new evaluations to discuss the rationale, potential use, scope, methodological design
and theory (or theories) of change underpinning evaluations. New guidance materials were
                                                - 68 -


produced (e.g. on structured literature reviews) and existing guidance (internal and external) was
updated and reorganized in a new Spark page accessible to IEG staff and the broader WBG
community.

        Third, an internal assessment of portfolio review and analysis practices, tools and
skills was undertaken to further strengthen the efficiency, quality and innovative potential
of portfolio reviews. Portfolio review and analysis (PRA) constitutes the backbone of most of the
evaluative work undertaken by IEG. The assessment analyzed the key challenges and identified
three main areas of reform that are currently being initiated:

   •   Enhancing staff capacity in PRA through dedicated training courses for task team leaders
       (TTLs), evaluators, and analysts as part the IEG Academy (an umbrella term for all
       capacity development activities organized within IEG).
   •   Developing a staffing plan and structure for PRA in IEG with PRA coordinators and
       analysts embedded in each of the units, under the technical supervision of the Methods
       Advisory Function.
   •   Investing in public goods, i.e., further strengthening the use of clear PRA protocols,
       investing in improved data management systems, and ensuring the availability of
       specialized expertise in particular areas of PRA.

        Fourth, IEG continued to invest in the methodological skills of its staff. The IEG
Methods Series of Brown Bag Lunches (BBLs) was launched in which external and internal
experts covered a range of methodological topics such as impact evaluations, using big data in
evaluation, quali-quantitative and qualitative methods of causal inference, collaborative
approaches in evaluation, and case-based methods. Training was also organized on the use of
computer-assisted qualitative data analysis software. Under the umbrella of the newly established
IEG academy, work has started on developing dedicated courses on methodological design and
data collection and analysis to further strengthen the capacities of IEG staff. IEG’s staff skills were
also supported by ensuring IEG’s global presence in professional fora and conferences on
evaluation practices and selected IEG staff attended specialized trainings on evaluation methods.
                                            - 69 -


Appendix F: List of DGE Statements to WBG Executive Directors and Management in
FY17


DGE Statements to Executive Directors
• WDR 2018 on Realizing the Promise of Education for Development, January 10, 2017
• Regional Results and Performance for Europe and Central Asia, February 6, 2017
• Regional Results and Performance for Africa, February 6, 2017
• Regional Results and Performance for East Asia and the Pacific Region, February 7, 2017
• Regional Results and Performance for South Asia Region, February 7, 2017
• Global Practice Performance for the Equitable Growth, Finance, and Institutions Global
  Practice Cluster, February 8, 2017
• Regional Results and Performance for the Middle East and North Africa Region, February 8,
  2017
• Global Practice Performance for the Human Development Global Practice Clusters, February
  13, 2017
• Regional Results and Performance for Latin America and the Caribbean Region, February
  14, 2017
• Operationalizing the IDA 18 IFC-MIGA Private Sector Window, April 11, 2017


DGE Statements to WBG Management
First Quarter
•   World Development Report 2017 on Governance and the Law Review Meeting, July 11,
    2017
•   IDA 18 Deputies Report Additions to IDA Resources Eighteenth Replenishment, August 19,
    2016
•   Further Details on the Proposed IFC-MIGA Private Sector Window in IDA 18
•   Doing Business Report 2017, September 12, 2016
Second Quarter
•   January 2017 Global Economic Prospects, November 17, 2016
•   Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2017 Report, November 21, 2016

Third Quarter
•   Draft Paper on Operationalizing the IDA 18 IFC-MIGA PSW, March 8, 2017

Fourth Quarter (as of May 25, 2016)
•   Proposal to use the IDA 17 Regional Window to provide financing for the Pandemic
    Emergency Financing, April 12, 2017
                                            - 70 -


Appendix G: Update on Commitments made in FY16

FY16 Commitments                                            Status
Plan to revise and strengthen the Results Framework, and    The revised Results Framework is
develop more meaningful key performance indicators, in      included in this report in
early-FY17 as part of the broader process of updating the   Appendix B.
IEG Mandate and TOR that CODE has endorsed. The
revised Results Framework will provide a stronger basis
for CODE oversight of IEG results and performance over
the course of the fiscal year.

We expect to complete evaluation work on Service            Following the WBG’s adoption
Delivery in FY18, and discuss options for new Strategic     of the Forward Look in FY17,
Engagement Areas in FY17. These options may include         IEG is now adjusting its three
Urban Development or Resilience to address the nexus        SEAs to the “2 goals, 3 ways to
of growing challenges related to migration, resilience,     achieve them” in the following
disaster risk management, and sustainable infrastructure    way: (1) Inclusive Growth
development. These themes are well aligned with those       becomes Inclusive and
the WBG has identified as key priorities in the Forward     Sustainable Economic Growth,
Look and W Process.                                         which makes sustainability an
                                                            explicit dimension of IEG’s
                                                            newly defined SEA; (2) Sustained
                                                            Service Delivery for the Poor
                                                            becomes Investing in People,
                                                            where IEG will continue its
                                                            emphasis on services delivery to
                                                            the poor and bottom 40%; and (3)
                                                            Environmental Sustainability
                                                            becomes Fostering resilience to
                                                            global shocks and threats, which
                                                            broadens IEG’s environmental
                                                            sustainability SEA.
IEG will scale up the use of ReAct workshops as well as     IEG and management have
test other processes in FY17 to deepen management           collaborated to pilot new ways to
engagement in evaluation work. IEG and management           engage on recommendations and
have established a working group to develop an action       action plans for evaluations. The
plan on next steps, which will be shared with CODE for      experience from these pilots will
information. IEG and Management will then prepare a         be reported to CODE in FY18.
stock-taking report on the experience of the pilot activities
in end-FY17, including suggestions for any proposed
changes to the current process for recommendations,
action plans, and the Management Action Record, for
CODE review and endorsement.
Country Program Evaluations:                                  The CCPE stocktaking was
As agreed in last year’s work program, IEG is undertaking completed in FY17 and discussed
a stocktaking to assess the relevance, effectiveness, and     at CODE on October 2016. CODE
                                              - 71 -


FY16 Commitments                                              Status
efficiency of the CCPE pilot. The stocktaking will be         supported IEG’s option to
finalized in early-FY17, after CODE has reviewed the          proceed with a hybrid/mixed
second pilot and shared its feedback.                         approach and use a combination
                                                              of CCPEs and single country
The design of the overall approach, the best way to           CPEs.
achieve synthesis and lesson learning, and the criteria for
selecting the countries will be decided once the
stocktaking is completed.

In addition, IEG proposes to do a small pilot country
study in FY17 on Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS)         The Saudi Arabia country
in Saudi Arabia, the Bank’s oldest RAS Program, in            authorities have communicated
response to a request by Bank management and country          through the ED that the decision
authorities. […] This case study would be prepared as a       on the country study should be
learning engagement and would help IEG develop a              postponed.
methodological framework for a possible future
evaluation of RAS.

Project-Level Evaluations- PPARs                              Efforts to strengthen methods are
IEG plans to continue improvements in FY17, with              ongoing (Appendix E). A new
continued use of more rigorous methods, improved PPAR         PPAR template has been
template to enhance readability and accessibility, and        developed that will be piloted in
greater emphasis on outreach.                                 FY18, and outreach efforts have
                                                              been strengthened.
Project Validation                                            The ICR reform was conducted in
Following CODE’s review of Behind the Mirror,                 FY17 and the streamlined ICR is
management will develop its Action Plan to implement          expected to be launched in July
the agreed recommendations – and IEG will develop             2017. (see para 45, bullet 3)
complementary actions to improve the validation process
within IEG. These actions will be reviewed with CODE
in FY17, including the scope for streamlining the system
and options for moving to sampling of ICR Reviews,
rather than the current 100 percent coverage.
IFC/MIGA Micro Products                                       IEG has provided feedback to
The new PCR guidelines were introduced in January             IFC to help launch the online
2016, supported by joint IFC-IEG training. The launch of      training. The revision of guidance
online training is planned in FY17. The revised XPSR          for MIGA PERs is ongoing.
guidelines were piloted in FY16 and will be fully
implemented in FY17, with training planned in the
coming year. IEG and MIGA completed and tested
guidance for a new MIGA product (non-honoring of
financial obligations). This guidance will be included into
the revision of Project Evaluation Reports (PERs) in
MIGA, planned to start in FY17.
                                             - 72 -


FY16 Commitments                                            Status
Learning Products                                           The Learning Fund was launched
In response to the stock-taking, IEG recommends a           at the beginning of FY17 and has
substantial redesign of our current approach to learning    been fully utilized.
and knowledge sharing.

To achieve this new direction, we propose to pilot in       A robust internal monitoring
FY17 a new Rapid Results Learning Fund of $750,000          system has been put in place and
under the Director General, which would approve and         regular updates are included in
fund larger IEG learning engagements on a rolling basis,    the CODE Quarterly Report.
based on clear eligibility criteria. […]
IEG will develop a robust system to monitor the delivery,   We propose to postpone the
cost, and use of all learning activities, to ensure         stocktaking to the end of FY18 as
managerial accountability for results, value for money,     it would be too early to assess the
and effective reporting. We will provide a summary of       impact in FY17.
activities delivered through the new Rapid Results
Learning Fund in the CODE Quarterly Report to keep
CODE apprised of implementation, and will complete a
stock-taking with Management in end-FY17 to assess the
effectiveness of this new approach.
Enhancing Knowledge and Communications                      The ICR Online portal is
•        Workflow automation for PPARs and ICR              operational.
Reviews, funded by the capital budget, have been
implemented, with further refinements planned in FY17;
work on disclosure tracking system is underway.
•       IEG will launch a new revamped website in FY17      The new IEG Website was
with improved search capabilities, enhanced user            launched in FY17 and is
interaction features, improved MAR sub-site, and a new      operational.
online consultation system to enable stakeholders keep
abreast with and contribute to ongoing IEG evaluations.
Monitoring Implementation of Evaluation                     IEG and management have
Recommendations.                                            collaborated to pilot new ways to
As part of our focus on Strategic Engagement Areas, IEG     engage on recommendations and
will review implementation of evaluation                    action plans for evaluations. See
recommendations related to each Strategic Engagement        para 58.
Area, to ensure that our collective recommendations are
strategic and coherent, and provide a platform for
effective dialogue with management.

Other process changes related to MAR in FY17 include:
(1) improving the engagement process with management
on evaluation recommendations and findings; (2)
conducting a stock-taking of the MAR process over the
past two years in partnership with management, and
identifying steps to enhance the impact and effectiveness
                                            - 73 -


FY16 Commitments                                             Status
of the MAR process; and (3) continued system
enhancements based on the experiences over the past two
years.

IEG will continue outreach efforts to familiarize
Executive Directors’ staff, WBG management, and other        IEG has organized a workshop
stakeholders on the use of the on-line system and            for ED staff which covered the
enhanced MAR website.                                        MAR process.
Other Evaluation Work
Impact Evaluations. In FY17, IEG will produce two
impact evaluations that will feed into the FY18 evaluation
on citizen engagement. The first will cover a community
monitoring project in Burkina Faso, and the second will      Completed.
be on a community driven development project in Nepal.
We will also continue to produce systematic reviews of
the impact evaluation literature to accompany major
evaluations when there is an evidence-gap to fill by doing
so. These systematic reviews will also provide value-
added for the WBG where there is considerable unmet
demand for harvesting the evidence-base on specific
development questions.

Working Papers on Methods. IEG will prepare working
papers on key methodological issues, as part of our focus Completed.
on clarifying and updating IEG’s methods in line with
global best practices. In FY17, IEG will prepare two sets
of working papers covering: (1) our recent analytical work
on Value for Money (see para. 48), and (2) the
methodological frameworks to assess service delivery
models and behavior change interventions for our work on
Sustained Service Delivery to the Poor (other topics for
working papers on methods will be identified after the
arrival of the Methods Advisor).

Evaluation Capacity Development                              See section IV. On Evaluation
IEG will provide an update on the implementation of the      Capacity Development
strategic directions in the FY18 work program document
