                Executive Summary of Evaluation
Name of Evaluation                                  Outcome Evaluation on PT South Pacific Viscose Line IV Project
Date of Final Report of Evaluation                  17 December 2013
Author of Final Report of Evaluation                Hulman Soaloon, IFC, hsoaloon@ifc.org
Date of this Executive Summary                      3 July 2014
Author of this Executive Summary                    Hulman Soaloon, IFC, hsoaloon@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary           2
Modifications from original Executive Summary       Without Modification
Executive Summary Approved for public               Ian Colley, PT South Pacific Viscose, 2 July 2014; Anna Hidalgo,
disclosure by (name) on (date)                      IFC-ECRIO, AHidalgo@worldbankgroup.org



Background
PT. South Pacific Viscose (SPV) is one of the world’s largest low-cost producers of high quality viscose
staple fiber, a biodegradable fiber that is traditionally used as a cotton substitute for its superior ability to
absorb moisture. The Company is located in Purwakarta, Indonesia. In 2008, IFC provided financing to
support SPV’s production capacity expansion (Line IV) and improvement in resource recovery and energy
efficiency. EAP Results Measurement team through an in-depth study conducted in August 2013 found
that the Project had achieved several positive outcomes on the local economy and private sector
development.


Analysis
The Project benefitted SPV’s two main suppliers through an increase in raw material procurement. Their
sales to SPV more than doubled while their total sales increased by 23 percent and 15 percent
respectively. Seeing the increasing trend, consequently they invested in production capacity expansion.
The Project also benefitted SPV’s main customers, namely, the yarn manufacturers, through an increase
in availability of good quality viscose fiber. Two main customers of SPV tripled their purchase from SPV
due to a positive market response. Consequently they were able to expand production capacity and
improve productivity. As more yarns were produced, sales to export market and domestic fabric
manufacturers also improved. This indicates that fabric manufacturers, both domestic and overseas
responded positively to an increase of availability of yarns produced from SPV’s fibers.

The Project also created positive impact on employment, directly and indirectly. It created 250 additional
direct employment positions and 9500 temporary jobs during the construction. Due to capacity expansion,
SPV’s customers employed more workers. We estimated at least 3,000 indirect jobs would be created in
the yarn manufacturing sector alone. Contribution to community development was also significant. The
Company initiated various community development programs such as health, education, micro credit, and
social                                        and                                           infrastructure.

The Project also demonstrated positive impact on private sector development by fulfilling the global
market demand and catalyzing the growth of textile industry in Indonesia. The Project introduced high
tenacity viscose fiber, which was suitable for high-speed vortex spinning process, and had enabled yarn
manufacturers to be at least twice as productive. Yarn manufacturers were motivated to expand their
spinning capacity and had invested more than $60 million in high-speed vortex spinning machines. This
was a positive response to the stagnant growth of Indonesia’s spinning industry which was hampered by


                                                  Page 1 of 3
outdated machinery and lagged investment. Indonesia is now a major player in the global viscose fiber
market.

Conclusions and Recommendations
Textile in Indonesia was not considered a strategic sector and once considered a sunset industry.
However with its superior product, coupled with technical know-how and vast global network, SPV has
become a market leader and played a major catalytic role in the viscose fiber market and textile industry
in Indonesia. We learned that even though textile was seen as a sector with a stagnant growth trajectory,
working with the right partner and sponsor who have the technology and the capacity might result in
positive outcomes. The development outcomes were optimized through our long-term partnership with
SPV and the Sponsor. Through this study we have also found significant unanticipated effects not
measured by the current indicators in Development Outcome Tracking System (DOTS). Despite the
positive outcomes, the Project was not set to tell the full impact story at the indicators level. Therefore it is
useful to conduct in-depth study to complement our annual monitoring exercise, and for evaluation
purposes, especially on the economic impact and private sector development of IFC’s projects.




Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.


                                                                 Page 2 of 3
Page 3 of 3
