                Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                 A Review of Recently Completed IFC Corporate Governance
Name of Evaluation
                                                 Advisory Services Project, Their Results and Lessons Learned
Date of Final Report of Evaluation               02/05/2014
                                                 Paul Cox, Ph.D.,Mara, BC, Canada with the assistance of
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                 PLAN:NET Limited Calgary, Alberta, Canada
Date of this Executive Summary                   03/21/2014
Author of this Executive Summary                 Caroline H. Bright, IFC, CBright@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary        3
Modifications from original Executive Summary    Without modification
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                 Anna Hildago, IFC, ahildago@worldbankgroup.org. 06/27/2014
disclosure by (name) on (date)



Background
In emerging markets strengthening corporate governance (CG) is important for promoting sustainable
private sector growth and investment. It can facilitate better performance by individual companies,
improve access to capital, and strengthen the overall investment climate. IFC recently commissioned a
review of corporate governance programs completed between 2006 and 2012. This review focused on
44 projects with a total investment of $31.4 million. This selection included all CG advisory projects of
more than $100,000 and making a major contribution to key results. It included those undertaken by
Regional Advisory Services, the CG Unit and the Global Corporate Governance Forum (GCGF).

Objectives
The review serves as a status check of the IFC CG advisory services portfolio. It especially focused on
results and lessons as they relate to results measurement, cost efficiency measures, collaboration with
IFC Investment Services (IS) and exit strategies. The review built upon a 2006 evaluation of IFC’s ECA CG
projects, which had been undertaken as a forward-looking exercise to improve the design of
measurement methods for future Advisory Services (AS) projects.

IFC works closely with clients and stakeholders to improve corporate governance practices and
standards, specifically to provide CG tools, advisory services and training to improve the CG framework,
build sustainable institutional capacity and improve firm level governance practices. In addition, IFC
plays a leading role in global policy dialogue on corporate governance, through supporting international
gatherings and publications on good CG practices.

Analysis
The review found significant diversity in the projects being undertaken. This included variations in
project size, client mix, and spread of national, regional and global coverage. The diversity in projects is

                                                 Page 1 of 3
greater than found in the 2006 evaluation which focused only on ECA projects. There were many
examples of a comprehensive approach to CG AS, with large numbers of interventions possessing
private good and public good components. There had been substantial collaborations between Regional
AS, the CG Unit and GCGF, and between these units and others in IFC and the WB. There has been
extensive knowledge platform activity centered on networking, capacity building and production and
dissemination of leading-edge best practice materials. The review found the projects performed well.
82% were rated as ‘highly successful’, ‘successful’ or ‘mostly successful’ on the Development
Effectiveness (DE) synthesis rating. 77% were rated either ‘excellent’ or ‘satisfactory’ for Outcome
Achievement and 55% for Impact Achievement. However one third of all projects were scored ‘not yet
achieved’ on the latter criterion. The projects also performed well in efficiency terms.

Conclusions and Recommendations
LESSONS FOR FUTURE OPERATIONS

The review primarily focused on lessons for strengthening IFC project design, systems and procedures
rather than seeking to draw more direct CG related lessons from the 44 projects [1].

Strengthening Tail-End Monitoring and Evaluation - The review found that M&E processes had
improved. However, monitoring of the end of the project cycle, especially post-completion, needed to
be strengthened. It suggested more attention should be given to updating indicators/capturing results
in the Advisory Services Operational Portal for closed projects based on post-completion M&E. The
review noted that the inability to change PCR ratings based on later evidence leads to important
feedback being lost and a reduced incentive for staff to focus on this. It also recommends ear-marked
M&E funding to ensure this is undertaken.

Consolidating IFC M&E guidance – It was difficult for TLs to follow a standard M&E framework
consistently due to incomplete and not particularly user-friendly M&E guidance. The review
recommended updating and synthesizing the guidance. This might include more details on the use of
standard Output, Outcome and Impact indicators; how to allocate budget to each stage of project, in
particular post implementation; how to include stories and cases to complement quantitative results
measures; documenting relevant evidence; and different project examples.

Helping project experience inform future practice - Whilst there are a good range of mechanisms for
documenting lessons learned, it was unclear how readily available this is to TLs during project
design/implementation. As well as ensuring all TLs can access lessons, the review suggested ensuring
project duration is sufficient for impact achievement, and that enabling environment work is conducted
with client work in order to promote comprehensive improvements in governance practices in the
markets.

Finding appropriate measures of performance and impact - The requirement to measure project
achievement in terms of financing facilitated (a key standard indicator of impact) is inadequate for
capturing public good aspects including capacity building of intermediaries. Too much focus on

                                               Page 2 of 3
financing facilitated risks under-reporting of other program achievements. Measurement of project
performance should include local context, challenges and resources.

Developing a single program level strategic framework - During the review period, there was no single
program-level strategic framework guiding CG work. As such some projects were not compatible with
the use of a standardized project log frame and unitary M&E framework. The review suggests that such
a single program-level strategic framework is needed.

RELATED LESSONS

Diversity lies at the root of IFC’s competitive advantage - CG needs worldwide are varied (and often
changeable). The means for addressing them are multiple and logically the AS offering should be many-
stranded. IFC is well placed to respond to this diversity.

Building a Narrative about Development Results - The review suggested there has been some success
to setting out a high level narrative about the need for and impact of CG interventions. This is useful in
building support across a high-level and broad audience.

Strengthening the AS/IS Interface - On the collaboration between AS and IS the review found that there
have been instances of AS projects leading to identification of potential IS clients, as well as cases in
which new IS procedures requiring assessment of a potential client’s CG practices have spurred interest
in AS product offerings.

Managing Exit and Ensuring Sustainability – Some of the exit options presented in PCRs were narrowly
focused on creating a new entity or body. Other projects followed a multiple partner, multi-faceted
approach. These issues have to be addressed at the design stage. For many partner intermediaries,
sustainability is often related to financial stability and pricing for services.

[1] The report contains lessons for project design (pp40-41), sustainability (pp 42-43), and the AS/IS
interface (p44).



Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 3 of 3
