                Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                 End of Program Evaluation An African Country Emergent
Name of Evaluation
                                                 Farmer’s Program
Date of Final Report of Evaluation               September 17, 2012
Author of Final Report of Evaluation             Triodos Facet BV, the Netherlands
Date of this Executive Summary                   28 Nov 2012
                                                 Luis Domenech, IFC CDI Department, ldomenech@ifc.org, Jane
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                 Onoka jonoka@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary        9
Modifications from original Executive Summary    Redacted to protect client’s commercially sensitive information
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                 Sara Clancy, IFC, SClancy1@ifc.org 07, July, 2014
disclosure by (name) on (date)



Background
An African Country Emergent Farmers Programme (the Programme) supported Emergent farmers
through commercial provision of financial and non-financial services. The financial services component
was implemented through a National Commercial Bank (the Bank), providing seasonal and medium term
loans. The non-financial services (business planning, extension services, access to market information,
input supply) were implemented in collaboration with a National Farmers Union (the Union), a farmers’
representative body, and its associated Associations. The technical support within the Programme was
provided by the partners in the agricultural value chain e.g. suppliers of seeds, fertilisers and chemicals,
local service providers as well as commodity buyers and processors (e.g. dairy factories). the Programme
was strongly based on the concept of value chain development and value chain finance.

the Programme defines Emergent farmers as having an annual turnover of USD 10,000 – USD 100,000
and/or minimum cropping acreage of 20 ha with a 3-year track record in farming. The Programme target
group “Emergent” farmers are often termed the “missing middle”, entrepreneurs who are clearly above
and beyond the majority segment of subsistence and small-scale farmers, but do not yet operate as fully
commercial farmers. This segment of “Emergent” farmers has financial and non-financial service needs
that go beyond the offer of microfinance institutions, out grower arrangements, and social development
programmes, while they are not yet easily welcomed by banks for lack of productivity hence loan
repayment capacity. Banks such as the National Commercial Bank have a strong interest in developing
services for Emergent farmers if only they could overcome their weaknesses in management, marketing
and production. This is what the Programme aimed to achieve.

In 2008 to 2009, IFC undertook a pilot project with 14 Emergent farmers which demonstrated that a
combination of financial and non-financial support to Emergent farmers boosted their productivity
(about double). The Programme is seen as a roll-out / up-scaling of the pilot project. The response
strategy of the Programme consisted of offering Emergent farmers simultaneously access to markets
(mainly through the Union and value chain partners), access to business knowledge and planning (the
Union and Business Development Services (BDS) providers), access to inputs and farming technology
(the Union, input suppliers and off-takers), and access to finance (the Bank). IFC’s role in the Programme
was to build institutional and organisational capacity of the Bank to develop and deliver agricultural

                                                Page 1 of 9
finance products to Emergent farmers. The Bank was also supported through an IFC credit line. In
addition, the Programme built the institutional and organisational capacity of the Union to deliver or
facilitate extension services, coordinate supply of farm inputs, establish marketing infrastructure, and
improve farmers’ access to finance. IFC coordinated the programme acting as honost broker between
the many project partners and associates. The Programme was a selective programme, aiming to
support a limited number of individual farmers with high development potential.

The ultimate aim of the Programme was that the combination of access to finance (A2F), access to
extension services and inputs (A2T), and access to markets (A2M) would significantly increase farmer
productivity with the target being a 30% increase and with a potential sales revenue increase of 5%.
Emergent farmers would graduate to the commercial farmers’ category, employment would be created
and poverty reduced.

Objectives
The Terms of Reference (TOR) for the evaluation are focused on five key evaluation questions, which are
relevance, efficiency, effectiveness, impact, and sustainability. These concepts are defined in the TOR,
and include a number of sub-questions to better focus the evaluation.

Analysis
Evaluation Findings

The evaluation shows that the Programme took off briskly, but lost momentum from early 2011
onwards. The operational activities such as training and developing working methodologies much
reduced afterwards. The growth of the Bank portfolio also slowed down while output and outcome
indicators tracked by IFC stagnated. Farmers and stakeholders interviewed by the evaluation team
spoke of the Programme as if it happened in the past. By the end of 2011, the Union had effectively
stopped supporting the programme while IFC was struggling to mobilise its support. The premature end
of the Programme can be attributed to divergent personalities and institutional cultures (IFC, the Union),
differences of opinion on the leadership of the Programme and financial contributions, and perhaps
most seriously increasing frustration among partners to see farmers’ loans rejected and not being able
to reach the (numerical) targets set for the programme.

Nevertheless, a review of output and outcome indicators shows that the Programme performed quite
well and was effective at the level of the Bank, much less at the Union. With the help of RIAS
consultants, credit officers were trained, financing methods developed, and generally the Bank was
capacitated in providing services to Emergent farmers to the extent that these can and do apply for
financing and are served with seasonal and medium term credit facilities. However, the geographical
coverage of the Bank’s services leaves room for improvement (expansion). The number of 150 Emergent
farmers financed (Project Data Sheet Agreement -PDSA- target) by December 2012 has by far not been
reached (61 active clients in September 2012). As to the Union, through training and working with
consultants, the Union staff has learned to see farming as a business and help farmers with business
planning, but the extent to which they now practice these skills is limited. In view of their other work the
Union staff lack the time to sit with individual farmers, and most would find it hard to do this without
the fall-back option of external advisors whose budget is now finished. Changes in institutional capacity

                                                Page 2 of 9
of the Union due to the Programme are minimal. The current situation is that the Union only plays a
limited role in assisting Emergent farmers financed by the Bank, and has practically stopped building up
the Bank’s pipeline of Emergent farmers ready for financing. Most Emergent farmers currently applying
for loans to the Bank are not members of the Union.

The Programme impacts, however, have been quite substantial. The combined approach of offering
financial and non-financial assistance to Emergent farmers has had a large impact on their productivity,
production, sales and employment generation. The programme’s aim to “increase farmer productivity
with the target being a 30% increase and with a potential sales revenue increase of 5%” has easily been
reached by most farmers, according to data collected by the Bank and the evaluators’ interviews with
farmers. About a quarter of these have reached or approach “commercial farmer” status. This is the
main reason why we evaluate the programme to be “relevant”. It is just regrettable that the number of
Emergent farmers reached has fallen short of aspirations.

As to the long-term impacts of the Programme, the “Emergent farmer” has been put more clearly on the
map. The Bank has built a loan product around this, and at least one other bank is positioning itself to do
the same. Furthermore, there is a demonstration effect with farmers feeling motivated by the
achievements of their neighbours. The Programme has also drawn attention to the large segment of
Lima farmers many of whom have the potential to graduate into Emergent farmers. Both the Bank and
the Union now invest great efforts in developing programmes for Lima farmers, and these show very
good results.

Also to relevance, the objectives and initial design of the Programme were and remain entirely in
accordance with the African country’s agricultural development policy, which aims to graduate the
African country’s small farmers into efficient and market-orientated categories. Enhanced access to
finance is a key requirement of this. The Programme is also conceptually relevant in that Emergent
farmers need an assortment of support services, including access to markets, inputs, technology,
equipment, and finance, as noted above. Their problems are complex, but access to technology and
markets is a precondition for access to finance. The evaluation found strong and sometimes spectacular
performance improvement (productivity, production, sales) of Emergent farmers who took part in the
programme. The Programme also corresponded to IFC’s strategic objectives, although in practice the
project worked out differently than had been expected (reduced chance for IFC to play its role).

The evaluation, however, revealed that from a numerical point of view the decision to set up a
programme specifically for Emergent farmers was questionnable – there were at the time of launching
the Programme just too few farmers with the adequate profile. It was also noted that strictly separating
Emergent farmers from other farm types is not always necessary and efficient in terms of service
delivery. Emergent and Lima farmers can often be supported and financed side by side, until the
moment where Emergent farmers become “leaders” in their communities, in which case a role change
takes place. It is noted that the Bank is targeting the top-level Emergent farmers, as the loan
performance of the smaller ones has been disappointing. These smaller Emergent farmers can better be
served alongside Lima farmers, whose loan performance through various group loan methods has been
very strong. Thus, to remain relevant the Programme must be flexible, distributing services in a variety
of manners including individual, group (cooperative), value chain, and out grower channels, whereby
Emergent farmers are not always served separately from Lima or even commercial farmers. The
approach should reflect the specific circumstances of the farmers and sector.


                                               Page 3 of 9
The efficiency in the programme implementation saw a number of weaknesses, in particular after
January 2011. There was poor document management and reporting (by all partners), and very long
time lags in taking decisions (by IFC), leading to contracts being signed only just before expiration and
the recruitment of an IFC programme coordinator taking one year. Generally, the documentary trail of
the Programme is insufficient to reconstruct the operations of the programme and problems faced – in
particular in the years 2011/12. Amazingly, in the last two years the Programme operated without
collaboration agreement among the partners. The last Steering Committee meeting in January 2012 did
not result in any actions. These failures are not all attributable to IFC, but fact is that what was an
efficient and inspired programme in 2008-2010 became a drag in 2011-2012 and IFC’s reputation in this
African country was damaged.

From a management point of view, IFC had little oversight over the activities undertaken by the Bank
and RIAS, but was more active with supporting and monitoring operations and training conducted by the
Union - until parties fell out. As to the use of local resources, one may conclude that the Union has
substantially relied on local Business Development Services (BDS) advisors and leveraged the existing
BDS vouchers available in the market (co-financed by farmers). the Programme and the Union in
particular also leveraged the resources of many external partners, such as USAID-Profit, value chain
partners, commodity associations, and NGOs and donors. Many “free” resources were received, which
also added to the demonstration effect of the programme. In terms of leverage IFC was very successful –
this to the extent that some partners (the Union, input dealers) started to wonder if IFC should not
contribute a bit more.

On the important issue of sustainability, the PDSA was silent. However, from various document it
emerges that the Programme assumed that once the business case for assisting and financing Emergent
farmers was proven, and once sufficient numbers had been reached, market participants would
continue the work on their own. Now that the programme ended (which it effectively did in the
beginning of 2011) the Bank and input suppliers continue to play their role; this is less the case for the
Union. The big void is left in project coordination, previously done by IFC and now somewhat reluctantly
assumed by the Bank.

Regarding additionality, the Bank has declared it would have targetted Emergent farmers anyway and
RIAS would have trained and supported it. However, IFC’s (initial) role in bringing together programme
partners was particularly important and fundamental for the programme’s succes (the Bank wants this
to continue). Furthermore, for the Bank, being associated with IFC is valuable as it helps open other
doors. As to the Union, in the absence of the Programme it may not have been able to facilitate services
for Emergent farmers as it has now, because the Union depended on grant funding to do so. Thus, IFC’s
support had some additionality and no other development partners were doing the same. However, it
would go too far to claim that none of the Programme results would have materialised in the absence of
IFC’s involvement.

A number of alternative approaches may have been considered, or could be considered for the future.
To start with, the Programme is strongly focussed on financing Emergent farmers, and this is also
reflected in IFC’s impact indicators. However, the Programme might have recognised that some (many?)
farmers need increased access to technology and markets rather than access to finance. Thus, the
Programme could have been more welcoming to farmers just to enhance their operations and not take
credit, or not to seek credit just now. Regrettably, farmers who applied but were declined a loan were
not offered technical services instead (so that they could have been financed later on).

                                               Page 4 of 9
The evaluators also conclude that the Programme gave the Union responsibilities that exceed its
mandate. The Union is a non-profit membership organisation whose “mission is to promote and
safeguard the interests of members as farmers, individuals, corporations/companies and other
organisations involved in the business of agriculture and related activities in order to achieve sustainable
economic and social development in the country”. The Programme, however, tasked the Union with
project identification and formulation, as well as technical advisory. Even though the Union was
expected to facilitate rather than provide services, the Programme stretched the role of the Union
beyond its key mandate and exposed it to a conflict of interest as it somehow substituted for the role
given to the Bank in credit delivery. The Union might have accepted a less pronounced role in credit
promotion, as selecting clients for financing is not its “forte” and may present it with a conflic t of
interest. Likewise, to “Establish a unit at the Union to manage delivery of pre- and post-harvest services
to farmers” (PDSA) exceeded the Union’s mandate and capacity. Commodity associations would have
been better placed to fulfil this task (as the dairy and poultry associations do), but the obvious
disadvantage is that responsibilities under the Programme would have been scattered over many
partners. One could also have thought of the government’s extension services, but these currently lack
capacity and credibility.

The Programme could have more explicitly recognised the (technical) role of off-takers and input
suppliers, and could have given them a seat on the table (e.g. as associate partners through a
Memorandum of Understanding –MOU-, or perhaps on the steering committee). Likewise, the technical
and organisational role of commodity associations even though affiliated to the Union would have
deserved more recognition. This is also true for colleague donor actions, such as those from Norad
(conservation farming), USAID (Profit) and European Union (various) that enhanced the actions from the
Programme. While recognising that not all can sit on the Steering Committee, a more visible association
of partners to the results of the Programme could have motivated these to show a stronger and more
durable level of commitment. Obviously, with so many partners involved a strong coordination
mechanism is required. IFC effectively lost this role in 2011, leading to the overall slippage in the
programme.

Conclusions and Recommendations
Lessons Learned for Future Projects

Officially, the Programme was implemented from July 2009 to July 2012. However, it would be more
truthful to state that the Programme started in June 2008 (pilot project) and ended in January 2011
(departure of the IFC programme coordinator). Evidence of this early ending of the Programme can be
found in the programme activities (virtually none in 2011/12), progress indicators and budget
expenditures. The untimely end of the Programme can be attributed to divergent personalities and
institutional cultures (IFC, the Union), differences of opinion on the leadership on the Programm and
financial contributions, and perhaps most seriously increasing frustration among partners to see
farmers’ loans rejected and not being able to reach the (numerical) targets set for the programme.

We observe that the Programme is extremely complex institutionally, involving many more than the
three key partners IFC, the Bank and the Union. This unavoidably requires that one partner is declared
and recognised as “leader”, and this must be clear and accepted from the start. IFC is not well placed to

                                                Page 5 of 9
fulfil this role as its involvement is transitional by definition, but neither is the Union better placed
(narrow mandate, potential for conflicts of interest) nor the Bank (as its focus is on finance only).

Recommendation 1: The Programme formulation must be crystal clear on its objectives, outputs,
activities and stakeholder roles, and this must be shared and accepted by all partners.

This was not the case, starting with the inaccessible format of the PDSA and its performance indicators.
The partners did not share the same understanding of the Programme objectives. However, as the
Programme followed from the successful pilot project and as relations were very cordial at that stage, it
did not matter initially. Only when personalities started to play a role, the programme’s design and
partner roles became an issue.

Recommendation 2: Consensus is particularly needed on the leadership role of the Programme, as well
as the sustainable exit and successor arrangements (including IFC’s transitional role).

These were not unambiguously defined at the outset of the Programme. Lack of accepted leadership led
to increasing paralysis in the programme. Lack of exit strategies meant that when IFC’s role suddenly
ended in January 2011 no follow-up arrangements were in place.

Recommendation 3: Recognize the great value of the many other partners in the Programme (input
suppliers, off-takers, development partners) and give them a more visible role and credits due.

This evaluation has suggested that this can be done in many ways, including a MOU or sometimes a seat
on the Steering Committee.

It was shown that the Programme is conceptually relevant in that Emergent farmers need an
assortment of support services, including access to markets, inputs, technology, equipment, and
finance. Their problems are complex, but access to technology and markets is a precondition for access
to finance. The evaluation revealed strong and sometimes spectacular performance improvement
(productivity, production, sales) of Emergent farmers who took part in the Programme.

However, the Programme targeted a farmer segment which is too small to justify a separate (IFC co-
funded) programme. Also from an organisational point of view (delivery of services) there was not
always a strong case for reaching out to Emergent farmers individually and separately from Lima
farmers. Emergent and Lima farmers can often be supported and financed side by side, until the
moment where Emergent farmers become “leaders” in their communities, in which case a role change
takes place. It is noted that the Bank soon started to target the top-level Emergent farmers, as the loan
performance of the smaller ones was disappointing. These smaller Emergent farmers can better be
served alongside Lima farmers, whose loan performance through various group loan methods has been
very strong.

Recommendation 4: Target Emergent farmers flexibly through individual or collective services, if
possible using value chain financing or out grower schemes, whereby the defining element is not the
loan amount but the efficiency and effectiveness of the service delivery mechanism. Emergent farmers
need not always be targeted separately from Lima farmers.



                                              Page 6 of 9
To a large extent, the Bank and the Unionalready work along these lines. The approach will differ from
farmer to farmer and sector to sector. This conclusion is not necessarily true for IFC’s actions in other
African countries, and depends on the size and sophistication of its Emergent farmer class.

Recommendation 5: Recognize in the Programme design that Emergent farmers do not necessarily all
need credit. Some farmers need non-financial services more, or need to improve their business
operations before they could be bankable.

By contrast, the Programme was much focussed on access to credit (through the Bank) and no specific
services were offered to the non-credit Emergent farmers.

The Programme was partially effective, and capacity at the Bank was demonstrably built – this is less the
case for the Union. However, both the Bank and the Union did not accept the capacity building offer of
IFC. the Bank already received assistance from Rabobank, and did not want to mix this with other
advisory. The Union felt IFC had no valuable assistance on offer, and preferred to rely on its own efforts
(but some assistance was received from the Bank / RIAS and local advisors). The current situation is that
the Bank can effectively serve Emergent farmers with financial products, while the capacity of the Union
to provide Emergent farmers with pre- and post-harvest support services is incomplete and much
dependent on outside advisors (whose subsidised payment is no longer ensured). However, this
evaluation has argued that the responsibilities awarded to the Union in terms of preparing financing
proposals and extension services exceed its capacities and mandate. In other words, the Union was
asked (and offered) to accept tasks that do not reflect its role and comparative advantages as an
advocacy organisation. Remains the question then who could have done this instead. The evaluators do
not have a definitive answer, but offer a few suggestions as follows:

    1. Commodity associations, which has the advantage of their proximity and sectorial knowledge,
       and the disadvantage of scattering assistance over many institutions, not all of which are up to
       the task.
    2. Government extension services, which are currently under-resourced.
    3. Private Service providers, which would probably work out more expensively than continued
       reliance on the Union and district associations.
    4. Bigger role of mentoring (advanced farmers) through the district associations, which may not
       always be feasible.
    5. A combination of the above.

None of the above solutions is optimal, bringing us back to the Union but perhaps through a more
flexible arrangement with the above-mentioned partners. Observe, however, that the role of the Union
or equivalent depends on the service delivery model. When farmers are embedded in a value chain or
out grower model the role of the Union or a commodity association could remain limited.

Recommendation 6: The institutional set-up of the Programme needs to be completely reconsidered,
with roles attributed that reflect the partners’ mandate and capacity. The Bank can maintain its role in
financing Emergent (and other farmers), as could any other bank wishing to contribute. The Union
should reduce its role to facilitation only and more actively rely on the above-mentioned sector
partners. IFC may play a coordinating role, but being a transitional partner a successor arrangement
must be devised. The Bank is not best placed, but currently the only who could credibly do this. The role


                                               Page 7 of 9
of the Steering Committee can also be increased, and related value chain partners may be invited to sit-
in during the meetings.

As noted above, the many partners in the value chain and donor community are to be recognised for
their contribution, as is government.

The efficiency in the programme implementation saw a number of weaknesses, in particular after
January 2011. There was poor document management and reporting (by all), and very long time lags in
taking decisions (by IFC), leading to contracts being signed only just before expiration and the
recruitment of an IFC advisor taking one year. In the last two years the programme operated without
collaboration agreement among the partners. The last Steering Committee meeting in January 2012 did
not result in any actions. These failures are not all attributable to IFC, but fact is that what was an
efficient and inspired programme in 2008-2010 became a drag in 2011-2012 and IFC’s reputation in the
country was damaged.

IFC was efficient, however, in leveraging the resources of project partners, including value chain
partners and farmers, and other donors. The total value of leveraged resources is probably a multiple of
the amount invested by IFC, and IFC got a lot of value for its money. Indicators of efficiency comparing
IFC and partner money to the value of loans facilitated, investments made, sales realised, and jobs
created are mostly favourable.

As to the Programme’s impact, it was already noted that most Emergent farmers in the programme
recorded very significant results in terms of production, productivity, sales, employment and their own
family well-being. A demonstration effect is apparent.

Recommendation 7: It is now time to capitalize on the effects and lessons from the Programme, and
disseminate the lessons learned and results achieved by Emergent farmers – to other farmers in
particular. It would be good to summarize the findings in an international publication. The lessons must
also inspire the Africa Agri Finance Programme.

This might be a good suggestion for some of the unspent resources of the Programme.

Regarding additionality, it was concluded that IFC’s contribution helped the creation of a service offer
for Emergent farmers by the Bank, but it would not be truthful to claim that none of the programme’s
results would have materialised in the absence of IFC’s involvement.1 In the country, IFC was unique in
targeting Emergent farmers. The Bank has already expressed the desire that IFC will continue its
support, notably providing the coordination function for the programme implementing partners
including those in the value chain.

One of the objectives of the Programme was to draw lessons from scaling up the (pilot) programme,
aimed at developing and refining the model for replication under the Africa Agri Finance Programme in
Sub Sahara Africa. We observe that the situation in the country is somewhat unique in Africa as the
country has a sizeable population of Emergent and commercial farmers (individuals, not cooperatives,
parastatal estates or agribusiness firms) with land to spare for their expansion. In contrast, many African

1
  None of the two Emergent farmers who received 2012 awards for excellent performance are beneficiaries of the Programme or borrowers of
the Bank.

                                                             Page 8 of 9
countries are dominated by (very) small farms and suitable land is often in short supply (e.g. the Great
Lakes region, much of East Africa). Others have a large presence of agricultural estates in the hands of
government or big firms. Thus, the extent to which the lessons learned from the Programme can be
useful to IFC’s actions in other countries needs to be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.. We observe that
the most critical element in the Programme has been the role of the provider / facilitator of non-
financial services, a role which only partly suits the Union. This question must be taken on board in any
other country where IFC may wish to target Emergent farmers.

One of the key lessons from this programme is that when working in a complex partnership like this one,
the expectations and roles must be crystal clear from the start. This was not the case, starting from
diverging opinions on the programme’s objectives and more seriously on which would be the “lead”
partner. The IFC documents repository does not provide any indication that the programme document
has been discussed, understood and agreed by all parties. This led to increasingly accremonious
relations between partners, and the rather embarrassing situation that both the Bank and the Union did
not recognise IFC’s lead role and did not accept its capacity building offer.


Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 9 of 9
