                     Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                 Social Compliance in EPZ: Does it increase technical efficiency of
Name of Evaluation
                                                 enterprises? A stochastic frontier production model study
Date of Final Report of Evaluation               October 2012
                                                 Professor William H. Greene, NYU; Wayne Amago Bacale, IFC,
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                 wbacale@ifc.org
Date of this Executive Summary                   July 1, 2014
                                                 Professor William H. Greene, NYU; Wayne Amago Bacale, IFC,
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                 wbacale@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary        2
Modifications from original Executive Summary    Without Modification
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                 Paramita Dasgupta, IFC, pdasgupta@ifc.org July 10, 2014
disclosure by (name) on (date)



Background
With rising global competitiveness, increasing wages, and growing demands for social responsibility, enterprises
in Bangladesh are grappling with a multitude of unprecedented challenges. In view of the complexities
surrounding a firm’s operation, it is not entirely surprising that social compliance is often seen as yet another
cost and a drag on profitability. Consequently, from the point of view of enterprises, they will comply only if the
benefits of compliance outweigh the costs.

Theoretically, an enterprise’s performance on social compliance is a good indicator of its overall competitiveness
and efficiency. The logic behind this is simple: quality of output and productivity of workers are closely linked to
wages, worker satisfaction, working hours, and other social compliance factors. Therefore, better working
environment brought about by social compliance is expected to increase technical efficiency of firms, i.e. firms
will produce maximum level of output for a given level of inputs. This study investigates whether the Social
Compliance Program at the Export Processing Zones of Bangladesh have led to increases in technical efficiency
in production.

Objectives
The objective of this study is to test whether increases in social compliance through the Social Management
Program have led to improvements in technical efficiencies of firms in the Export Processing Zones. The
following primary research questions are explored in this study:
      Did increased social compliance contribute to significant increases in technical efficiency of firms in
        EPZs?
      Do some social compliance variables increase technical efficiency more than others? If so, why?

Analysis
To carry out this investigation, the study employed econometric method ‘stochastic frontier analysis’, which
predicts technical inefficiencies of firms. The stochastic production function assumes that for a given
                                                    Page 1 of 2
combination of inputs, the firm can produce an ‘ideal’ level of output. The greater the amount by which the
realized production falls short of this frontier production, the greater the level of technical inefficiency. For this
study, two different production models were analyzed and compared – one that does not use the information
about SMP and one that uses 14 SMP indicators. The estimates of technical efficiency from the two models, No
SMP and Full Model, for each of the 45 firms in Dhaka Export Processing Zone, which were selected for this
study, were compared to each other. Of the 45, 39 firms showed an increase in estimates of technical efficiency
after incorporating SMP indicators in the model – the mean value for estimated efficiency of firms rises from
0.527 to 0.605

In the Full production model, the impacts of the individual social management indicators range between -0.195
and 0.117. Since this study is interested in the comprehensive impact of the program, individual analysis of
these indicators does not make sense. For assessing the impact of the whole program this study added the
effects of the 14 components. The sum of the partial effects for all the components is about +0.298 or
approximately 30%, which is quite a large positive effect. Based on this finding, it can be concluded that
increased social compliance led to a positive impact of 30% on technical efficiency for the 45 firms in the study.

Conclusions and Recommendations
The results from the study suggest broadly that technical efficiency increases in response to SMP and other
variables in the model. However it is difficult to attach statistical significance to this result due to small sample
size (45 firms) and lack of statistical significance of the individual parts. Future studies can bring more robust
results if the exercise is repeated for a larger sample or panel data with multiple observations per firm.




Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this publication
may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the information
used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of Experience series does not
represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this publication. Instead, any issues arising in
an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances of the project.


                                                                        Page 2 of 2
