                Executive Summary of Evaluation
Name of Evaluation                              BiharIC III
Date of Final Report of Evaluation              November 2012
                                                IMRB International: Seema Kapur, seema.kapur@imrbint.com
Author of Final Report of Evaluation            Jerry Raphael, jerry.raphael@imrbint.com , Mani Pradhan,
                                                mani.pradhan@imrbint.com
Date of this Executive Summary                  July 7, 2014
                                                Wayne Amago Bacale, IFC, wbacale@ifc.org , Luis Domenech,
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                IFC, ldomenech@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary       3
                                                Added text from original Final Report without deletion or
Modifications from original Executive Summary
                                                redaction of text (refer to cover sheet)
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                Paramita Dasgupta, IFC, pdasgupta@ifc.org July 10, 2014
disclosure by (name) on (date)




Background
This document is a report on the findings from the qualitative and quantitative research conducted by
IMRB International for IFC. IFC – a member of the World Bank Group is helping the Commercial tax
department of the Government of Bihar to simplify the tax compliance processes. IMRB international
helped IFC in setting the baseline for the tax reforms by conducting a study in Bihar on time and cost
implications of VAT process in year 2009, the study was conducted across 1000 business enterprises out
of which 60% were small businesses (turnover 5 Lakhs to 20 Lakhs). As a part of recommendation from
IFC, the state government of Bihar implemented reforms to its business tax regime. After successful
implementation of the tax reforms in Bihar, the VAT revenues have significantly improved from the past.
However, in order to gain deeper understanding of issues, reform imperatives and effectiveness of the
reforms, IFC has conducted a follow up study of tax compliance cost and time for small businesses (i.e.
business in the turnover range of Rs. 5 to 20 Lakhs) in Bihar so to compare the findings to the
corresponding baseline data gathered in the survey conducted by IMRB in 2009.

Objectives
To understand the tax compliance time and cost implications for VAT in year 2012 and compare it with
the time and cost implications for VAT in year 2009 for small businesses in the turnover band 5 to 20
Lakhs INR.

Sub-objectives of the research were:
    Calculation of time and cost related to VAT compliance
    Gathering the feedback on the simplified VAT scheme – Small Dealer Tax Scheme
    Understanding the changes felt in tax climate by businesses under the standard Regular VAT
       Scheme
    Understanding what is encouraging or discouraging businesses to come under the simplified
       VAT scheme

                                                Page 1 of 3
       Capturing the perceived changes the tax climate over the past 3 years along with capturing the
        perception of businesses towards paying taxes, tax department and tax officials

Conclusions and Recommendations
Post the reforms implemented, businesses in Bihar (in the turnover band of INR 5 Lakhs to 20 Lahks)
have been able to reduce the cost on VAT compliance by 31% of the initial expense (2009). The
businesses in the new simplified VAT scheme have been able to save 41% of the cost of compliance seen
in 2009.

With close to 70% of the businesses under the Regular VAT scheme being eligible to convert to the
simplified scheme, we still have scope for more savings on VAT compliance in the state of Bihar.
Considering that there is still a sizeable chunk of businesses that are not aware of the simplified scheme,
the government needs to continue and also increase its communication related to the simplified VAT
scheme.

The businesses under Small Dealer Tax Scheme are able to carry out larger proportion of the compliance
activity totally in-house when compared to businesses under Regular VAT Scheme. The payment made
to tax consultants on outsourcing of VAT compliance is seen to be much lower in businesses who got
themselves registered for VAT directly under the Small Dealer Tax Scheme (they were not registered
before).

Half of the businesses who converted from Regular VAT scheme are still paying their consultants the
same amount as before. This is because the payment terms for consultants for the new scheme have
not been standardized in the market yet.

Reasons for adoption of the simplified scheme largely hovers around the aspect of security due to the
promised no scrutiny clause and savings on one’s own time on compliance related aspects. In fact
majority of the businesses who plan to continue outsourcing are doing so keep to keep their business
“secure”.

Businesses in the Regular VAT scheme have seen improvements in almost all the VAT related activities.
Maximum improvements have been seen in deposit/payment of VAT, reduced number of visits to
department, lesser number of scrutiny and reduced corruption.

Access to internet has increased since 2009 but the penetration of actual usage is still on lower side and
in case of Small dealers the numbers are not enough to advocate mandatory usage of e-facilities.

Tax morale of businesses is still high and we could clearly see that businesses acknowledge that tax
compliance is much less burdensome now. Perception towards tax officials has not changed much since
2009 however the perception towards business climate is very positive. With lesser scrutiny happening
the fear of tax officials has greatly reduced in the state which has also resulted in increased confidence
of businesses to do business in the state.




                                               Page 2 of 3
Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 3 of 3
