                Executive Summary of Evaluation
Name of Evaluation                              Bangladesh Investment Climate Fund Economic Zone Project
Date of Final Report of Evaluation              July 2013
                                                Wayne Amago Bacal WBacale@ifc.org , Sigma Shams
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                sshams@ifc.org and Rotbah Nitia rnitia@ifc.org
Date of this Executive Summary                  July 9, 2014
                                                Wayne Amago Bacal WBacale@ifc.org and Luis Domenech,
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                IFC Development Impact Dept. ldomenech@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary       3
Modifications from original Executive Summary   Without modification
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                Paramita Dasgupta, IFC, pdasgupta@ifc.org July 10, 2014
disclosure by (name) on (date)



Background
The Economic Zones is a 5-year Investment Climate project ending June 30, 2013 supported by the
International Finance Corporation.

Objectives
The key objectives of the project were to assist the GOB in developing a new legal framework that
focused on private participation in zone development, facilitate investment in existing zones, pilot
investment climate reforms in zones, and improve social and environmental compliance in zones.

This report presents the findings of an independent results validation and data quality spot-check
exercise of the Economic Zones project within the project completion phase. The aim of this exercise
was to triangulate and systematically assess the quality evidence and accuracy of results through
qualitative approach, using key informant interviews, desk reviews and focus group discussions.

Analysis
The data collection activities were conducted exclusively by the results measurement team.
Respondents included stakeholders and beneficiaries of the project’s interventions, namely Member
(Finance) of BEPZA, management of Dhaka, Chittagong and Adamjee Export Processing Zones social and
environmental counselors, management of public-private partnership utility service providers, and
factories receiving services directly linked to project interventions.

Conclusions and Recommendations
Key highlights of the findings of this independent results validation are discussed by components below:

Component 1: Develop and Implement Policy and Regulatory and Institutional Framework


                                                Page 1 of 3
The former director of the Prime Minister’s Office highly appreciated IFC’s contribution, especially with
regards to facilitating the approval of the EZ Act and drafting rules and regulations for the Act. However,
the enactment of these rules and regulations have been delayed significantly due to several rounds of
revisions, which has in turn delayed the licensing of any private economic zones. Even though these
delays are beyond the projects’ control, they have contributed to the project not achieving seve ral of
their key impact indicators, e.g. investment generated, jobs created, etc. Alternatively, BEZA rated the
project’s work as “3” or “Neutral” suggesting that further work could have been done to develop
capacity of BEZA officials on zone development and investment promotion.

Component 2: Public-Private Partnership zone projects established
Prospective local and foreign private zone developers rated IFC as “4” or “Very Satisfactory” regarding
facilitation and technical advisory towards prospective zone development opportunities in Bangladesh,
but they expected better services from BEZA. Both interviewed companies are currently scoping the
possibility of investing in private zones, but their progress has been slowed by the deliberation over EZ
rules and regulations. Private utility providers (CETPs and power plants) also rated IFC’s work as “4” or
“Very Satisfactory”, but they noted several difficulties with their operations. For instance, CETP
management cited discrepancy between services provided and payment received as one of the key
challenges. Further they mentioned that BEPZA currently does not have a mechanism in place to control
the amount of chemical dumped into the wastewater by factories; this causes chemical content of
effluent to fluctuate erratically and disrupts their operations.

Component 3: Institutions to support EZ established and/or improved
All interviewed beneficiaries of the automated EP/IP system at the DEPZ and CEPZ rated it as “5” or
“Excellent”. Firms highly appreciated the automated system, reporting that transactions were faster and
efficient and reduced the time and cost required to obtain EP/IPs. However, the firms, as well as EPZ
management, mentioned several challenges of the system. For instance, low internet speed, frequent
interruption of internet services, technical glitches, etc.

Component 4: Regulating and operating zones through a green zone framework
BEPZA management as well as zone authorities rated IFC as “5” or “Excellent” for contribution towards
the social and environmental counselors program. Most interviewed firms, that are direct beneficiaries
of counselors, rated their services as “4” or “Very Satisfactory”. The social counselors were highly
appreciated by firms and EPZ management for their role in resolving grievances, raising awareness, and
ensuring compliance. However, several factories recommended hiring more social counselors as the
worker-counselor ratio is very high. In addition, interviewed firms also appreciated the services of
environmental counselors in terms of monitoring the performance of their CETPs. However, they
stressed the need for further capacity development of the counselors.

It must be noted that the IFC SEZ product is being handed over to the World Bank’s Private Sector
Development Support Project (PSDSP). The transition was initiated in FY12. The project team has
developed a transition plan to hand over activities to PSDSP. However, the results validation exercise
identified several gaps in light of the recommendations made the various stakeholders which need to be
addressed.




                                               Page 2 of 3
As part of the validation exercise, the results measurement team came up with a set of
recommendations for the management in terms of lessons learned, areas for improvement, and what
worked well. Some key recommendations are highlighted in the figure below:




Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 3 of 3
