                Executive Summary of Evaluation
Name of Evaluation                              End of Program Evaluation: Africa Schools Kenya
Date of Final Report of Evaluation              September 17, 2012
                                                Grace Bunyi, Jake Grout-Smith, Alfred Ojwang, Andrew Riechi,
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                Sophie Tanner, John Wood
Date of this Executive Summary                  July 9, 2014
                                                Jane Onoka jonoka@ifc.org; Luis Domenech, IFC-CDI,
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                Ldomenech@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary       6
Modifications from original Executive Summary   Redacted client’s commercially sensitive information
Executive Summary Approved for public           Sara Clancy, IFC, SClancy1@ifc.org 07, July, 2014; Anna
disclosure by (name) on (date)                  Hidalgo, IFC-ECRIO, AHidalgo@WorldBankGroup.Org



Background
The African Schools Kenya (ASK) Program is an initiative of the International Finance Corporation (IFC),
through the Private Enterprise Partnerships for Africa (PEP Africa) Program. The program provides
advisory services to private schools to improve school operations and the quality of education. This
program was launched following the successful implementation of the pilot program in Ghana, and was
later introduced in Rwanda, Uganda and Liberia.

The overarching aim of the ASK program is to complement the Government’s efforts to improve access
to quality education in Kenya through supporting the improvement of the infrastructure and quality of
the private school sector. Specifically, the program sought to:

(i) Increase access to finance for 50 schools in the amount of USD 3 million by 30 June 2012.
(ii) Reach 75, 000 students enrolled in the target schools by 30 June 2012.
(iii) Deliver in-depth advisory services in systems and tools development to 50 schools by 30 June 2012.
(iii) Deliver advisory services through workshops and training to 500 schools by 30 June 2012.

In December 2006, IFC signed a risk sharing agreement with a local commercial bank (the Bank) to
extend credit to 100 private schools over a period of three years. In parallel to this investment
component, a comprehensive Advisory Services Program was designed to deliver school-level Business
Development Services (BDS). These services included:

i. Whole school improvement training workshops (including areas such as Curriculum and Learning
Management, Finance and Accounting, Human Resource Management and School Marketing), which at
a later stage incorporated Business Edge training methodology.
ii. In-school support for school diagnostics and business plan development.
iii. In-school support for preparing financial statements and records.

Through these services the program sought to improve participating schools’ financial and other
functional management capabilities (in turn enabling them to access finance through the risk-sharing
agreement with the Bank) and their ability to deliver quality educational services. The program also

                                                Page 1 of 5
aimed to strengthen the Bank’s ability to evaluate and monitor loans to schools through organizational
support to the bank, and to develop independent providers of educational consultancy services to
private schools to enable continued support to private schools beyond the lifetime of the program.

The program was initially designed for a period of three years from 2007 to 2010, but was extended for
a further two years in order to expand the reach and enhance the impacts of the program. By the time
of the evaluation 2691 private school staff in over 718 private schools across the country (especially in
Nairobi, Mombasa, Machakos, Nyeri, Nakuru, Kericho, Kisii, Bomet, Kisumu, Kakamega and Eldoret), had
benefited from the program’s training workshops, and 202 schools had been assisted with the
preparation of Business Plans, out of which 61 schools had accessed financing from the Bank and other
banks, amounting to USD 2.9 million.

Objectives
This report presents the findings of the end-of-program evaluation of the ASK Program, commissioned
by the IFC. The evaluation was undertaken to provide the Private Enterprise Partnership (PEP) for Africa
Management with an assessment of the design and implementation of the ASK Program business
model, the progress towards the intended outputs, outcomes and impacts, and lessons on the role of
development agencies and donors in supporting the development of private schools.

As per the Terms of Reference (ToR) the evaluation specifically looked at the following issues in relation
to the Africa Schools Kenya Program:
     Relevance of the program to the needs and priorities of private schools in Kenya and the policies
        of the Kenyan Government and related donors;
     Efficiency of the program in achieving its results;
     Effectiveness in the extent to which the objectives the program have been reached;
     Impact of the program, both positive and negative, intended and unintended;
     Sustainability of the program in ensuring the continuation of its positive benefits beyond the
        program period; and
     Alternatives/improvements to the program that could have produced similar or better results,
        outcomes and timeliness more cost-effectively or efficiently.

Analysis
Evaluation Findings
Relevance
The program is relevant to the needs of the education sector in Kenya in supporting the private school
sector to contribute to the Government’s aims on education for all and quality education. It is in line
with IFC’s strategic objectives to address the constraints of private sector growth and develop local
financial markets in education. Market surveys in 2006 and 2009 confirmed a need for support to
private schools, particularly around business and finance, and helped to inform the design of the ASK
program advisory services. The training workshops provided by the program were rated very relevant to
schools’ needs by 60% of respondent schools, and 97% rated the relevance of in-school support as
excellent or good. There is a clear demand for more support in these areas.


                                               Page 2 of 5
The program adapted and down-scaled the focus on investment as it recognized the challenges facing
schools, particularly low income schools, and realized the extent to which capacity development was
needed before they could approach banks for finance. The Bank was the only bank trained on
understanding the private education sector, but this knowledge was lost due to staff turnover. The Bank
agreement was frozen in 2008 and remained so for the rest of the program due to non-compliance with
the agreement; no agreements with other banks were established.

The logic framework that underpins the ASK program is based on standardized IFC indicators, allowing
for the aggregation of results for IFC across countries and programs. It therefore does not link to the
specific objectives or activities of the program. A tool containing program specific SMART indicators
(specific, measurable, attainable, relevant and timely) could have provide a firmer basis both for the
program and monitoring progress at program level, feeding into standardized IFC monitoring and
evaluation frameworks.

Efficiency and accountability

There were a number of adaptations and additions to the program in response to changes in the
context, issues with the partner bank, and schools’ requests and needs, demonstrating the flexibility and
responsiveness of the program. However, the changes to the advisory services were somewhat reactive
and ad hoc and some could have been avoided with more rigorous analysis of, and response to, needs
and capacities of stakeholders identified at the start of the program.

There was one program manager for the ASK program, whose role was expanded to coordinate all Africa
Schools programs. This limited the management capacity available to the ASK program. However,
experienced implementing consultancies were contracted to deliver services. They had existing
relationships with the private schools associations, and the Kenya Private Schools Association (KPSA) and
the Kenya Independent Schools Association (KISA) were engaged in the program to varying extents.

ASK activities aligned with the IFC’s Pricing Guidelines by requiring client contributions for services: 70%
of school respondents reported that the cost was reasonable for the services provided. A robust
efficiency analysis of the program is not possible due to the lack of data available from schools and the
program over the program period, but based purely on the value of loans facilitated through the
program loans totaling a value of USD2.9 million were secured. Successful loan applications were
reported by the Bank and the schools, training quality was monitored through feedback forms, and
follow-up phone calls and questionnaires were used to gather outcome data. Measuring outcomes has
been challenging, but has improved over time and with further support from the IFC monitoring and
evaluation team.

Effectiveness

A total of 718 private schools benefited from the ASK program, of which 61 received loans. Services
were found to be of high quality: over 95% of participants rated consultants’ knowledge as excellent or
good, and workshops received high satisfaction ratings according to consultant reports. Overall services
were found to be participatory, though this varied particularly for the in-school support. The evaluation
found 70% of schools reported participation in the program had resulted in better organizational and
financial systems for the school, and in receiving a bank loan for 19 respondent schools. There is a lack
of confidence amongst schools in accessing finance, with 78% stating they would need ‘some’ or

                                                Page 3 of 5
‘substantial’ further support to do so. Communication with schools and implementing partners has been
sufficient, though schools’ expectations might have been better managed: many schools had expected
to receive direct funding from the IFC, which was never an intended part of the project design.
Recording and sharing knowledge has been limited to a handful of publications and workshops.

Some of the program targets have been met according to the logic model, but there are also questions
around the applicability of these targets to the program activities and problems in the systematic
collection of data on outcomes during implementation.

Impact

Though a strategy for impact evaluation was designed and a comprehensive baseline was conducted,
the impact assessment was later dropped from the program and tracking and monitoring of treatment
and control samples was not carried out. Impact findings are, therefore, qualitative, reliant on the
perceptions and self-reporting of schools.

Case studies made the link from program participation to improved education quality and increased
revenues. School respondents to the questionnaire also reported impacts, particularly of school staff
working together better as a team (82%), better teaching and learning in the classroom (82%) and
teachers being more involved in school management (81%). Impacts were slightly higher for
respondents that received in-school support as well as workshops: the low income schools that were
reached by the program report greater impact across the range of possible areas.

Awareness of the schools market has increased amongst non-program banks.

Sustainability

Sustainability has been an important focus for the program. The program has produced school operating
manuals, contracted local consultants for delivering workshops and built their capacity to deliver such
services independently after the program finishes, and engaged private schools’ associations.
Recognition of the program and its value is fairly strong amongst stakeholders, and KPSA has shown an
interest in continuing to support or facilitate the advisory services but lacks resources. Recent
workshops have been held with stakeholders to discuss the continuation of the program, with Housing
Finance eager to take the program forward.

At school level, sustainable change has come from overall improvements in management and
organization, particularly of succession planning and incentives for teachers. The demand for future
support exists amongst schools and local consultants could now, potentially, offer services at market
rates, though many schools report they would not be able to pay the full cost.

Conclusions and Recommendations
There is a tangible need for support to the private school sector in Kenya, and to improve business
process and financial capacity in such schools. The ASK Program has made an important contribution to
understanding this need, and starting to address it. The achievements and lessons learned suggest the
following recommendations for future IFC programming:

                                              Page 4 of 5
1.       Base programs on a clear design, with a program-specific logic model that clearly articulates a
logical flow from the program activities to its objectives and develops a better balance between the
monitoring needs of IFC globally and the implementation and monitoring needs of the individual
program. Such a design must include program-specific monitoring and evaluation indicators linked to
identified data collection mechanisms. A basic program Education Management Information System
(EMIS) might assist in managing information on new schools.

2.       Ensure program activities are based on an understanding of the different capacities of schools
within the private sector, to provide differentiated services with appropriate delivery mechanisms,
sufficient time and sufficient resources. The program should recognize that it may not be feasible for
low-income schools to access finance through commercial banks within a program period, so objectives
should take a long-term perspective for those schools and focus on the gradual development of their
capacities through advisory services and other means of support such as grants. A capacity analysis of all
schools on entering the program would be necessary to match the services provided with program
schools.

3.      Diversify the access to finance options within the program, firstly by working with a range of
banks that offer different products to different types of clients. Secondly, by exploring options for
innovative three-way partnerships between donors, IFC and banks, or public-private partnerships, to
provide more conducive lending conditions for lower income schools. Such a partnership may help
counter current barriers for schools, such as loan securities, repayment conditions and market rates,
whilst minimizing the risk to banks.

4.       To ensure sustainability, build the capacity of private school associations or other similar
stakeholders to play a role in linking private schools to approved local service providers (e.g. auditing
firms, training consultants, accountants) with information for schools on standards for advisory service
packages and prices.

5.       Set a realistic demand by government for financial record keeping etc. as part of registration and
inspection regime of private schools. This is part of government’s role to ensure minimum standards of
provision and corporate propriety. It is a route to improving the information available to parents so as to
facilitate a working market. It also provides an incentive for schools to develop and maintain good
management practices.


Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.



                                                                 Page 5 of 5
