                Executive Summary of Evaluation
Name of Evaluation                                  CASA Mid-Term Review
Date of Final Report of Evaluation                  August 2012
                                                    Dalberg, Angela Hansen, Naoko Koyama, Veronica Chau
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                    veronica.chau@dalberg.com
Date of this Executive Summary                      July 14, 2014
Author of this Executive Summary                    Luis Domenech, IFC CDI Department, ldomenech@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary           5
Modifications from original Executive Summary       Paragraphs’ rearrangement. Without content’s modification.
Executive Summary Approved for public
disclosure by                                         Anna Hidalgo, IFC-ECRIO, AHidalgo@WorldBankGroup.org



Background
IFC Advisory Services, in accordance with donor agreements and internal monitoring and evaluation
requirements, has commissioned Dalberg Global Development Advisors (Dalberg) to conduct an
independent mid-term review of the Conflict Affected State in Africa (CASA) Program.

CASA’s business model is a comprehensive program consisting of three components: (1) Project
Support1, or the facilitation of tailored and coordinated Advisory Service (AS) projects, (2) Funding, or
the provision of funds to support the implementation of Advisory Service (AS) projects, and (3)
Knowledge Management (KM), or dissemination of IFC tools, lessons learned, and best practices for
private sector development in fragile and conflict-affected states (FCAS). CASA’s current business model
aims to enhance the delivery of IFC’s Advisory Services in fragile and conflict-affected states (FCAS) as
measured by2: (1) an increased number of projects, (2) enhanced project outcomes based on improved
relevance to the local context, (3) increased diversity across Business Lines.

CASA was initiated by IFC Private Enterprise Partnership for Africa (PEP Africa) in response to the
growing focus within the development community and the World Bank Group on private sector
development in conflict-affected countries. CASA was launched in 2008 and became active in Central
African Republic (CAR), Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Liberia and Sierra Leone in 2009. Three
additional countries were launched in 2010 – Burundi and Côte d’Ivoire – and in 2011, South Sudan.

The mid-term review, takes place at an opportune time, as the Program has almost four years of
experience to examine for lessons learned. Key review findings will inform recommendations for
adapting CASA’s business model as it moves into its second phase.

Objectives
1
  Note: In CASA’s initial program proposals and documentation and the Terms of Reference for the review, this
component was referred to as “Integration”. For this review it will be referred to as “Project Support” to better
describe CASA’s intention.
2
  This is based both on a review of CASA program documents (PDSA, donor reports etc.) as well as conversations
with members of the initial team which developed the CASA program.

                                                   Page 1 of 5
The objectives of the review are (1) to inform IFC CASA donors, management, staff, and other key
stakeholders on the relevance, additionality, effectiveness and impact, efficiency, and accountability of
the Program; and (2) to inform management of lessons learned and potential improvements to service
delivery for the remainder of the current Program cycle, as well as for any potential continuation or
expansion phases.

In addition to structured review criteria three strategic questions were addressed: (1) Was the CASA
model a good investment for the donors and for IFC? (2) What are the determining factors for success in
CASA countries? (3) Is the available evidence robust enough to answer these questions effectively?

Analysis
The review covers each program component, all seven countries, and the period from Program
inception in mid-2008 until the end of December 2011. Recognizing that CASA serves as a facilitation
mechanism and does not directly implement advisory programs; the review focuses on the Program’s
performance and does not focus in detail on the performance of the projects it suppo rts. CASA’s
performance will be reviewed with regards to the Program’s objectives and targets as stated in the
Program’s Approvals (PDSAs), supervision reports (PSRs), and other reports. To the extent that CASA
supported projects are reviewed, this will be a portfolio-level analysis of projects’ performance as
measured in their PSRs. In all, the review included CASA and Private Enterprise Partnership for Africa’s
portfolio (including a desk review of over 85 internal and external documents) and interviews with 91
CASA stakeholders and experts.

Conclusions and Recommendations
Key Findings

Relevance and Additionality

CASA is highly relevant based on industry best practices for private sector development in fragile and
conflict affected states. By focusing on private sector development (PSD) in FCAS in Africa, CASA
addresses one of the most important elements in post-conflict reconstruction (as per the World
Development Report 2011). Moreover, according to stakeholder feedback, no other agency is
addressing PSD in FCAS as comprehensively as IFC through CASA. While private sector development is
critical following a conflict, supporting that development in this context is exceptionally challenging and
requires a unique approach. To this end, CASA’s model successfully applies the best practice principles
developed by the Donor Committee for Enterprise Development. Our assessment of CASA’s relevance is
based on stakeholder perceptions: relevance and additionality criteria received the highest ratings from
the majority of stakeholders interviewed.3 A full one hundred percent of IFC Business Line staff rated
CASA’s relevance and additionality ‘high’ or ‘very high’, affirming CASA’s unique value to the existing IFC
Advisory Services in FCAS in Africa. Other stakeholders also considered CASA’s relevance high; over
eighty percent of local stakeholders (i.e., government and private sector counterparts in CASA countries)
and over seventy percent of donor agencies interviewed rating CASA’s relevance ‘high’ or ‘very high’.

3
    Dalberg analysis of stakeholder interviews.

                                                  Page 2 of 5
Effectiveness/Impact

CASA’s project support and funding components help generate more AS projects and sustain the
quality of existing projects. During the review period, the IFC AS portfolio in CASA countries increased in
volume while the overall PEP Africa portfolio shrank. This occurred without sacrificing project quality;
the CASA portfolio’s overall project rating remained in line with the broader PEP Africa portfolio. It is
difficult to isolate CASA Coordinators’ contribution to the evolution of project volume and quality, due
to numerous exogenous factors such as country context, donor interest, and most importantly the
coinciding contribution of IFC Business Line staff. Nonetheless, feedback from IFC Business Line staff
provided evidence that CASA significantly impacted portfolio performance: eighty percent of Business
Line staff rated the effectiveness of CASA’s Project Support function ‘high’ or ‘very high’.

Closer analysis of project-level feedback from stakeholders also showed a clear link between CASA’s
contribution, and project volume and quality. In particular, CASA Coordinators’ local presence and close
engagement with local stakeholders were highly valued by stakeholders, leading to improved quality
ratings for some projects.

CASA’s funding through the Multi-Donor Trust Fund also played a key role in generating projects. The
availability of funding allowed many projects to start; the flexibility of that funding allowed
disbursements to be made quickly to accommodate small windows of opportunity.

CASA has helped increase diversity of projects implemented across Business Lines but has limited ability
to adapt standard products to suit FCAS needs. The CASA portfolio has shifted from a heavy Investment
Climate (IC) orientation toward a more diverse structure. CASA Coordinators identified the need to go
beyond standard product offerings, and while CASA funding did enable them to do so, a few challenges
became apparent. First, CASA faces two institutional barriers that limit its ability to integrate across
Business Lines: (1) lack of institutional incentives for Business Lines to engage in FCAS; and (2) a strong
culture of business as usual. Second, CASA Coordinators have limited time to devote to strategic
planning and innovation; this is partly because Coordinators are generally overstretched, but also
because they appear to lack strategic direction and incentives to plan in accordance with such a
direction.

On the Project Support Continuum CASA is not well structured to play an innovation role. CASA
Coordinators are highly appreciated by IFC staff, donors, and local stakeholders for the role they play in
the day to day coordination and support of project delivery. However, Advisory Staff are concerned that
Coordinators do not have the depth of technical expertise and understanding of the Business Line
products to effectively engage in developing tailored products. CASA’s current structure is anchored in
country-specific coordination and expertise which limits the potential for CASA to have an institutional
influence. It is Dalberg’s opinion that this is best addressed through adapting the structure to include
Business Line Champions which will give CASA a voice and legitimacy within the Business Lines where
the key product decisions are made.

Despite the delivery of several concrete outputs, CASA has not fully met stakeholder expectations
relating to Knowledge Management. Stakeholders widely expressed interest in learning from CASA’s
experience, yet CASA has been relatively inactive and/or irregular in publishing its lessons learned and
best practices. CASA’s KM activities have included the development of the Conflict Analysis Tool, a FCAS-

                                               Page 3 of 5
focused M&E methodology, a training course for operational staff working in the CASA context, and a
FCAS Practice Group for IFC staff that serves as a global platform for knowledge sharing. However, many
stakeholders are not actively engaged with these efforts and outputs, as they may or may not meet their
specific needs. As a result perceive CASA as being inactive.

CASA’s effectiveness varies across countries. Due to differences in program duration, and complexity of
individual country dynamics, it is difficult to draw general conclusions on success factors. Nonetheless,
the Dalberg Review Team identified some country-specific and Coordinator-specific factors that may
affect CASA’s effectiveness in certain countries.

Country-specific factors include political stability, private sector viability, and donor support.
Coordinator-specific factors, based on stakeholder feedback, are the quality of the Coordinators’
relationships with local stakeholders (usually influenced by their length of stay in country) and their
ability to navigate IFC’s internal systems. Both sets of factors enhance the potential for CASA’s/IFC’s
success.

Efficiency and Accountability

CASA is operating efficiently toward its program and funding targets. Using only 60 percent of its
budget, CASA has achieved or surpassed most of its program targets well within their time frames.4
Additionally, CASA’s initial investment in building a field-based platform via its Coordinators attracted
additional bilateral funding of US$ 15 million for project expansion.

CASA’s human resource approach may not ensure the business model’s sustainability. The Program
needs to ensure that the role of CASA Coordinator is attractive enough to ensure recruiting success and
rewarding enough to motivate over the long term. During its first phase, CASA had a clear strategy for
recruiting Coordinators that met the Program’s specific capability needs; specifically it found IFC staff
with a combination of country context exposure and knowledge of AS offerings, which were willing and
able to experiment with the CASA model. While this short-term strategy was largely successful, a longer
term strategy for recruitment and retention is yet to be defined. In order for CASA to continue attracting
staff, the career trajectory of Coordinators needs to be defined. Retaining Coordinators who have the
right expertise and experience is critical, as the primary determinant of the Program’s success is the
effectiveness of its Coordinators.

Strategic Recommendations

Business model recommendation

CASA has achieved significant results to date, but more may have been possible if the program had
engaged with the Business Lines more effectively. To improve CASA’s collaboration with the Business
Lines, the current “country-level” business model should be expanded to include CASA champions
within each Business Line. These champions will facilitate greater learning from CASA’s experience, give
CASA access to deeper technical/product insight, and build the key relationships needed to enhance
effectiveness.

4
 According to CASA PSR FY12Q2, CASA has spent US$5.7 million out of the total budget of US$9.6 million for all
program expenses other than project funding budget from its inception to FY12Q2.

                                                  Page 4 of 5
Component recommendations

Project Support: The primary proposal for improvement of this component relates to the business
model, as described above, however additional recommendations include:

           • Establish a dedicated budget for hiring short-term consultants (STCs) and support staff as
           needed, in order to alleviate the capacity constraints on CASA Coordinators. This support would
           enable CASA Coordinators to spend more time developing strategies for Project Support.

           • Regularly update and ensure consistent development of Country Engagement Strategies that
           detail the processes for identifying, designing and implementing projects.

Funding: Overall, CASA’s funding should remain flexible, but some recommendations for improving the
funding structure include:

           • Formalize CASA’s resource allocation (project funding and staff) to 1) potential future CASA
           countries and 2) new products tailored for the CASA context.

Knowledge Management: CASA needs to invest significantly to enhance the KM component, building on
the initial “tool development” phase and strengthening its role as a thought leader in FCAS.
Accomplishing this requires hiring a full-time KM Coordinator who works to provide key stakeholders
with CASA expertise and insights.

Cross-cutting recommendations: In addition to the recommendations for the business model and
individual program components, overarching recommendations include:

           • Scale-up foot print by establishing CASA programs in new countries.
           • Advocate for wider adoption of the CASA model within the WBG and push for the institutional
           flexibility required for the model’s effectiveness.
           • Improve M&E and finance support functions to increase accountability and enable fact-based
           strategic planning.

Instituting these recommendations will likely increase CASA’s reach and impact.


Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.


                                                                 Page 5 of 5
