                Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                 Terminal Evaluation of the Russia Sustainable Energy Finance
Name of Evaluation
                                                 Program (RSEFP)
Date of Final Report of Evaluation               July 2013
Author of Final Report of Evaluation             Ravi Kantamaneni, ICFI, ravi.kantamaneni@icfi.com
Date of this Executive Summary                   June 30, 2014
                                                 Ravi Kantamaneni, ICFI, ravi.kantamaneni@icfi.com; Dilyan
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                 Donchev, IFC-C3P, DDonchev@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary        6
Modifications from original Executive Summary    Without Modification
Executive Summary Approved for public            Rolf Behrndt, IFC-CFMDR, RBehrndt@ifc.org; Anna Hidalgo, IFC-
disclosure by (name) on (date)                   ECRIO, AHidalgo@worldbankgroup.org



Background
The Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program (RSEFP) was launched in 2005 to stimulate investment in
energy efficiency (EE) and renewable energy (RE) projects by supporting financial institutions (FIs) in
building sustainable energy (SE) lending businesses. The program has provided credit lines to Russian FIs
as well as technical advisory services to help finance projects, build institutional capacity, and promote
EE and RE across the Russian commercial and industrial enterprise landscape.

With the completion of the Programs’ 7 year (2005-2012) implementation mandate, the governance
framework of the RSEFP state that an independent terminal evaluation to assess the Program’s progress
and achievement of results is required. The Terms of Reference (TOR) and the Guidelines for GEF
Agencies in Conducting Terminal Evaluations serve as the basis for this terminal evaluation.

Per GEF guidelines, IFC is conducting a Terminal Evaluation of RSEFP to analyze and assess the
achievements and progress made towards the original objectives, and document lessons learned to
improve the design and delivery of future programs. The conceptual foundation for the evaluation is
presented in Appendix C, which describes the linkage between the TOR questions (Appendix G) and the
GEF evaluation areas:

   Relevance: The extent to which the program structure, design and product was suited to local and
    national development priorities.

   Effectiveness: The extent to which the actual program outcomes are commensurate with the
    original or modified program objectives.

   Efficiency: The extent to which program results have been delivered value with the least costly
    resources possible (without carrying out a full financial audit).

   Sustainability: The likely ability of the program to continue to deliver benefits for an extended
    period of time after their completion.


                                                Page 1 of 6
   Additionality: The extent to which projects would not have been possible without program technical
    and financial support.

   Catalytic impacts: The extent to which the program contributes to leveraging or catalyzing the
    investment of new and additional funds.

   Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems: The extent to which the program has met the minimum
    requirements for M&E design and implementation.

The assessment is based on the insights gathered through the stakeholder interviews and document
reviews, with findings rated against the GEF evaluation areas.


Objectives

The key goal of the Russia Sustainable Energy Finance Program (RSEFP) is to establish a sustainable
market capacity in Russia to develop and finance commercial projects in the areas of energy efficiency
and new energy sources (including renewables).

The program has five primary objectives:

           Objective 1: Establish/monitor the IFC-GEF investment facility

           Objective 2: Support SE project development by partner FIs and their clients

           Objective 3: Improve market awareness, understanding of EE

           Objective 4: Strengthen capacity of local energy service companies

           Objective 5: Policy and legal support to EE investment projects


Analysis

RSEFP, initially designed as a 5-year program, was granted two extensions: from June 2010 to June 2012,
and again, from June 2012 to December 2012. Below are some of the main achievements of the
program over its lifetime:

   By the end of the program, 14 partner FIs had financed 342 projects valued at US$289 million with
    expected GHG emission reductions of 559,000 tons of CO2 per year.

   IFC signed credit line agreements for a total value of US$148 and US$77 million of IFC financing was
    invested in projects. As such, each US$1 IFC invested resulted in an additional US$2.76 of project
    financing from partner FIs.

   The program received US$456,000 for the total value of its Advisory Services (AS) provided to FIs.



                                               Page 2 of 6
   The program organized around 200 workshops, training events, seminars, conferences for a total of
    about 3,200 participants from various audiences including: end-users, vendors, FIs, journalists,
    policy makers, etc.

   RSEFP published best practice guides, technical briefs, market studies and success stories.

   The program communicated about SEF and program activities through a large array of media
    channels (including newspapers, TV and radio), developed awareness campaigns, organized study
    tours, and produced promotional films.

RSEFP contributed to the development of Federal Law No. 261-FZ “On Saving Energy and Increasing
Energy Efficiency, and on Amendments to Certain Legislative Acts of the Russian Federation” which was
adopted by the State Duma in November 2009. RSEFP experts were then invited to participate in the
development of several sub-laws.


Key Findings
The following table presents a high-level overview of the findings for each GEF evaluation area.

Relevance        Satisfactory
                 RSEFP credit lines and advisory services have played an important role in developing
                 the SEF market by remaining flexible and addressing the key barriers to market
                 transformation through de-risking policy, lowering financial barriers and raising market
                 awareness.

Effectiveness    Satisfactory
                 The program exceeded initial targets and expectations and has helped build
                 momentum in the field of SEF by effectively leveraging funds from other sources, and
                 supporting the evolving policy debate, leading to the adoption of Federal Law No 261-
                 FZ and its bylaws. Charging fees for AS has been successful; although some FIs have
                 noted it a barrier to participation. Promoting the ESCO business model in a difficult
                 market context has yielded few concrete results.

Efficiency       Highly Satisfactory
                 The results of RSEFP activities indicate that the program was cost-effective in building
                 capacity and facilitating EE and RE investments. At the project-level, the majority of
                 investments are less than 0.01 tCO2 per US$ of loan disbursed, which are less efficient
                 from a GHG reduction perspective. However, these projects have payback periods of 5
                 years (on average), which highlights the additionality of the program’s SEF activity.




                                               Page 3 of 6
Sustainability   Moderately likely
                 Short-term outlook for continued SEF activity without the support of credit facilities is
                 poor.
                 Regulatory uncertainty and a lack of confidence in the long term direction of
                 government policy remain important risks.
                 Technical skills and knowledge built in FIs has enabled them to move forward and
                 undertake SEF activities independently. After the closure of RSEFP, a clear need exists
                 for an organization to continue to provide capacity building and outreach activities.
                 Public (GHG reductions) and private (energy savings) impacts have exceeded targets,
                 but this performance and the long term benefits are very dependent on one single
                 energy project.

Additionality    Highly Satisfactory
                 Most projects would not have been implemented without RSEFP support due to the
                 overall lack of market capacity and adapted financial products. RSEFP remains a
                 distinctive and additional offering due to continuing market barriers.

Catalytic        Not Rated (per GEF guidelines)
impact           The key catalytic impact of the program has been its influence on the design and
                 adoption of Federal Law No. 261-FZ on energy efficiency. However, the impact of
                 RSEFP and market adoption of EE will be limited until detailed regulations and
                 implementing policies are established. The RSEFP model is being replicated within
                 Russia, and in other geographic regions.

Monitoring       Satisfactory
and              Effective collaboration between AS and IS and a “One IFC” approach to SEF have been
evaluation       key factors of success. A formal process for tracking program performance and
                 reporting to donors was established; however, areas to improve granularity,
                 consistency and transparency exist.



Conclusions and Recommendations
A series of lessons learned arising from RSEFP is set out below along with specific recommendations
which could be applied to future programs.

    LESSON LEARNED 1: Continuing financial market uncertainties limit the short-term outlook for SEF
    products without credit facility support.
    RECOMMENDATION 1: At least in the short term, IFC should continue to offer credit facilities to support
    greater SEF penetration in the Russian market.



                                               Page 4 of 6
Long term liquidity issues in the Russian financial market, continuing effects of the financial crisis,
policy uncertainty, and continuing short-term business mentality make it difficult for FIs to offer
longer term (3-5 years) lines of credit for SEF products without support from IFC or similar programs.

LESSON LEARNED 2: A holistic strategy of de-risking policy, lowering financial barriers, and raising
awareness has helped transform the Russian EE market, but significant EE market penetration is still
years away.
RECOMMENDATION 2: A suitable organization should be identified to ensure continued EE outreach
and dissemination of SEF knowledge after RSEFP closes.

The program’s objectives were well defined to address the basic tenets of market transformation.
Nonetheless, greater EE market penetration in Russia is still several years away. As such, continued
outreach and dissemination of EE knowledge through a public or private organization will be
required to maintain EE and SEF momentum.

LESSON LEARNED 3: A “One IFC” approach to SEF is crucial to ensuring the successful adoption of SEF by
partner FIs.
RECOMMENDATION 3: A protocol should be developed to detail coordination/reporting requirements
between AS and IS. This should be undertaken at the start of the program to ensure key
responsibilities and lines of communication are defined, and internal capacity is sufficiently built.

Over the course of the program, a good working relationship was established between AS and IS,
which was instrumental in engaging with FIs effectively and presenting a seamless approach: credit
lines and AS. Nearly 80% of SEF business generated has been through FIs that have initially
established a credit line and advisory services relationship with RSEFP.

LESSON LEARNED 4: Charging fees for AS has been successful although some FIs have noted it a barrier
to participation.
RECOMMENDATION 4: AS should continue to be provided on a fee basis; although, the transparency in
AS costs per client might need to be strengthened.

Since 2009, AS has been charging a full fee service. This fee structure has been met with broadly
positive FI sentiment and helped ensure FI management buy-in and commitment to SEF. However, it
has dissuaded some banks from participating in the program.

LESSON LEARNED 5: A comprehensive process for reporting on program activities and performance was
established; however, there are still areas for improvement.
RECOMMENDATION 5: RSEFP should encourage FIs to provide more robust and detailed project data,
including actual energy savings achieved by projects.

Generally, the granularity, transparency and consistency of the information/indicators tracked by
the program could be improved; in particular, the data concerning the projects financed which relies
heavily on the quality of the information provided by FIs.


                                           Page 5 of 6
     LESSON LEARNED 6: RSEFP has been successful in developing SE projects, in particular, those with longer
     payback periods.
     RECOMMENDATION 6: Program targets should be clearly prioritized in order to ensure that activities
     support the principle aims of the program

     Over the course of the program, 342 SE projects have been implemented, with each US$1 of IFC
     finance producing $2.76 of project financing from partner FIs and end users. Almost 60% of projects
     demonstrate emission reductions of less than 0.01tCO2/US$. While such projects are less efficient
     from a GHG reduction perspective, they are more likely to demonstrate longer payback periods (i.e.,
     5 years on average). Therefore, while facilitating SEF and GHG reductions are clearly linked, it is
     important that the program indicates which targets are to be prioritized (e.g., maximizing SEF or
     GHG reductions) so that the principle objectives of the program are not jeopardized.

     LESSON LEARNED 7: AS proved to be an effective, flexible tool to engage with private and state FIs to
     extend the reach of the program.
     RECOMMENDATION 7: Since the overall objective of SEF is to facilitate investment in EE and RE, IFC
     should consider making exceptions to enable AS to work with state banks in future programs, if
     relevant to the market.


Over US$460 of SEF loans were disbursed for every US$1 of AS spent. Similarly, although no formal AS
agreements were established with state banks within the program period, AS has effectively engaged
with Gazprombank since 2006, and Vnesheconombank (VEB), who have signed an AS agreement in early
2013 after IFC provided an exception to enable AS to support a state bank.




Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 6 of 6
