                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF EVALUATION
                                                         FOR PUBLIC DISCLOSURE



FROM: C3P


   Terminal Evaluation of China Utility Based Energy Efficiency Program (CHUEE)

                                     Redacted Version


  1. The Executive Summary of the Evaluation entitled Terminal Evaluation of China Utility
     Based Energy Efficiency Program (CHUEE) has now been redacted for public disclosure
     in accordance with IFC’s 2012 Access to Information Policy, following the Procedure for
     Development, Management and Disclosure of IFC Evaluations effective on 04/01/2014.

  2. The attached redacted version reflects the following adjustments:

        Redaction of sensitive or confidential information related to clients

        Minor typographical corrections.

  3. Questions on this document should be addressed to Dilyan Donchev
     (DDonchev@ifc.org) or William Beloe (WBeloe@ifc.org)




                                          Page 1 of 7
                 Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                       Terminal Evaluation of the China Utility Based Energy Efficiency
Name of Evaluation
                                                       Program (CHUEE)
Date of Final Report of Evaluation                     July 2013
Author of Final Report of Evaluation                   Ravi Kantamaneni, ICFI, ravi.kantamaneni@icfi.com
Date of this Executive Summary                         June 30, 2014
                                                       Ravi Kantamaneni, ICFI, ravi.kantamaneni@icfi.com; Dilyan
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                       Donchev, IFC-C3P, DDonchev@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary              6
Modifications from original Executive Summary          With Modification(Please refer to cover letter)
Executive Summary Approved for public                  William Beloe, IFC-GFGA1, WBeloe@ifc.org; Anna Hidalgo, IFC-
disclosure by (name) on (date)                         ECRIO, AHidalgo@worldbankgroup.org



Background
The China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency Finance Program (CHUEE) was launched in 2006 to stimulate
investment in energy efficiency (EE) and renewable energy (RE) projects by supporting financial
institutions (FIs)1 to build a sustainable energy lending business in China. The Program provided
investment services (IS) in the form of a risk sharing facility (RSF)2 to Chinese banks as well as technical
advisory services (AS) to help finance projects, build institutional capacity, and promote EE across the
Chinese commercial and industrial enterprise landscape.

With the completion of the Program’s 6 year (2006-2012) implementation mandate, the governance
framework of CHUEE state that an independent terminal evaluation to assess the Program’s progress
and achievement of results is required. The Terms of Reference (TOR) and the Guidelines for Global
Environment Facility (GEF) Agencies in Conducting Terminal Evaluations serve as the basis for this
terminal evaluation.

Per GEF guidelines, IFC is conducting a Terminal Evaluation of CHUEE to analyze and assess the
achievements and progress made towards the original objectives, and document lessons learned to
improve the design and delivery of future programs. The conceptual foundation for the evaluation is
presented in Appendix B, which describes the linkage between the TOR questions (Appendix F) and the
GEF evaluation areas:
 Relevance: The extent to which the program structure, design and product was suited to local and
    national development priorities.
 Effectiveness: The extent to which the actual program outcomes are commensurate with the
    original or modified program objectives.
 Efficiency: The extent to which program results have been delivered value with the least costly
    resources possible (without carrying out a full financial audit).
 Sustainability: The likely ability of the program to continue to deliver benefits for an extended
    period of time after their completion.


1
 The term “FI” is used interchangeably with “banks” in this report.
2
 The name of the Risk Sharing Facility changed over the life of the program, from Loss Sharing Agreement (LSA) to Loss
Sharing Facility (LSF) to Risk Sharing Facility (RSF). For simplicity, only RSF is used in this document.
                                                     Page 2 of 7
   Additionality: The extent to which projects would not have been possible without program technical
    and financial support.
   Catalytic impacts: The extent to which the program contributes to leveraging or catalyzing the
    investment of new and additional funds.
   Monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems: The extent to which the program has met the minimum
    requirements for M&E design and implementation.

The assessment is based on the insights gathered through the stakeholder interviews and document
reviews, with findings rated against the GEF evaluation areas.

Objectives
The key goal of the China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency Finance Program (CHUEE) is to overcome
perceived market and technical barriers in China’s banking sector to develop and finance commercial
projects in the areas of energy efficiency and GHG reductions.

The program has three primary objectives:
 Objective 1: Support EE project development by end users, partner utilities/EE equipment suppliers
    and ESCOs
 Objective 2: Support partner FIs in building their EE lending business
 Objective 3: Improve market awareness and public understanding of EE business

Analysis
Within the first year of the original CHUEE program, it was determined that there was a much larger
under-funded EE market in China than expected, and therefore IFC sought to provide a second, larger
facility (CHUEE II) to existing and new partner banks and to modify the program structure and priorities.

   By the end of the program, three participating banks provided CHUEE loans totaling US$783 million,
    exceeding the end-project target of US$533 million
   178 EE/RE projects financed, leading to the estimated avoidance of 19.02 million metric tons of
    carbon dioxide equivalent (MTCO2eq) annual greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
   The loans at two of the three participating banks are performing with no default; two defaults by
    the same client have been recorded at the remaining participating bank
   Participating banks have gone on to build Sustainable Energy Finance (SEF) portfolios outside of the
    CHUEE program:
        o Bank A reported its SEF portfolio have reached over US$20 billion; more than 1000
            companies have accessed finance via the bank’s SEF products
        o Bank B reported its SEF portfolio of US$16 billion
        o Bank C has reported an SEF portfolio of US$1.6 billion
   Three comprehensive market studies completed, and program results have been widely
    disseminated
   CHUEE III started in January 2013 with a focus on small and medium enterprises (SMEs)

Key Findings
The following table presents a high-level overview of the findings for each GEF evaluation area:




                                               Page 3 of 7
Relevance        Highly Satisfactory
                 CHUEE has played an important role in addressing two key market barriers to SEF in
                 the Chinese banking sector: perceived market risks and technical risks. The RSF and AS
                 provided a unique service offering that transformed the Chinese SEF market. The
                 flexibility of CHUEE I and II allowed the program to successfully adapt over time to
                 reflect market realities and the changing macro-economic context.

Effectiveness    Satisfactory
                 The CHUEE program was effective in supporting the development of EE projects
                 through diverse channel partners. CHUEE supported participating FIs to build their SEF
                 portfolios through the unique combination of RSF and AS. Market awareness and
                 public understanding of the EE business was also achieved.

Efficiency       Highly Satisfactory
                 The results of CHUEE activities indicate that the program was cost-effective in
                 facilitating EE investments and developing SEF portfolios for participating FIs.

Sustainability   Likely
                 Short-term outlook for continued SEF activity without the support of RSF facilities is
                 excellent.
                 The government’s support of SEF lending and EE improvements is has important
                 implications for program impact sustainability.
                 Technical skills and knowledge built through AS has enabled FIs to undertake SEF
                 activities independently.
                 Public (GHG reductions) and private (energy savings) impacts have exceeded targets.

Additionality    Moderately Satisfactory
                 Most EE projects supported by the program would have been implemented without
                 CHUEE-supported loans, with the exception of some projects through completed by
                 ESCOs and for SMEs. The very low proportion of loans overdue may indicate that the
                 program could have taken on more significant risks.

Catalytic        Not Rated (per GEF guidelines)
impact           CHUEE had a catalytic impact on Chinese SEF stakeholders, particularly in the case of
                 the ESCO relationship with both participating and non-participating FIs. The CHUEE
                 program influenced the implementation of the Green Credit Guidelines in China. The
                 CHUEE model is being replicated within China, and in other geographical regions.

Monitoring       Satisfactory
and              M&E procedures and evaluation reports provided good feedback, but
evaluation       recommendations could have been taken into account earlier. Some aspects of the
                 program were not properly documented. Better indicators to track sustainability
                 effects could be developed.


                                              Page 4 of 7
Conclusions and Recommendations
A series of lessons learned arising from CHUEE is set out below along with specific recommendations
which could be applied to future programs.

 LESSON LEARNED 1: Although CHUEE had many objectives and targets, the CHUEE program team chose to
 strategically prioritize GHG reductions and loan volume over specifically allowing SMEs access to
 finance. This early decision was an important tradeoff that resulted in the large GHG reductions and
 loan volume that made the program so successful.
 RECOMMENDATION 1: Program design should have a specific, well-aligned objectives and clear
 expectations.
The CHUEE team made a conscious effort to prioritize GHG reductions and commercial viability over
supporting SMEs, and this allowed for the program to meet and exceed GHG reduction and loan value
targets. The program was considered a success by donors and other stakeholders as a result. In future
programs, the program design should include well-aligned objectives that influence the selection of FI
partners, other channel partners, targeted sectors, etc.

 LESSON LEARNED 1: Although CHUEE had many objectives and targets, the CHUEE program team chose to
 strategically prioritize GHG reductions and loan volume over specifically allowing SMEs access to
 finance. This early decision was an important tradeoff that resulted in the large GHG reductions and
 loan volume that made the program so successful.
 RECOMMENDATION 1: Program design should have a specific, well-aligned objectives and clear
 expectations.
The CHUEE team made a conscious effort to prioritize GHG reductions and commercial viability over
supporting SMEs, and this allowed for the program to meet and exceed GHG reduction and loan value
targets. The program was considered a success by donors and other stakeholders as a result. In future
programs, the program design should include well-aligned objectives.

 LESSON LEARNED 2: ESCOs are important market partners to address finance barriers and impact
 sustainability for SMEs.
 RECOMMENDATION 2: Include ESCOs as main project channel partners in future program design to
 facilitate the participation of SMEs.
ESCO involvement in CHUEE RSF-supported loan applications was clearly linked to smaller project sizes,
which suggests that ESCOs allowed for greater participation of SMEs in CHUEE I and II. ESCOs provide a
shared savings energy performance contract model that reduces finance risk of EE projects for SMEs.
ESCOs also provide technical assistance for both technology and finance aspects of the SEF market.

 LESSON LEARNED 3: The issue identified in the original program concept regarding SMEs’ lack of access to
 funding due to traditional lending criteria was not fully addressed.
 RECOMMENDATION 3: Take more financial risk to increase additionality by adjusting the lending criteria
 used for CHUEE I and II in future program design.
Although one of the original program targets was to support smaller projects and SMEs, this was
dropped in favor of maximizing GHG emissions reductions, and demonstrating commercial viability. FIs
also preferred this approach as it enabled them to offer higher value loans to larger companies with less
credit risk. As such, while CHUEE I and II successfully demonstrated the viability of large SEF portfolios
                                               Page 5 of 7
at participating FIs; the program did not address the issue of SMEs lacking access to finance as indicated
in the original program targets.

 LESSON LEARNED 4: EE market transformation was an important program impact, but it was difficult to
 measure because FIs did not want to share details on their non-CHUEE loans.
 RECOMMENDATION 4: A clearer definition of transformational impact is required, with more rigorous
 M&E resources and more effective performance indicators.
CHUEE had a catalytic impact on Chinese SEF stakeholders; however, the impact was hard to evaluate
due to data deficiencies. For example, participating FIs were hesitant to share detailed information
about non-CHUEE SE loans with IFC. Also, it was difficult to obtain SEF loan portfolio information for
non-participating banks. Additionally, CHUEE influenced the implementation of the Green Credit
Guidelines in China; however, without effective M&E frameworks the impact of this effort is hard to
quantify.

 LESSON LEARNED 5: Communication and record-keeping improves market development effectiveness.
 RECOMMENDATION 5: Improve communication lines and record-keeping both internally and with channel
 partners including EE equipment suppliers, ESCOs, and end-users.
There were gaps in the program documentation that affected the comprehensiveness of the evaluation.
The utility company’s exit from the program was not properly documented, although CHUEE
management was able to give a full explanation during an interview. However, full documentation
would be helpful for lessons learned and future program design. Over time, the CHUEE PMO built up
more AS services in response to the mid-term reports and PAC suggestions, which resulted in increased
awareness of the program for all market players. However, end-user and ESCO contact details were not
kept up to date, indicating that there was no regular personalized communication between CHUEE PMO
to at least a few end-users and other market partners. IFC was therefore unable to access end-users and
market partners for terminal evaluation interviews, which would have been useful for understanding
end-user and channel partner impact.

 LESSON LEARNED 6: A rule change during the course of the program significantly reduced the potential size
 of the SEF loan portfolio compared to the original project design.
 RECOMMENDATION 6: Avoid making mid-program rule changes that reduce the program’s ability to meet
 its targets, or adjust targets as required.
A change in program design limited the total number of projects financed by CHUEE I and II. On the
advice from the M&E group, CHUEE loan targets were not adjusted mid-program to take into account
this structural change that reduced the program’s ability to meet its targets. Therefore, the number of
loans disbursed was below target (178 of 260; i.e. 68% of target). In future, targets could be adapted to
account for program design changes.

 LESSON LEARNED 7: Modifying the original program design to allow for more diverse end-users resulted in
 greater program outreach than would have occurred by working with a utility as the key market partner,
 which has different objectives than the CHUEE program.
 RECOMMENDATION 7: Future programs should avoid designating loan end-users in advance using a set
 model and instead focus on developing a more diversified end-user base with the help of channel
 partners that share similar objectives.


                                               Page 6 of 7
The original program design included a utility company as a key channel partner and its customers
making up a significant proportion of CHUEE RSF loan end-users. However, the objectives of the chosen
utility and CHUEE were not aligned. The program structure was modified to include other channel
partners such as ESCOs and equipment vendors which shared similar objectives to the CHUEE program.
Through these channel partners, diverse end-users were selected that better met the criteria set by
CHUEE and the FIs. This early decision by CHUEE management resulted in wider-reaching program with
a greater impact on the market as a whole.

 LESSON LEARNED 8: The flexibility of the CHUEE strategy, structure, and target segments allowed for FIs to
 gain confidence in the SEF business model with existing clients.
 RECOMMENDATION 8: Maintain some flexibility in program strategy and structure to allow FIs to test the
 SEF business models with existing clients before pushing FIs to focus on priority target sectors.
FIs participating in CHUEE I and II tended to start SEF businesses with their traditional client groups with
whom they have existing relationships and can properly test and gain confidence in the SEF business
model. An SEF program can encourage FIs to find new groups of borrowers, such as SMEs, and new
types of products only after the FIs have developed confidence in the SEF business model. The flexibility
of the CHUEE I and II strategy, structure, and target segments allowed for this process to occur and for
banks to achieve and exceed GHG reduction and loan volume targets. Subsequent programs are helping
FIs to work in strategic sectors such as SMEs, green buildings, etc., now that the SEF business model has
been successfully demonstrated.

 LESSON LEARNED 9: The RSF alone did not convince participating FIs to increase risk tolerance or lend to
 non-traditional borrow groups. AS was instead the key factor allowing participating FIs to initiate or
 expand their SEF businesses.
 RECOMMENDATION 9: RSF requirements should include expanding to non-traditional borrower groups or
 other criteria if this is a key program target.
The RSF added the most additionality when participating FIs lent to non-traditional borrower groups
such as ESCOs and SMEs. There is not enough evidence that the RSF encouraged FIs to consistently
reduce collateral requirements or lend to non-traditional borrowers. If program objectives require that
participating FIs aggressively pursue non-traditional borrower groups, this should be included in the RSF
requirements. In CHUEE I and II, AS seemed to be the key factor to ensuring that FIs initiate or expand
their SEF business to new borrower groups.



Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.



                                                                 Page 7 of 7
