                Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                  SEDF II Program Completion Evaluation - Bangladesh, Bhutan,
Name of Evaluation
                                                  Nepal and North East India
Date of Final Report of Evaluation                February 2014
Author of Final Report of Evaluation              PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited, India
Date of this Executive Summary                    July 3, 2014
                                                  Hasan Shahriar, IFC, HShahriar@ifc.org
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                  Luis Domenech, IFC,ldomenech@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary         7
Modifications from original Executive Summary     With modifications (refer to cover sheet)
Exec. Summary Approved for public disclosure by   Tania Lozanski, IFC, TLozansky@ifc.org, July 3, 2014


Background and Scope
The South Asia Enterprise Development Facility II (SEDF II), promoted and managed by International
Finance Corporation (IFC), aims to enhance the performance, competitiveness and sustainable growth of
small and medium enterprises (SMEs) in selected sectors in Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and North-
East India. SEDF II is a multi-donor funded program, co-funded by Department for International
Development (DFID) Bangladesh, Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation (NORAD), Dutch,
DFID Nepal and IFC. The USD 32 million budget of the program is spread across three intervention areas
(or components) of Access to Finance (A2F), Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA) and Investment Climate
(IC) with over 30 projects. Through its three components, the program works to address the key SME
issues such as limited access to finance (A2F), inefficient use of resources (SBA), limited market access
(SBA) and lack of favorable government policies (IC).

The purpose of this Program Completion Evaluation (PCE) is to provide the donors and SEDF
management with an independent assessment of SEDF II facility on four assessment parameters viz.
relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability for each of the three components and on the
overall financial and program management of the facility. The evaluation was undertaken with a view to
identify lessons that could serve as design inputs for subsequent phase of interventions and to provide
recommendations to improve the program approach and management.

Snapshot of achievements
The program has been successful in achieving several developmental outcomes that it set out to
achieve. The Access to Finance component of the program made an appreciable contribution towards
empowering lenders to lend and regulators to create the requisite infrastructure. The two participant
institutions surveyed, surpassed their targets and expressed satisfaction at SEDF’s contributions,
especially with regards to exposure to international best practices. In addition to improved efficiency
and cost, participant institution A observed enhanced employee professionalism and higher
effectiveness of execution. Meanwhile, participant institution B claimed that SEDF support helped
manage the non-performing loans (NPL) numbers, increase the loan approval rate despite a decline in
the number of submissions, and enable learning associated with newer banking concepts like credit
scoring.


                                                  Page 1 of 7
Projects under the SBA component also succeeded in achieving important targets. The Waste to Energy
project successfully promoted the use of bio-gas for production of electricity amongst farmers by
creating a demonstration effect. This in turn contributed to economy-wide benefits such as reduced
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and increased revenue of technical service providers (TSPs). The
second SBA project assessed, the Agri-seed project, was also found to be highly relevant, efficient and
effective. With a rate of return of 53%, the project may be considered a highly successful intervention.
More than 200% the number of entities initially targeted were provided advisory services and the
number of farmers & SMEs which adopted recommended practices also exceeded targets set, leading to
considerable improvements in farmer revenues. The Enhancing competitiveness of the Washing, Dyeing
and Finishing (WDF) sector project was also found to be highly successful, both in terms of design and
implementation. Owing to its inherent commercial viability and buyer push, the project witnessed a high
beneficiary buy in. The project led to private sector savings of over USD 2.5 million, per year water
savings of 1.65 million cubic meters, and GHG emission reduction of over 45,000 metric tons of CO2 per
year. Given the acceptance of the program amongst the beneficiary group, sound achievement is
expected to continue through the remaining period.

The IC program in Nepal delivered key outcomes despite functioning in a political stalemate scenario.
Regulatory reforms undertaken by the Nepal Investment Climate Reform Program (NICRP), and dialogue
facilitated between the public and private sectors have led to improvements in the business
environment, which have helped improve Nepal’s rank in the Doing Business Rankings from 123 in 2010
to 105 in 2014. Although investment generation has been slow because of the instability rendered due
to the political situation, 982 jobs are expected to have been created because of the registration of 491
new firms registered at the Office of the Company Registrar (OCR) as a result of the NICRP intervention.
Regulatory reforms carried out under the program have resulted in reduction of the administrative
burdens of businesses, which will contribute to time and cost savings, for example, compliance cost
savings worth USD 6.018 million. The Nepal Business Forum envisaged as a platform for transparent
dialogue between public and private sector entities was able to identify and address 55
recommendations across several themes, leading to a combined compliance cost saving of $6.540
million. The forum also brought forth representation from the smaller private sector actor, over and
above the larger associations like Federal of Nepalese Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FNCCI) and
Confederation of Nepalese Industries (CNI) which usually represent the sector. This was highly
appreciated by the smaller private sector actors who have been put at the forefront of the dialogue with
the government and can now present concerns directly. The third component project - IC for Industry
which commenced in May 2013 is also expected to deliver key results for industry in Nepal.

Key Evaluation Findings
Financial Management - Till FY 2013, the program had achieved a utilization of 78% of its total budget.
The majority of funds lying unutilized accrue to the SBA component (33% unutilized) followed by IC
(25%) and A2F (7%). While under-utilization in case of SBA may be attributed in part to additional
funding received at the end of FY’13, in case of IC, this may be attributed to the new project - IC for
Industry, which is in its first year of implementation. With an average budget outturn of 97% (in the last
5 year) we feel that the program is comfortably placed to meet its expenditure targets.

The Program delivery costs, comprising of direct implementation costs and program management &
supervision costs, have increased from 79% in SEDF Phase I to 83% in SEDF II indicating improvement in


                                               Page 2 of 7
financial management. However, when compared to other funds, the program management costs of
SEDF II are quite high - 33% for IFC SEDF II as against the median (nine funds) of 29%. It may however be
noted that for the purposes of this comparison, for SEDF II, Project Management and Supervision (PMS)
and General & Administrative Expenses (G&A) have been combined to reflect program management
costs while IFC considers PMS as a part of program delivery costs. As compared to Katalyst in
Bangladesh, the program shows a higher variance in budget utilization indicating scope for further
improvement in financial management.

Program Management - The program, headquartered in Bangladesh, has been following a regional
approach towards attaining better feasibility and efficiency. The program is characterized by a sound
management framework complete with a strong organization set up, risk management tools and
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems. However, a few internal constraints were observed in the
overall management during the course of evaluation. These include – a perception of time lags; frequent
organizational changes at key positions and limitations in extending project coverage on account of
Integrity Due Diligence (IDD) obligations.

Relevance of program components
A2F: The component has been rated as High on relevance on the back of its appropriateness in the
participant countries’ financial landscape, effectiveness in targeting the relevant stakeholders and
adequacy of design elements. The program has been able to lend an extensive coverage on the key
stakeholders viz. Partner Finance Institutions (PFIs) and the regulators through its SME banking and
Financial Infrastructure interventions. A few additions could be considered in the log frame indicators
(e.g. number of new SME clients, impact on SME revenue and profitability) to better capture the impact
garnered at the beneficiary level.

SBA: The relevance of the component has been assessed as “High”. The program has addressed most of
the challenges faced by SMEs in these sectors such as lack of energy & cost efficient technologies;
limited capacity of SMEs in market development; limited knowledge of best management practices and
lack of favorable policies. Some changes in the log-frame indicators are suggested to capture the whole
array of program’s impact.

IC: The Nepal Investment Climate Reform Program (NICRP) is rated “High” on relevance because of its
holistic focus on interventions in the areas of regulatory reform, public-private dialogue as well as
promotion of industry, three crucial aspects for the creation of an environment conducive to business in
an economy trying to recover from the huge financial, economic and social drains caused by the decade
long civil strife.

Efficiency of program
A2F: The assessment, conducted on a sample from participant financial institution A has been found to
be yielding significantly high returns for the bank. On the assumption that the benefits accrued would
result in a direct downstream percolation (even if accompanied with downstream correction factors),
the efficiency for the project has been assessed as “High”.

SBA: The component is assessed as “highly efficient”. The rates of return calculated for the three
projects in Bangladesh, namely, waste to energy (23%), agri-seed project (53%) and enhancing the
competitiveness of WDF sub sector (111%) have been quite high indicating that SEDF’s interventions
have created positive benefits to the society.

                                              Page 3 of 7
IC: NICRP is assessed to be “Moderately” efficient. Despite the political stalemate scenario, the project
has been successful in maintaining continued interaction with the government and delivered on most
outputs. It has also efficiently included a large number of private sector members, including smaller
industry groups and associations as well as independent entrepreneurs represented. However, these
achievements are yet to convert into attainment of targets with respect to two of three impact level log-
frame indicators agreed upon, viz. increased private investments and new jobs. The Bhutan Licensing
reform project has been able to reduce business days from 1-2 months in the pre-program period to less
than a month now.

Effectiveness of Program Achievements across components
A2F: The component has been found to be a highly effective intervention on the back of its achievement
against the slated targets and acceptance amongst partner institutions (as observed on field). The
partner institutions found the engagement to be very beneficial. There is a need to enhance the
integration of partner institutions in the design stage in the light of overachievement against targets in
most cases.

SBA: The component is rated as “High” owing to significant achievement in agri-seed and WDF
interventions. However, various interventions envisaged in the waste to energy project, such as creation
of clean energy forum, organic fertilizer promotion, facilitation of finance to farmers and capacity
building of service providers, are yet to be successfully implemented. Target setting approach needs to
be re-visited owing to significant over-achievement of targets.

IC: NICRP is assessed as being “Moderately” effective. The rating is based on a balance of positives and
negatives observed during the review. On the positive side, the Regulatory Reform and PPD projects
have achieved several planned outputs, led to compliance cost savings of over USD 12 million, effected
an improvement in the country’s Doing Business rankings and achieved huge buy-ins from both the
public as well as private sectors. However, while seven of thirteen output indicator targets have been
met, only one of eight outcome indicator targets has been achieved. In Bhutan, the Licensing Reform
Program has played a vital role in impacting the regulatory landscape of Bhutan in the industrial
licensing space. Two months prior to the slated completion timeline, the project stands near complete in
terms of achievement on envisaged initiatives.

Sustainability of interventions
A2F: The project sustainability has been assessed as “Moderate” in the wake of the intervention’s ability
to afford an independent run in the absence of donor support. There is a need to extend project
coverage to volume banks and NBFIs and the financial infrastructure needs further augmentation to
reach a self-sustainable level.

SBA: The sustainability of the component has been assessed as “Moderate”. While the component has
succeeded in creating a demonstration effect, there is a need for enhancing the capacities of the trade
associations and service providers; creation of knowledge repositories for environment related
information; and organic fertilizer promotion to make the project self- sustainable.

IC: NICRP initiatives are assessed to be “Moderately” sustainable. While creation of the independent
NBF Secretariat and allocations of USD 2.7 million from the private and public sector towards sustaining
NICRP initiatives are positive signs, uncertainty with respect to talks with donor partners on future


                                               Page 4 of 7
        funding, capacity constrains at the OCR, and lack of confidence expressed by certain working groups
        regarding sustainability in the absence of SEDF support are areas of concern. The Bhutan Licensing
        Reform program stands near complete in terms of achievement on envisaged initiatives. To further its
        investment promotion agenda and sustain the initiative, Royal Government of Bhutan (RoGB) is working
        with IFC and World Bank on initiatives like ‘Doing Business in Bhutan’.

        Summary Assessment
        We have summarized the findings of our assessment across the 3 business lines, and have presented an
        overall assessment below:



Assessment areas              Access to Finance                Sustainable Business          Investment Climate

                                                               Advisory assessment           assessment (NICRP)


Relevance                                 High                             High                            High
(strategic relevance to the
country, sector and
stakeholders, including
program design)

Efficiency                                High                             High                         Moderate

(based on cost-benefit;          (High return for Bank)            (ERR high for SMEs)                 (Conversion of
program efficiency)                                                                              achievements into higher
                                                                                                private investments and job
                                                                                              creation behind targets agreed)


Effectiveness                             High                             High                         Moderate

(based on achievement           (Output and Outcome –             (Output, Outcome and             (Outputs – Moderate
of agreed outputs,              High; Impact – Positive,          Impact – High, owing          resulting out of compliance
outcomes, impact)                 as per preliminary               to significant savings,         cost savings and time
                                 results of Job Study)               revenue and GHG            savings; Outcome – Low to
                                                                         avoidance)                      Moderate)


Sustainability                         Moderate                          Moderate                       Moderate

(based on capacity to              (Need to increase                (Limited capacity of         (Capacity constraints in
self-sustain / sustain          stakeholders to improve            service provides; slow         OCR, certain working
beyond program                         outreach)                        replication)                     groups)
period)


SEDF‟s Value Add                          High                             High                            High




                                                           Page 5 of 7
Key Recommendations
Recommendation 1: Plan for sector wide coverage -This may, under A2F, includes coverage of NBFIs
under the program to reach out to more SMEs, especially in the rural areas, and achieve financial
inclusion. Similarly, to ensure sector wide impacts under SBA, program should plan for continued
engagement with Farmers / SMEs (textile firms, Poultry farmers).

Recommendation 2: Capacity building and awareness creation
 Especially in project like IC and fluid government machinery, continuous engagement and awareness
   building will help ensure focus. In addition, clarity of roles and objective improves self-sustainability
   prospects.
 Empowering the clients on IDD compliance.
Recommendation 3: As follow-on to the initiatives, some of the new areas to extend partnership could
include A2F and support in priority areas (improving exports, horticulture, agriculture and clean
manufacturing) for Bhutan, and similarly ITES – BPO sector for Nepal. In Bangladesh, gender oriented
intervention (gender financing, training of women entrepreneurs etc.) may be taken up.

Recommendation 4: Review and revise indicators to adequately reflect objectives of a project
 For A2F, include tracking of new SME clients and quantum of deposits facilitate for SMEs. In
   addition, linkage to SME database will help ensure tracking of impacts.
 For SBA, include indicators for tracking of service provides (for participation in technical workshops,
   trainings), conversion rate, linkage to companies, improving access to financial institutions, sale
   revenue to monitor impact, participation of women folk.

Recommendation 5: Plan for strengthening benefit monitoring
 Post-implementation monitoring methodology needs to be agreed for longer gestation projects,
   especially project like Agri Seed. While SEDF can look at 3 to 5 year horizons for monitoring such
   projects, clients should be encouraged to do long term monitoring (for example through innovative
   mechanisms like farmer registration system that can help triangulate benefits). We take cognizance
   of the efforts undertaken by the program on this front by way of introducing Post Implementation
   Monitoring (PIM) guidelines which would be applicable to new IFC projects going forward.
 Improve data capture and institute post project feedback, so as to track quality of services, future
   prospects and potential for standardization.
Recommendation 6: Adjust organization structure and process -Since, the SEDF Head is responsible for
reporting to donors, we believe that the position should be solely responsible for the program. We
recommend that SEDF Head should be a part of the project approval process. In addition, we consider it
prudent to make the project coordinators report to SEDF Head and the SEDF Head report to the RBLMs.
The RBLMs should be involved more in an advisory role, to allow them to be more critical and
independent towards assessing project achievement.
Recommendation 7: Revisit Target Setting periodically -The methodology used for setting targets may
be revisited periodically in collaboration with donors and partners to review targets which are
categorically over or under-achieved. Design of targets needs to include adjustments to baseline growth
owing to complementary interventions.



                                                Page 6 of 7
Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 7 of 7
