                Executive Summary of Evaluation
Name of Evaluation                              IFC’s Role in China’s Financial Sector Transformation
Date of Final Report of Evaluation              11/30/2012
                                                Chaoying Liu, IFC-CDI, CLiu@ifc.org;
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                Yanni Chen,IFC-CDI, YChen@ifc.org
Date of this Executive Summary                  06/26/2014
                                                Chaoying Liu, IFC-CDI, CLiu@ifc.org;
Author of this Executive Summary
                                                Yanni Chen,IFC-CDI, YChen@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary       4
Modifications from original Executive Summary   Without Modification
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                Anna Hidalgo, IFC-ECRIO, AHidalgo@worldbankgroup.org
disclosure by (name) on (date)



Background
Over the past thirty years, China’s financial sector has experienced a tremendous transformation,
evolving from a mono-bank system into a multi-player sector with some of the world’s biggest banks.
IFC, the member of the World Bank Group that promotes private sector development in developing
countries, has since 1995 provided a range of services in China, including advisory, equity investments,
loans, and risk management products, to support the development of the country’s financial sector.

Empirical research has demonstrated a strong positive link between the functioning of the financial
system and long-term economic growth. It also has shown that financial development
disproportionately boosts incomes of the poor and reduces income inequality, and therefore has an
impact on poverty reduction.

Objectives
The primary objective of this study is to systematically assess and summarize the development results of
key IFC activities in supporting financial sector reforms in China over the past twenty years. Unlike an
impact evaluation, a review is not an attempt to measure the attribution of IFC’s intervention. Rather, it
is intended to consolidate, validate, and elaborate on a wide range of evidence recorded in project
documents by hearing from clients and partners about IFC’s contributions, and thereby learn useful
lessons that could guide IFCs future work in China and other countries.

The scope of the review focuses on three IFC operations areas: Investment Operations, Advisory
Services, and local-currency financing, and covers four broad topics:
     Policy, regulation, and financial infrastructure, including secured transactions, the
     Credit reporting system, and green credit policy;
     Commercial banks;
     Microfinance and non-bank financial institutions; and
     Capital market development, focusing on local-currency financing.

                                                Page 1 of 4
IFC Interventions and Results
Since1995, IFC’s support for financial sector reform in China has advanced through three phases:
exploration, expansion, and frontier focus. The operations in each phase were designed and
implemented in response to the changing challenges faced by the sector and were guided by a dynamic
IFC strategy that evolved as the Chinese economy evolved. By adopting this dynamic strategy, IFC’s
additionality was maintained and its relevance to the market and to regulatory objectives continued.

     IFC helped create an enabling environment for the maturation of China’s financial services:
IFCs Advisory Services projects related to secured transactions assisted the People’s Bank of
China (PBOC) to draft the relevant articles of the country’s 2007 Property Law and contributed to the
establishment of a single, centralized accounts receivables registry – the Credit Registry Center (CRC).
IFC also helped PBOC issue ministry-level regulation shaping the Consumer Credit Information Database
in 2005 and then used the regulation to help establish a nationwide consumer credit database the next
year. IFC also has worked closely with a number of governmental and non-governmental organizations
to provide sector wide capacity-building activities for financial and non-financial institutions in China,
with the objective of addressing their weaknesses, while improving their efficiency and competitiveness.

Other policy and regulatory areas that IFC has supported include housing finance and a green credit
policy. IFC‟s Performance Standards and the Equator Principles are being used as benchmarks and
guiding standards in the implementation of China’s Green Credit Policy, and are now well-established
within key Chinese banks. The IFC-China Green Credit partnership model has been expanded to other
countries in the EAP region including Vietnam, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia.

     IFC helped expedite the transformation of China’s commercial banks:
Between 1999 and 2009, IFC made equity investments in eight Chinese commercial banks totaling
$471.7 million1, starting with Bank of Shanghai in 1999 at a time when the Chinese banking sector was
plagued with a heavy load of non-performing loans and was considered highly risky. Through its
investments and advisory services, IFC helped introduce international best practices in banking
management to these banks, established and strengthened risk management capabilities, improved
corporate governance, and sharpened the banks‟ focus on serving small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs). IFC also pioneered the China Utility-Based Energy Efficiency Finance Program (CHUEE) with
Chinese commercial banks, which combines a risk-sharing facility with an advisory program to directly
stimulate energy efficiency financing.

The types of commercial banks that IFC invested in together account for only a small share of
China’s financial system, starting at about 16 percent of the country’s total financial sector assets in
1999 and remaining below 25 percent in 2010. However, by building the capacity and enhancing the
competitiveness and sustainability of best-practice “role model banks,” IFC contributed significantly to
the overall development of the banking sector. Client banks that the research team visited said that
strengthened competitiveness of the smaller-bank segment has helped increase competition for the



1
    Updated information on IFC’s investments can be located at https://finances.worldbank.org/ifc

                                                     Page 2 of 4
entire banking sector, which has improved services to the underserved sectors of the economy such as
SMEs.

     IFC supported the development of the microfinance industry:
Following its model for helping transform China’s commercial banking sector, IFC had a clear strategy on
what it intended to do with China’s microfinance sector, again by combining advisory and investment
activities and intervening at the policy, sector, and institutional levels simultaneously. At the policy level,
IFC helped the government formulate the regulatory framework. At the sector level, IFC worked with
several market players to educate the market and disseminate best practices on microfinance
operations. At the institutional level, IFC made equity investments in and provided advisory services to
eleven Chinese institutions offering microfinance. Two more such investments are in the pipeline. IFC
helped the firms develop strategy, conduct market studies, formulate business plans, develop
information management systems, train staff, and introduce international operational knowledge on
microfinance into China.

      IFC supported the development of China’s capital market:
From 2005 to 2011, IFC carried out three RMB bond issues in Chinese mainland and Hong
Kong SAR markets, with total proceeds of RMB2.15 billion. In 2012, IFC became the first multilateral
institution authorized to conduct transactions with Chinese banks in the domestic currency swap
market. With these local-currency products, IFC has been able to support high-quality domestic
companies that needed long-term local-currency financing. Most of these companies were not able to
access the bond market directly for financing, and short-term funding from banks was inappropriate for
their capital-intensive operations such as business expansion or research and development.

Conclusions and Recommendations
China has made impressive achievements in financial sector reform over the past twenty years. The
main conclusion of this review is that while the Chinese government has led the primary effort behind
the sector’s achievements, IFC has made significant positive contributions as an active investor,
technical advisor, facilitator, and knowledge broker.

A key goal for the review is collecting and synthesizing – from IFC projects documents and management
and staff, government, clients, and beneficiaries – many of the valuable lessons that IFC’s long-term
work with China’s financial sector offers for future operations, in China and elsewhere.

Coordinating reform efforts with the Chinese government, and working with competent and committed
clients – from both government and banks – were the key factors for IFC’s success in this country.
Intervening at all levels at once: regulatory and policy, sectoral, and institutional proved important,
along with other success factors such as:

       Remaining relevant to the government’s strategic priorities and reform agenda;
       Having a dynamic strategy that addressed major issues as they emerged;
       Maintaining a close working relationship with the government as a trusted partner;
       Taking calculated risks when warranted;
       Combining a strong local team and top-notch international expertise; and
       Co-investing and collaborating closely with other strategic investors.

                                                 Page 3 of 4
All of these approaches enabled IFC to have a significant impact. In addition, IFC’s multicultural
environment and organizational matrix worked to its advantage. Finally, IFC’s remaining true to its
values and mission also was critical.

The review also identified several issues that hindered IFC’s success, from which we take the following
lessons:
     Being supply-driven is a recipe for failure;
     Better allocation of resources and a better funding instrument for advisory services
     Could have improved results and efficiency, in some cases.
     Timing and mode of entry in less-developed areas needs to be carefully planned out; and
     Taking small stakes can result in limited influence for IFC.

Clients interviewed by the research team expected IFC to be faster, more efficient, and more flexible, to
offer more customization, and to maintain greater continuity in relationship management.

Looking ahead, China faces tremendous development challenges that create opportunities for IFC to
continue its partnership and support, especially with respect to climate change and other environmental
issues. China’s growth also offers chances to support greater financial access for micro, small and
medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs), particularly in the rural and microfinance sectors, and for
promoting South-South cooperation.




Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.


                                                                 Page 4 of 4
