                     Executive Summary of Evaluation
                                                An Impact Assessment of the BICF Regulatory Reform Core
Name of Evaluation
                                                Group Training Program
Date of Final Report of Evaluation              July 2012
                                                Syed Estem Dadul Islam, IFC, sislam2@ifc.org Wayne Amago
Author of Final Report of Evaluation
                                                Bacale, IFC, wbacale@ifc.org
Date of this Executive Summary                  July 8, 2014
Author of this Executive Summary                Wayne Amago Bacale, IFC, wbacale@ifc.org
Number of pages of this Executive Summary       2
                                                Original Executive Summary without modifications and added
Modifications from original Executive Summary
                                                original text from Final Report (without text redaction)
Executive Summary Approved for public
                                                Paramita Dasgupta, IFC, pdasgupta@ifc.org July 10, 2014
disclosure by (name) on (date)



Background
Bangladesh Investment Climate Fund provides advisory services aimed at improving business operating
environment in Bangladesh. BICF is managed by IFC, in partnership with the UK Government and the European
Union. Its objectives are consistent with the Bangladesh government’s strategic vision for private sector
development within its poverty reduction strategy. Government agencies and BICF—in close collaboration
with the key stakeholders in Bangladesh—jointly design and implement programs to institute business friendly
policies, laws and regulations, and strengthen the institutions that implement them.

Objectives
The BICF Core Group Program has fostered a nuanced and proactive outlook among the trained civil servants
and changed their mindset in favor of private sector led economic growth through business reforms. This
quasi-experimental evaluation tried to investigate the question: “Was the BICF Core Group Program able to
create a difference in the mindset of bureaucrats in approaching PSD?” This study has established reasonable
evidence that the training program succeeded in creating a difference in the dimensions of knowledge,
perception and attitude of the bureaucrats towards reforms for private sector development. This study
considered that the combined effect of change in knowledge, perception and attitude reflects change in
mindset.

Analysis
The trainees demonstrated more knowledge compared to untrained civil servants regarding the importance of
carrying out systematic diagnosis and considering the difficulty of enforcement before initiating reforms. They
were also more aware of scopes to carry out reform actions within their jurisdiction. These civil servants
perceived that some laws and regulations are not private sector friendly and that they should be changed.
They were also able to recognize their lack of technical resources to undertake those reforms. Government
officials who received training from the Core Group program also demonstrated an attitude of action and
proactive behavior. Some of the trained bureaucrats have implemented reforms identified as part of their
learning-by-doing exercise, which included undertaking diagnostics by using Administrative Barrier Review


                                                 Page 1 of 2
(ABR) and Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) tools. They used their authority and network to advocate the
implementation of the reforms in order to improve government service delivery to businesses.

BICF designed and implemented the Regulatory Reform Core Group Training Program in association with the
Government of Bangladesh to shift the mindset of bureaucrats from that of a regulator to a facilitator. The
project provided a series of tailored capacity building trainings to enhance knowledge and skills of 80 civil
servants. The long-term aim was that the change in attitude of the government officials would lead to the
identification and implementation of regulatory reforms for private sector development. This evaluation study
depicts that hands-on training and the opportunity to interact with the private sector are effective in creating
significant differences along several dimensions of the civil servants’ knowledge, perception and attitude in
favor of private sector led economic growth.

However, both core group government officials and untrained colleagues hold some ingrained bureaucratic
views which apparently were off-limits to impact from the Core Group training program. For instance, majority
in both groups were in support of regulating the private sector strictly. Likewise, the two groups also seemed
to agree that government officials are not capable of independently initiating reforms within their jurisdiction
to improve government services to the private sector.

Conclusions and Recommendations
The spirit of the Core Group training program was based on the readiness of government officials to recognize
that there are opportunities to take initiatives for helping private sector led growth, to acknowledge the
corrosive roles of laws and regulations, and the willingness to learn new knowledge and apply new methods to
systematically identify and solve problems. Interestingly, statistical analyses have reasonably indicated that, to
a considerable extent, it was the core group members who carry the spirit more compared to the control
group members.

A more proactive attitude has been observed among the core group members compared to their control group
colleagues. This suggests that the Core Group program and the exposure that it provided have both inculcated
a reform commitment and helped bring some eruditeness in the attitude of the participants towards the
government role in promoting PSD. This study provides reasonable statistical evidence that the core group
training program implemented by BICF succeeded in creating a difference by effectively changing the mindset
of the trainees in line with the spirit of the training program. Future studies could be further improved by
conducting experimental evaluation studies on similar programs through comparing pre and post intervention
knowledge, perception and attitude of the trainees.




Copyright and Legal Disclaimer

The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this publication
may be used freely without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for commercial purposes

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the information
used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The Lessons of Experience series does not
represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in this publication. Instead, any issues arising
in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances of the project.


                                                                       Page 2 of 2
