         Evaluation of Rural
    Electrification Concessions in
         sub-Saharan Africa


               Detailed Case Study:
                                    Mali



                     Report to World Bank


                                December
                                  2015




                    Copyright World Bank. All rights reserved.
Report prepared by Castalia Limited, a part of the worldwide Castalia Advisory Group.
Table of Contents

Executive Summary                                Error! Bookmark not defined.
1     Introduction                                                          1
2     Mali Background                                                      2
      2.1    Power Market Structure                                        4
      2.2    Rural Electrification Approach                               10
3     Mali’s Rural Electrification PCASER Concessions                     15
      3.1    Stages of Development                                        16
      3.2    Operations and Management                                    16
      3.3    Financing Arrangements                                       17
      3.4    Contractual Arrangements                                     17
      3.5    Technological Approach                                       18
      3.6    Regulatory Arrangements                                      19
4     Assessment of Concession                                            20
      4.1    Evaluating Success of Concession                             20
             4.1.1   Access                                               20
             4.1.2   Quality of service                                   21
             4.1.3   Sustainability                                       21
             4.1.4   Efficiency                                           21
             4.1.5   Other Impacts                                        21
      4.2    Arrangements that Could Have Delivered Better Results        22
      4.3    Reasons for Results                                          22
      4.4    Replicability of Experience and Success                      23
      4.5    Lessons for Future Concessions                               23



Appendices
Appendix A : Small Concessionaire Summary – KAMA                          24
Appendix B : List of PCASER Projects                                      31
Tables
Table 2.1: Mali Summary Statistics                                     2
Table 3.1: Private Operators with Operations in more than 20
Municipalities                                                        15
Table 3.2: Stages of Development of Concession                        16
Table 3.3: Breakdown of Localities by Type of Energy (2015)           19
Table A.1: KAMA Number of subscribers by type of clients and by
project (cumulative average) in 2014                                  24
Table A.2: KAMA Collection Performance (2014)                         25
Table A.3: Average Price, in XOF per kWh (2014)                       27
Table A.4: Cumulative Operating Expenses and Revenues by Project
in XOF (2014)                                                         29
Table B.1: List of PCASER Projects                                    31



Figures
Figure 2.1: Map of Mali                                                3
Figure 2.2: Mali Power Market Structure                                4
Figure 2.3: Change in Electrification Rate in Mali (1990-2012)         7
Figure 2.4: Population with Access to Electricity, Mali (1990-2012)    7
Figure 2.5: Electricity Map of Mali (Focus on More Populated
Southern Half of Country)                                              9
Figure 2.6: Zones d'Electrification Multi-sectorielle – « ZEMs »      11
Executive Summary
Mali has had success developing mini-grids using a concession approach. Spontaneous
“bottom-up? concessions, authorized and subsidized by the rural electrification agency
AMADER, have built around 250 small power projects connecting 78,000 rural households.
Despite some difficulties, these small power projects have been financially sustainable, as
evidenced by operators staying in the industry without ongoing subsidies from donors or
governments.
History: The state-owned vertically-integrated power company, Energie du Mali (EDM),
was privatized using a concession contract in 2000. However, the company returned to
Government hands in 2005 due to disagreements with proposed rate increases. In 2004, the
Government created the rural electrification agency, AMADER (Agence Malienne pour le
Développement de l’énergie Domestique et de l’Electrification Rurale), with the main goal of extending
access to electricity in rural and peri-urban areas. AMADER, with help from the World
Bank, tried to tender out large zonal area concessions of around 10,000 customers. This
approach was unsuccessful. AMADER also issued public tenders for concessions. This
approach was also unsuccessful. The third approach, Projets de Candidatures Spontanées
d'Electrification Rurale (PCASER), attracted significant interest from small, local
entrepreneurs, who developed hundreds of projects between 2004 and 2015.
Bottom-Up Concessions: Under PCASER, interested parties can approach AMADER
with proposals to build out projects with a capacity smaller than 250 kW. There are now
more than 250 mini-grids operating in the country operated by around 68 private operators
and the state-owned vertically integrated utility Energie du Mali (EDM). The majority of the
projects are powered by diesel-fired generators, and some are in the process of converting to
larger hybrid solar-diesel generators. The private operators usually manage between 1 and 4
mini-grids each, although the largest, KAMA, manages 15 mini-grids covering 31
municipalities. Several private operators built grid extension projects, but were unsuccessful
in negotiating power purchase agreements with EDM. As part of an agreement mediated by
the Government, EDM bought these installations at the cost of the investment made by the
developers, which is around 25 percent of their book value.
Rural Electrification Agency as Promoter and Regulator: The rural electrification
agency, AMADER subsidizes the initial investment costs of new connections to users.
AMADER is responsible for promoting and regulating mini-grids. It has played an
important role in investing in projects in Mali. It has on average subsidized 75 percent of the
capital investment cost of new installations, with private operators financing the rest, usually
by themselves. Private operators must recover their initial investment and their ongoing
operations and maintenance costs through their tariffs. As a result, the price of electricity for
households in these mini-grids is currently around US$0.50 kWh. This tariff is around three
times higher than the tariff paid by customers attached to the EDM national grid.
New Directions: Mali has been in a precarious state since 2012 when a civil war broke out
between northern rebels and Government forces in the South. However, AMADER is
building on its experience with the PCASER concessions and encouraging private
concessionaires to build out larger projects based on solar-diesel hybrid generators.




                                                  i
Key Lessons: The PCASER projects illustrate lessons for governments considering using a
concession approach to rural electrification:
        A poorly functioning state-owned national utility creates a drag on the
         whole sector and has negative repercussions on rural areas. EDM absorbs
         significant amounts of subsidies and sells power below cost. The difference
         between the EDM tariff and rural tariffs has been the cause of significant
         problems for private rural concessionaires, and the Government has had to
         intervene in several cases to mediate disputes.
        There is a trade-off between project approval speed and good governance.
         AMADER is a central agency with a great deal of responsibility over the rural
         electricity sector. Some people in the sector have bemoaned how much discretion
         AMADER has, and how difficult it can be to understand how they reach their
         decisions, or if they are procuring at “least-cost.? However, imposing technocratic
         requirements of good governance may in fact hamper efforts to build projects
         quickly, albeit imperfectly. Mali’s approach may have benefited from the fact that
         AMADER awards authorizations without requiring up-front competition for each
         authorization.
        Giving formal regulatory authority to the rural electrification agency may
         be the most effective way to implement mini-grid concessions. Mali’s
         success with bottom up development of private mini-grids seems attributable, at
         least in part, to the fact that AMADER performs two roles: it gives grants and
         technical assistance but it also regulates the mini-grids in its authorization and
         grant agreements (through regulation by contract). In contrast, in other countries
         (including for example Senegal), these two functions are performed by two
         different government agencies. This divided regulatory arrangement may make it
         more difficult to manage mini-grid concessions.
        Mini-grids power by diesel-fired generators can be financially sustainable.
         Despite their high unit costs and other shortcomings, diesel-fired generators have
         been a key part of Mali’s rural electrification success. However, whether Mali’s
         mini-grid concessions will be able to recover their long-run costs (including
         replacement equipment), remains to be seen.




                                             ii
1      Introduction
In Mali, public-private concessions for rural electrification have been widely used since 2003.
The purpose of this report is to review Mali’s experience of rural electrification concessions
and evaluate their performance of the concession approach. For the purposes of this report,
a rural electrification concession is a public-private partnership in which a private entity is
granted a long-term right to provide electricity service in rural areas through a distribution
grid. The Mali case study is one of six detailed case studies that form a body of evidence on
the experience and successes of rural electrification concessions across sub-Saharan Africa.
Mali’s rural electrification approach and background information on the power market are
presented in Section 0. The Government of Mali has granted “authorizations? that are
similar to concessions to dozens of small private operators to build and operate mini-grids in
rural areas. These concessions, started under the “PCASER? program (Projets de
Candidatures Spontanées d'Electrification Rurale), are discussed in Section 3. We conclude
in Section 4 with an evaluation of the relative success of these concessions at sustainably
increasing access to electricity. Appendix B is a detailed study of the experience of one of
Mali’s largest rural concessionaires, KAMA. Appendix B is a catalogue of all the mini-grid
authorizations and concessions in Mali, and the technology used by their generation plants.




                                               1
2          Mali Background
To put Mali’s rural electrification concessions in context, we first present the country’s
historical, economic, and political context. Table 2.1 gives references.
Table 2.1: Mali Summary Statistics
                                        Indicator                                 Value
         Demographics
         Population, total (2014)                                                  15,768,227
         Population growth, 10-year average (2004-2014)                                3.09%
         Rural population (% of total population) (2014)                              60.86%
         Rural population growth, 10-year average (2004-2014)                          1.89%
         Population density (people per sq. km of land area) (2014)                       12.09
         Economy
         GDP per capita (2014, current US$, market exchange rate)                          766
         Real GDP per capita growth, 10-year average (2004-2014)                       1.19%
         Debt to GDP (2014)                                                           32.10%
         Electricity Sector
         Access to electricity, rural (2012, % of rural population)                   11.90%
         Access to electricity, national (2012, % of total population)                25.60%
         Electric power consumption (kWh per capita) (2012)                      Not available
         Governance
         Ease of Doing Business index (2015 ranking out of 189 countries)                  146
         CPIA property rights and rule-based governance rating (2014);                      2.5
         1=low to 6=high
         Government bond ratings (S&P Long-Term)                                    Not rated
         Corruption Perceptions Index (2014) - scale of 0 (highly corrupt) to               32
         100 (very clean)
         Legal system                                                            Civil law and
                                                                                customary law
         Administrative tradition                                                      French
         Fragile or conflict-affected state (any year, 1990-2015)                          Yes


Economy and demographics
Mali has a population of 15.8 million, of which 9.6 million live in rural areas. 1 Income levels
are low at US$766 annual GDP per capita. Over the 10 years between 2004 and 2014, the

1   World Bank Open Data (2014)



                                                      2
population has been growing at 3.09 percent per year. GDP per capita (in real PPP terms)
has grown at 1.25 percent per year over the same period. 60 percent of the population is
rural. The rural population growth rate is just 1.87 percent per year. Population density is
low. The population is dispersed and unevenly distributed as about 60 percent of Mali’s
surface area is desert.2
Figure 2.1: Map of Mali




Source: CIA World Factbook


Politics and governance
A former colony which gained independence from France in 1960, the country was ruled by
a single party until 1991, when multi-party democracy was introduced.3 However, in 2012, a
military coup replaced the civilian government and an interim administration was put in
place.4 Rebel groups in Northern Mali started a secessionist rebellion that is ongoing as of
September 2015.
In 2014, Transparency International’s corruption perceptions index ranked Mali at 115 out
of 175. The legal system is based on civil law, with the final court of appeal being the Cour
Suprême du Mali (Supreme Court). The administrative tradition is French.
Mali has been a fragile or conflict-affected state since 2012.5

2   World Bank. Project Appraisal Document: Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project. (2013)
3   United States Department of State. Background Note: Mali. (2015)
4   United States Department of State. Background Note: Mali. (2015)
5   According to the World Bank’s Harmonized List of Fragile Situations for Fiscal Year 2015, available online at:
    http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/FY15%20Fragile%20states%20list.pdf



                                                             3
2.1         Power Market Structure
The current structure and legal framework of the electricity sector in Mali results from a
major reform undertaken following the "Sector Policy Letter of Electricity and Water
Supply" dated 10 November 1999. At the time, the Government of Mali noted that only 8
percent of the Malian population and less than 1 percent of the rural population had access
to electricity. The main principles of the reform are provided for by an Ordinance enacted in
March 2000 (the “Electricity Ordinance?).6 The Regulatory Commission of Electricity and
Water (Commission de Régulation de l’Electricité et de l’Eau - CREE) is the sector regulator, established
at the same time.7
The power market in Mali is presented in Figure 2.2.
Figure 2.2: Mali Power Market Structure




Energie du Mali (EDM) is the state-owned vertically-integrated power company. It owns
most of the country’s electricity production, transport and distribution facilities, except for
hydroelectric facilities. The Government sold 60 percent of EDM in 2000 to a consortium
that included the French company Bouygues and a subsidiary of the Agha Khan
Development Fund. A concession agreement was signed between the State and EDM.
Following a difference of views between SAUR and the Malian authorities, SAUR sold back
its shares to the Government and to AKFED group. It seems that the dispute started with
the refusal of the government to apply the second price revision requested by the
concessionaire. The parties were not inclined to settle this dispute since the new government
of Mali was not in favor of private management of utilities and Bouygues was willing to

6   Ordinance n°00-019/P-RM dated March 15, 2000 on the reorganization of the electricity sector and implementation
    Decreen°00-184/P-RM dated April 14, 2000.
7   Ordinance n°00-021/P-RM dated March 15, 2000 and implementing Decree n°00-185/P-RM dated April 15, 2000.



                                                          4
disengaged from utilities. As a result the Government and the AKFED group respectively
hold 66 percent and 34 percent of EDM share capital.
Since 2010, EDM received a significant amount of subsidies to cover operating costs,
especially fuel purchases. The level of subsidy in 2014 and 2015 was around FCFA30 billion
(US$51.5 million). It is expected to be maintained at this level in 2016.8
EDM rights and obligations vis-à-vis the State are still governed by the concession
agreement.9 EDM’s concession perimeter includes 98 localities.10 This EDM perimeter may
interfere with rural electrification projects as rural electrification projects have been
conducted in these same areas. The EDM concession provides for the right of independent
mini-grid operators to operate within the EDM concession perimeter, with EDM’s
permission, until EDM can expand its activities. The development of rural electrification
includes projects in 36 isolated municipalities within EDM concession perimeter, which are
in the process to be transferred back to EDM11, identified in Appendix B.
The rural electrification agency is called the Malian Agency for the Development of Domestic
Energy and Rural Electrification (AMADER - Agence Malienne pour le Développement de l’énergie
Domestique et de l’Electrification Rurale). AMADER is a public establishment (Etablissement Public à
caractère Administratif) with legal personality and financial autonomy, under the supervision of the
Ministry in charge of Energy. AMADER’s main task is extending access to electricity in rural and
peri-urban areas.
The Rural Electrification Fund (FER - Fonds d’Electrification Rurale) is a fund under the
control of AMADER and held with the Ministry of Finance.
The Ministry for Energy and Water (MEE) is one of Mali’s largest and most important
ministries. The National Directorate of Energy (DNE - Direction Nationale de l’Energie) is a
division of the MEE. The head of DNE is appointed by Decree of the Council of Ministers
on the proposal of the Minister in charge of energy. This Directorate was reorganized in
2007 in view of the reinforcement of its role in terms of definition of development and
control strategies.12 DNE is currently in charge of:
             Participating in defining strategies of the Ministry, preparing technical studies,
              action programs, draft laws and regulations in all branches of the energy sector,
              including infrastructures, energy management
             Coordinating, controlling and monitoring the implementation of energy policies
              and regulations by public administration and by the operators in the energy sector
             Conducting preliminary investigations on the content of decisions to be taken and
              activities to be undertaken by public authorities as well as the right to approve,
              suspend or amend decisions already made.
Other agencies involved in the electricity sector include:

8   EDM and AMADER interviews
9   EDM and AMADER interviews
10   EDM, « La société », available at https://www.edm-sa.com.ml/index.php/2014-05-27-14-04-15 (accessed December 1st
     2015).
11   EDM interview, September 2015.
12   Decree n°07- 254/P-RM dated August 2, 2007



                                                           5
             The Agency for Renewable Energies (l’Agence des Energies Renouvelables du
              Mali AER-MALI), established in October 201413, which replaces the Center of
              Solar Energy and Renewable Energies (Centre National de l’Energie Solaire et des
              Energies Renouvelables - CNESOLER). Unlike CNESOLER, AER MALI is a
              public establishment with legal and financial autonomy and may raise funding to
              carry on its activities
             The National Agency for the Development of Biofuels (Agence nationale
              pour le Development des Biocarburants – ANADEB), established in 2009, which
              cooperate with AMADER to develop biofuels power plants in rural areas.14
Some concessions have been granted to independent power producers, which have entered
into exclusive power purchase agreements with EDM. It appears however that only one of
these independent power plants is currently operating:
             A five-year concession agreement has been granted in 2007 to the company
              SOPAM for the financing, construction and operation of a 56MW heavy fuel
              thermal power plant in Sirakoro; the plant has started operation on mid-2011 and
              is producing 35MW;
             A concession agreement was concluded in 2010 for a period of 10 years with the
              company Albatros for the construction and operation of a heavy fuel thermal
              power plant of an installed capacity of 70MW and 51MW guaranteed capacity,
              located in Kayes; works were suspended in 2012 due to the troubles. An
              amendment has been signed in 2015 in view of increasing the guaranteed capacity
              of the plant to 66MW and extending the term of the concession up to 20 years
             A concession agreement was concluded in 2009 for a period of 15 years with the
              US company Vica technologies for the construction and operation of an 30MW
              biomass power plant in Noumoubougou, with 15MW guaranteed capacity.
In 2009 the Government of Mali adopted, a new scheme for the reorganization of the
management of public water and electricity services (Schéma Optionnel de Réorganisation de la
Gestion des services publics de l’Eau et de l’Electricité - SORGEE), the premises and personnel
related to the water utility have been transferred to a new entity with effect from 1 January
2011.
According to the unbundling principles set forth by the Electricity Ordinance, production,
transport and distribution of electricity may be carried out separately by public or private
operators in accordance with a concession or an authorization.




13   By Ordinance n° 2014 – 012 dated October 1st, 2014
14   By Ordinance n°006/P-RM dated March 4, 2009



                                                          6
Figure 2.3: Change in Electrification Rate in Mali (1990-2012)



                                                                                                                                              26
      Electrification Rate (%)




                                                                                         17                                            17


                                 12                                                                                                          11.9




                                                                                                                                       3.2
                                                                                      2.2
                                 0.1
                             1990               1992       1994    1996     1998      2000       2002     2004     2006     2008      2010   2012
                                                                                              Year
                                                                                 Rural               National


Source: World Bank Open Data




Figure 2.4: Population with Access to Electricity, Mali (1990-2012)

                                              18,000,000
                                              16,000,000
                                              14,000,000
                                              12,000,000
                                 Population




                                              10,000,000
                                               8,000,000
                                               6,000,000
                                               4,000,000
                                               2,000,000
                                                       0
                                                            1990                   2000                   2010                 2012

                                               Rural population without electricity            Rural population with access to electricity
                                               Total population without electricity            Total population with access to electricity

Source: World Bank Open Data




                                                                                          7
Concessions and Authorizations
The following activities may only be delegated through a concession, awarded following a
call for bids, in accordance with the procedure determined by the Regulatory Commission of
Electricity and Water (Commission de Régulation de l’Electricité et de l’Eau – CREE):
             Hydroelectric production regardless of the capacity;
             Thermal energy production exceeding 250 KW;
             Building and operation of electricity transport networks;
             Distribution requiring medium voltage equipment.
A concession for production, transport and distribution may be granted to the same
concessionaire. A concessionaire can therefore operate a vertically integrated business. This
is currently the case for EDM.
An authorization on the other hand is granted by the Minister in charge of Energy to
operators called “permissionnaire? with respect to:
           Thermal power production with an installed capacity exceeding 50 kW and up to 250
            kW; a new authorization must be requested in case of any significant increase of the
            installed capacity and the permissionnaire must request the granting of a concession in
            case the installed capacity exceed 250 kW (however AMADER allows a permissionnaire
            exceeding this threshold to continue to operate under its authorization15)
           Distribution of low voltage electricity through a grid extension.
The procurement method is a key difference between a “concession? and an
“authorization?. Concession contracts are tendered using a competitive process, whereas
authorization contracts can be granted following unsolicited bids from candidate operators.
In the “authorization? process, if AMADER accepts an unsolicited bid, it files a public
notice that it has awarded a preliminary permit. Competing proposals are then allowed
within a 60-day period. This process is discussed in more detail in Section 2.2 under the
heading “authorization process?.
In this case study, we consider “authorizations? to be concession contracts. Authorizations
grant an entity the right to build and operate an electricity asset for a relatively long period of
time.
Figure 2.5 is an electricity map of Mali. It shows the following:
             Towns and population centers (in small black dots)
             The main EDM grid and EDM grid-connected and off-grid localities (in red lines
              and red circles)
             Private operators of mini-grids powered by thermal energy (yellow circles) and by
              hybrid systems (blue circles).




15   This policy is adopted pursuant to the reference framework for the development of rural electrification prepared by the
     government but is in contradiction with the Ordinance and would require the Ordinance to be amended accordingly.



                                                              8
Figure 2.5: Electricity Map of Mali (Focus on More Populated Southern Half of Country)




Source: Direction Nationale de l’Energie (Mali)




                                                              9
2.2         Rural Electrification Approach
The Electricity Ordinance (enacted in March 2000) addressed the development of rural
electrification in few provisions, whereby:
             The Minister in charge of energy is responsible for establishing and updating a
              electricity sector development program;
             The Minister encourages and supports the creation of a network of private
              enterprises capable to supply the equipment and provide services related to rural
              electrification;
             Authorizations to develop and operate production and distribution premises may
              be granted to those rural communities that lack access to the public service;
             Investment subsidies may be granted by the government through the Rural
              Electrification Fund (Fonds d’Electrification Rurale – FER) established by the
              Electricity Ordinance as a special account of the public treasury and not as an
              entity.
In 2000, access to electricity in rural areas was very low. The World Bank estimated that the
rural electrification rate was less than 1 percent.16 The state-owned electricity company,
EDM, was poorly managed and unable to finance expansion of the network to rural areas.17
The importance of developing rural areas through infrastructure building including
“broadening the energy mix, its diversification and its extension to rural areas to the rural
sector? was highlighted by the Framework Letter from the President of Mali to the Prime
Minister, dated 23 October 2002.
In May 2003 AMADER was established18 and a document called “Reference Framework for
the Development of Rural Electrification? (Cadre de Référence pour le Développement de
l’Electrification Rurale - CdR-ER) was prepared by the Government. The CdR-ER sets the
main principles and modalities guiding the implementation of rural electrification programs
by AMADER.
The CdR-ER provides for the granting of authorizations or concessions to operators
through three approaches:
       1. In the top-down approach, eight large concession areas were drawn up (Zones
          d'Electrification Multi-sectorielle – “ZEMs?) and AMADER solicited bids through a
          competitive process. Private operators submitted proposals to AMADER, and were
          to be selected on the basis of lowest tariff.19 The rural electrification fund financed
          feasibility studies in the poorer areas. The ZEMs were originally expected to have a
          potential client base of at least 5,000 clients each.20 The larger size of the top-down
          approach was meant to attract international operators. A map of the eight ZEMs is
          given in Figure 2.6. This map shows that the regions were expected to have 10,000

16   World Bank. Project Appraisal Document: Household Energy and Universal Access (October 6 th 2003).
17   World Bank. Project Appraisal Document: Household Energy and Universal Access (October 6 th 2003).
18   Law n°03 - 0 0 6 dated May 21, 2003 and implementing Decree n° 03 – 226 P-RM dated May 30, 2003.
19   CdR-ER section V and Alassane Agalassou, AMADER (March 17, 2011) ESMAP Knowledge Exchange Forum
20   World Bank, HEURA Mali, Project Appraisal Document,
            clients each. The top-down ZEMs approach was, however, unsuccessful.21 Two
            bidders eventually responded to a tender offer but they fail to conclude concession
            agreements.22 This approach was not pursued because of the government's desire for
            a more rapid approach in agreement with donors.
Figure 2.6: Zones d'Electrification Multi-sectorielle – « ZEMs »




Source: AMADER


       2. The second approach described by the CdR-ER consists of selecting operators for
          mini-grids or grid extensions following calling for expressions of interests and
          selecting candidates on the basis of objective criteria such as the number of clients
          targeted, the tariff and the amount of investment subsidy requested. This approach
          has not been used so far since it was not considered by the Government and donors
          to be fast enough. However, public tenders are now being issued by AMADER as
          part of their program to deploy hybrid solar/diesel generators to established mini-
          grid operators.
       3. In the bottom-up approach, spontaneous project proposals under the “PCASER?
          program (Projets de Candidatures Spontanées d'Electrification Rurale) are selected
          based on private operators’ perceived ability to develop and operate a commercially
          viable project. In accordance with the CdR–ER, investment subsidies of up to 80%

21   World Bank (March 28, 2013) Implementation Completion and Results Report, Mali Household Energy and Universal
     Access Project (Report No ICR2627)
22   AMADER, Interview with Castalia, September 2015.
           of the amount of capital expenditures may be granted through the FER (rural
           electrification fund).
The bottom-up “PCASER? approach remains the primary concession method used by
AMADER and is described in Section 3.
The PCASER approach attracted significant interest from local private sector operators. As
of September 2015, 68 private operators are operating in 215 municipalities and 39 single
village projects are operated by communities.23 These figures include grid extensions projects
and projects within the initial EDM concession perimeter, as well as projects that have been
transferred to or are in the process of being transferred to EDM.
Central Role of AMADER
AMADER plays a central role as the agency responsible for developing household energy
and rural electrification. In this respect, according to the Law establishing the agency,
AMADER: (i) promotes electrification in rural and peri-urban areas, (ii) works with all types
of operators, national and international private, operators, NGOs, decentralized groups,
cooperatives, (iii) provides technical assistance and financial support (investment subsidies),
and (iv) is responsible for managing the Rural Electrification Fund.
AMADER also analyzes subsidy requests and business plans and prepares all the documents
in relation to the granting of authorizations to rural operators by the Minister in charge of
Energy. The agency concludes 15-year “authorization contracts? (which are concession-type
agreements) as well as financing conventions with the operators. As part of its monitoring
rights under the authorization contracts, AMADER authorizes electricity price adjustments
for rural operators. The extent of these latest tasks may appear to go beyond the mission
defined by the Law, which might be adjusted accordingly.
Rights and obligations of Permissionnaires
According to Decree n°00-184/P-RM implementing the Electricity Ordinance, the
beneficiary of an authorization is a “permissionnaire?. Rights and obligations of the
permissionnaire are similar to those of a concessionaire, both benefitting from a delegation of
the public service. The permissionnaire must comply with the same general principles deriving
from the operation of a public service than a concessionaire, as set forth in particular by the
implementing decree of the Electricity Ordinance. The permissionnaire has the right to directly
collect the tariff from users.
While a call for bids in accordance with the procedure determined by the Regulatory
Commission of Electricity and Water (Commission de Régulation de l’Electricité et de l’Eau - CREE),
according to the Electricity ordinance and its implementation Decree, authorizations are granted
upon the application made to the Minister in charge of energy with no obligation of any
competitive process, provided that the applicant is deemed to have the capacity to fulfil its
obligations. In case of several applicants the choice is made on the basis of the same criteria.
Authorization process
The process of granting authorization to an operator may be summarized as follows:
            A private entrepreneur or a community within the municipality concerned obtains
             an opinion from the representative of the municipality on the positive impact of

23   Data supplied by AMADER
                the Project and its consistency with municipality’s development plan existing or
                contemplated;
             The applicant then files an application for a preliminary permit in attaching the
              opinion from the municipality and a project description sheet summary describing
              the scope of the project, its demographic and economic characteristics, the
              intended electrification system and goals. The application contains an undertaking
              to file an application for authorization (in accordance with the Electricity
              Ordinance) including the results of a technical and economic study of the
              electrification project within a six-month period
             After granting the preliminary permit, AMADER must publish its decision. This
              begins a 60-day period during which any other third party candidate can make a
              better proposal to AMADER for the same project. To our knowledge, in the case
              another applicant declares its interest within this 60-day period, there is no formal
              evaluation procedure based on pre-determined criteria. These competing
              applications have been relatively rare. There have been no more than 3 cases
              where another applicant declared is interest in an authorization sought by another
              operator.24
             When the 60-day period has expired, the operator with the preliminary permit is
              the only candidate allowed to submit the final application for obtaining the
              authorization.
             The authorization is granted on the basis of the AMADER’s analysis of the
              business plan submitted by the applicant.
Where the authorization is granted by the Minister on the basis of AMADER’s analysis,
AMADER and the operator enter into the authorization contract and the financing
convention. This procedure appears to be a formality rather than a genuine opportunity for
the Minister to evaluate projects.
World Bank Involvement
In 2003, the World Bank’s Household Energy and Universal Access (HEURA) project
supported Mali’s implementation of a concession approach to rural electrification. This
project included support to develop AMADER, support for “top-down? zonal concessions
and the “bottom-up? PCASER program.25
Many benefits were anticipated by the establishment of the rural electrification approach and
the HEURA project, including:
             Increasing the capacity and the number of staff at AMADER, CREE DNE
              (Direction Nationale de L'Energie), and DNCN (Direction Nationale de la
              Conservation de la Nature)
             Increasing the private operators offering decentralized electricity services from
              two to ten



24   AMADER, Interview with Castalia, September 2015.
25   World Bank. Project Appraisal Document: Household Energy and Universal Access (October 6 th 2003).
             Increasing access to modern energy outside the EDM concession area to: 40,000
              homes, 1,080 enterprises, 125 rural schools and 107 health clinics.26
By 2008, the World Bank HEURA project had performed satisfactorily and succeeded in a
number of areas: 41 electrification projects proposed by local private operators had been
financed; 20 business plans had been selected and were awaiting financing; 36 business plans
were being reviewed to ascertain their technical and financial viability; and 44 business plans
were under development by promoters.27 Connections were extended to 690 public and
community institutions and centers, including 82 schools and 45 health centers. 28 The targets
for the HEURA project, and the expected benefits, grew in 2008 when additional World
Bank financing of US$35.0 million of was secured for the HEURA project.
More recently the World Bank’s Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project (Systemes
Hybrides pour lElectrification Rurale – SHER) is aiming at increasing access to electricity and
electricity production from renewable energy sources. The SHER project is structured
around three main components:
       1) Increasing renewable energy generation capacity in approximately fifty existing rural
          mini-grid power stations currently relying exclusively on diesel generation by
          including hybrid systems (including photovoltaic panels, inverters, batteries, and
          control electronics; this component includes as well extension and densification of
          distribution network;
       2) Expand off-grid lighting and solar lanterns in targeted rural areas through catalyzing
          the markets, and improve energy efficiency and promote a rational and efficient use
          of electricity on targeted mini-grids, and
       3) Project implementation and capacity building.




26   World Bank. Project Appraisal Document: Household Energy and Universal Access (October 6 th 2003).
27   World Bank. Project Paper on Proposed Additional Financing Credit to the Republic of Mali for a Household Energy
     and Universal Access Project (July 31, 2008). pg. 11.
28   World Bank. Project Paper on Proposed Additional Financing Credit to the Republic of Mali for a Household Energy
     and Universal Access Project (July 31, 2008). pg. 11.
3           Mali’s Rural Electrification PCASER Concessions
The PCASER projects in Mali today are operated by a combination of community
organizations, private enterprises, entrepreneurs, and a few international companies.29
According to data received from AMADER, 68 private operators are operating in 215
municipalities and 39 projects are operated by communities, for a total of 254 projects in
operation. Among the private operators only four are operating more than three projects. A
list of projects and operators is given in Schedule 1.
17 operators are operating in more than two municipalities and four of them are operating in
more than 20 municipalities. The four operators who are present in more than 20
municipalities are presented in Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Private Operators with Operations in more than 20 Municipalities
                         Operator                   Number of                 Number of
                                                     Projects                municipalities
                                                                              connected
                         ACCESS                           12                        22
                         KAMA                             15                        31
                         SSD KURAYE                        4                        26
                         SSD YEELEN                        5                        21
                         KOURA
Source: AMADER


AMADER estimates that all the projects listed in Appendix B have connected approximately
78,000 customers to electricity connections.30 This figure includes customers connected to
mini-grids managed by EDM, the state-owned utility.
All projects operated by private operators or communities cover both production and
distribution. Thirteen grid extension projects to be connected to EDM grid have never been
operated by their promoters as a result of the lack of agreement between EDM and the
operators on electricity sale and purchase conditions. A PPA agreement couldn’t be reached.
These grid extensions projects are or will be transferred to EDM, upon the government’s
decision. As a compensation for the transfer, EDM pays to the private operator the portion
of the net book value of the investment in proportion of the financing brought by the
private operator (usually 25 percent).
The localities, where these grid extensions were built and the 36 localities which were initially
within EDM perimeter and will be transferred back to EDM, in applying the same financial
terms as above mentioned, are identified in the list of PCASER projects given in Appendix
B.


29   Interview, World Bank (July 2015)
30   AMADER interview: according to estimates made by operators in their feasibility studies, 75328 households should have
     access to electricity in 2013 and an additional 2,600 in 2014.
3.1        Stages of Development
A timeline showing the major stages of development leading up to the concession is
presented in Table 3.2.
Table 3.2: Stages of Development of Concession




3.2        Operations and Management
The permissionnaires have diverse ranges of skills sets and management capacity. Many are
small and do not have extensive operational or management know-how. However, some are
ambitious and growing their businesses through adding connections or offering alternative
services to their customers. The extent to which international partners involved in operations
and management is generally limited.
Tariffs
The tariffs charged by the private rural operators are significantly above those charged by
EDM. This difference creates "rate envy," angers rural customers, particularly in areas near
the EDM grid. In 2011, the government forced EDM to connect its grid to 7 mini-grids near
the EDM concession area.31 This example shows how 1) mini-grids can be an intermediate
stage for the electrification of communities; and 2) mini-grid operators need to evaluate how
grid electrification might impact their service areas.
The tariff differences have created tension in communities about to be served by rural
operators. In some cases, there has even been violence when new rural operators try to offer
electricity services. In one case, customers became violent and threatened to burn a new
generation unit, thinking that, as a result, they would receive later on the less expensive grid
electricity.

31       EUEI       PDF,       “Mini-Grids       Policy    Toolkit?, 2014,   available  online    at   http://euei-
     pdf.org/sites/default/files/files/field_pblctn_file/RECP_Mini%20Grid%20Policy%20Toolkit-web-
     %28pdf%2C%2014%20MB%2C%20FR%29_0.pdf (accessed October 8th 2015).
3.3         Financing Arrangements
In accordance with the Reference Framework, a subsidy of investment costs is allocated for
up to 80 percent of the amount of the investment. At least 20 percent of the initial capital
investment is provided by the private operator. The amount of the grant depends on the
number of contemplated subscribers, the purchasing power of the population, the rural
electrification technology.
We understand that the 20 percent of the capital is raised from operators’ own funds or
those of local entrepreneurs or partners. There is very little formal bank lending to private
operators.
In practice, AMADER has been financing on average about 75 percent of the investments in
new rural mini-grids, with the operators providing the remaining 25 percent of the
financing32.
Subsidies are currently funded by multilateral and bi-lateral development aid. AMADER
would like to secure the sustainability of rural electrification development through financing
investment subsidies by the payment of a portion of the energy income received by EDM.
The terms and conditions for the payment of the subsidy are defined in a financing
convention signed between the permissionnaire and AMADER acting as manager of the
Rural Electrification Fund. In accordance with this convention:
             The permissionnaire must provide evidence of the existence of its portion of the
              financing within 60 days from the signature of the financing convention and use it
              to invest in the equipment before any disbursement of the subsidy;
             When the financing to be provided by the permissionnaire is disbursed and
              invested a fist payment of 25 percent maximum of the subsidy is paid; other
              payments are made depending on the progress of the works in accordance with
              the time schedule agreed between the permissionnaire and AMADER.
We learned that some entrepreneurs have been inflating their capital investment estimates in
order to receive larger subsidies.
3.4         Contractual Arrangements
Private rural operators are granted an authorization relating to power production with an
installed capacity exceeding 50 kW and up to 250 kW. There is no competitive process.
They receive first a preliminary permit on the basis of an application including a certificate
from the representative of the municipality on the positive impact of the Project, upon
submission of an application to AMADER and undertakes to apply for authorization within
a six month period. The authorization is granted by the Minister on the basis of the
AMADER’s analysis of the business plan submitted by the applicant.
Contracts in practice
When the authorization from the Minister is granted, the applicant and AMADER sign an
“authorization contract? which defines the rights and obligations of the permissionnaire in a
way similar to a concession agreement, including technical specifications attached.

32   World Bank, “Mali: Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project,? November 15th 2013, Project Appraisal Document,
     Report No: PAD688.
It may be noted that AMADER, represented by its chairman, is signing these contracts on its
own name and not on behalf of the Minister in charge of Energy, who delivers the
authorization. It seems that the conclusion of this contract by AMADER on behalf of the
Minister would better correspond to the allocation of powers and provide more legal safety.
The authorization contract is concluded for 15 years. Under the authorization contract the
permissionnaire undertakes to:
              Build out the proposed investment, maintain and renew the equipment;
              Realize inside electrical installation of the subscribers;
              Provide the service during at least seven consecutive hours per day;
              Pay to AMADER a “regulation fee? of 2 percent of turnover.
In the case that an entity obtains a concession contract for an area that includes an area
where an entity operates under an authorization contract, the permissionaire agrees to
negotiate in good faith the terms of surrender of his authorization to the concessionaire. The
payment of financial compensation should cover at least the net book value of the
investment financed by the permissionnaire. This commitment is part of the application file
and of the authorization contract.
Growing from a permissionnaire to a concessionaire
When the installed capacity of a mini-grid grows from below 250 kW to above 250 kW, a
conflict appears between the law and the practice. Under the Electricity Ordinance33, a new
authorization must be requested in the case of any significant increase of the installed
capacity. However, in practice, AMADER allows a permissionnaire exceeding this threshold to
continue to operate under its authorization, in order to avoid the competitive procedure
required for a concession agreement.
The AMADER policy of allowing authorizations to exceed the 250 kW threshold is adopted
pursuant to the Reference Framework (CdR-ER) for the development of rural electrification
prepared by the Government of Mali.34 The CdR-ER policy document (2003) states that “in
the event the capacity of the power plates for a given territory exceeds 250 kW, this territory
can have several authorizations for each village or group of villages?.35 The practice could be
brought into compliance with the law by amending the Ordinance accordingly.36
3.5          Technological Approach
The majority of the Mali’s permissionaires use vertically-integrated mini-grids backed by
diesel-fired generators. Increasingly, hybrid solar/diesel systems are being deployed.



33   Ordinance n°00-019/P-RM dated March 15, 2000 on the reorganization of the electricity sector and implementation
     Decreen°00-184/P-RM dated April 14, 2000.
34   Ministry of Mines, Energy and Water (Mali), “Cadre de Référence pour le Développement de l’Electrification Rurale - CdR-ER?,
     May 2003.
35   Ministry of Mines, Energy and Water (Mali), “Cadre de Référence pour le Développement de l’Electrification Rurale - CdR-ER?,
     May 2003, pg. 5.
36   This policy is adopted pursuant to the reference framework for the development of rural electrification prepared by the
     government but is in contradiction with the Ordinance and would require the Ordinance to be amended accordingly..
Twenty permissionaires built out grid-extension projects, but none were able to agree on
power-purchase agreements with EDM. EDM sees the private operators as competitors. As
a result of a settlement negotiated by the President, EDM was allowed to buy the grid
extension projects from the private operators at around 25 percent of their book value—the
investment cost that was incurred by the private operators. The Government of Mali may
have favored this option under pressure from prospective new clients preferring to become
EDM customers (and pay the EDM tariff) rather than becoming customers of small
operators (and paying a relatively higher tariff).
Other than the grid extension projects, the permissionaires don’t interact with the existing
transmission and generation sectors.
The number of electrified localities broken down by technologies serving them is presented
in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Breakdown of Localities by Type of Energy (2015)
                       Type of Energy                       Number of
                                                             localities
                       Diesel-fired generators                       133
                       Hybrid Solar/Diesel:                           28
                       Biofuel                                        15
                       Grid extension                                 20
                       Multi-functional Platforms (MFP)               42
                       Individual Solar Kits                          15
                       Micro-hydro energy                              1
                       Total                                         254
Source: AMADER



3.6    Regulatory Arrangements
The PCASER projects are regulated by AMADER.
The Electricity Ordinance provides for the principles of tariff regulation. Sales by
concessionaires are subject to regulation by the directives from the national regulator
(Regulatory Commission of Electricity and Water – CREE). On the other hand, sales by
permissonnaires are free. In practice, the prices set by permissionnaires are regulated by
AMADER on the basis of the authorization contract entered into between the permissionnaire
and AMADER. In effect, this is “regulation by contract?.
The law and the contracts allow for the initial tariff to be changed in accordance with a tariff
indexation formula depending on the variation of the fuel prices, the wage index for the
Public Service in Mali, the price index for capital goods in OECD countries. AMADER still
needs to agree to any requested tariff change. Authorization holders initiate the tariff
adjustment by applying to AMADER. However, whether this tariff indexation process has
been implemented as intended is not clear. One concessionaire, KAMA (examined in detail
in Appendix A) applied for a revision of the tariff but never received it.

4           Assessment of Concession
We evaluate Mali’s PCASER concession approach to rural electrification against its targets,
analyze the reasons for the results, and present lessons for future concessions.
4.1         Evaluating Success of Concession
The PCASER concessions succeeded at extending 78,000 connections to rural households.
However, the results of the concession depend on the dimension of success:
4.1.1 Access
At the outset of the concession approach, the Government of Mali had no explicit targets in
terms of number of connections. However, in 2003 the World Bank had a target of 40,000
connections within 5 years from effective date. In 2009, the Government of Mali set an
electrification coverage target of 50 percent by 2015. The people we met with in Bamako
said the target was politically oriented and that few people at the time believed this target to
be achievable.
78,000 rural households have been connected to electricity as a result of the bottom-up
PCASER concession approach.37 To our knowledge, Mali is the best developed case of mini-
grids increasing access at this scale. AMADER shared with us how they arrived at this
estimate. They added the number of connections established during 2013 and 2014 to a
World Bank estimate of 74,787 connections published in March 2013. The 74,787 figure
appears in the Implementation Completion and Results Report (ICR) for the HEURA
project as an estimate for the number of connections on June 30th 2012.38
We estimate that the number of people with electricity connections in their households is
577,200. We arrive at this number by assuming that a household in Mali has 7.4 people, 39
and multiplying that figure by the 78,000 rural households that have access to electricity.
The PCASER approach has quite clearly been a success at extending access to rural
households.
However, this success may not be as high as one might be led to believe by other estimates.
A number of sources estimate the rural electrification rate in Mali to be between 11 percent
and 18 percent.40 These estimates would suggest that between 1.05 million and 1.73 million
rural people have access to electricity in Mali.41


37   AMADER, Interview with Castalia, September 2015.
38   World Bank, “Mali: Household Energy and Universal Access Project,? March 28th 2013, Implementation Completion and
     Results Report (ICR), Report No: ICR2627.
39   We base this assumption on four recent surveys in Mali that reported household sizes from 5.7 to 9.1. From “Do
     Household Definitions Matter in Survey Design? Results from a Randomized Survey Experiment in Mali? by Lori
     Beaman, Northwestern University, June 2011.
40   These sources include the World Bank Open Data bank, the World Bank PADs and ICRs for the most recent Mali
     projects, and people Castalia met in Bamako.
41   Based on a Malian rural population estimate of 9.60 million from World Bank Open Data (2014).
Because the rural electrification rate was nominal in 2003, we find it difficult to explain the
discrepancy between these estimates. The discrepancies could be due to:
       1. Differences in the definition of “rural? vs. “urban?. In many countries,
          government officials had different approaches to defining what areas were
          considered rural.
       2. Differences in the definition of “access?. We believe that these estimates could
          derive from a broad interpretation of “access to electricity?. The 2013 Rural
          Electrification Hybrid System Project Appraisal Document suggests this could be the
          case as it estimates that “1,200,000 people gained access to modern energy services
          through the project (based on a fairly extensive definition of access including some
          populations benefiting from public lighting).?42
       3. Other energy access projects undertaken outside of PCASER. It is possible that
          other actors, such as EDM or off-grid energy services companies could have added
          connections during this time.
4.1.2 Quality of service
AMADER specifies technical standards and a minimum number of hours per day that
electricity must be supplied. However it is not clear how Mali’s rural private operators are
faring against these standards and minimum requirements.
4.1.3 Sustainability
In our assessment, many of the operating concessions are sustainable. They receive no
ongoing donor funding and are able to recover their costs through tariffs. We reviewed the
financials for one of the bigger private rural operators, KAMA. They show that five of its 15
concessions are profitable.
4.1.4 Efficiency
We are not able to assess whether the deployment of diesel-fired mini-grids in Mali was the
‘least-cost’ approach. The deployment of mini-grids in Mali has mostly been the result of
private operator’s decisions about what was viable rather than optimizing techno-economic
outcomes. The majority of the private operators elected to invest in diesel-fired generation
sets.
In theory, an 80 percent capital expenditure subsidy favors technologies such as solar and
hydro that have a higher ratio of upfront capital costs to operations and fuel costs. However,
these technologies have been used in few projects.
4.1.5 Other Impacts
The concessions had a number of reported social and economic impacts in Mali’s rural areas.
For example, over time the need for installing and maintaining generators has led to the
creation of skilled jobs in rural areas. AMADER estimates that around 800 skilled jobs have
been created by rural private operators. There are now training programs specialized in rural
electrification.



42   World Bank, “Mali: Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project,? November 15th 2013, Project Appraisal Document,
     Report No: PAD688, pg. 17.
4.2         Arrangements that Could Have Delivered Better Results
Ex-post, it is difficult to say whether alternative arrangements could have delivered better
results. We identified several short-comings in the approach. Specifically, AMADER may
not be getting the best deal because its procurement process is not very competitive and its
project evaluation process is fairly opaque. There are institutional remedies for these
problems, such as:
             Increasing competition by using calls for election of interests for the PCASER
              projects, instead of spontaneous or unsolicited proposals
             Improving the assessment of business plans by setting clear, objective,
              quantifiable evaluation criteria and using independent experts to assess proposals;
             Strengthening transparency of the process by having the assessment of the
              business plans and recommendation for granting the authorization conducted by
              an independent committee. This committee could, for example, be composed of
              professionals from government or civil society, and chaired by AMADER.
However, we also believe that these institutional changes may have hindered the entire
PCASER process because of the difficulties associated with running competitive tenders.
AMADER’s recent steps to promote hybrid systems43 seek to rectify some of the perceived
shortcomings of PCASER while building on its successes. The new approach seeks to:
             Encourage projects of a larger scale;
             Reduce the unit investment costs;
             Improve the operating performance and capacity of the operators
             Move towards sector consolidation.44
4.3         Reasons for Results
The results of the concession are explained by the following key factors:
             Leveraging local capacity. In the early 2000s, the hope was to attract
              international operators to large concession areas. It’s likely that these larger
              concessions, had they occurred, would have had difficulties dealing with the
              realities of operating in Mali.
             A combined promoter and regulator for rural electricity can be very
              effective. AMADER is powerful and well-resourced relative to rural
              electrification agencies in other countries. As a result, it has been able to institute
              its vision in rural areas.
             National utilities are threatened by competition. EDM is a state-owned
              company but its efforts have undercut rural electrification efforts by AMADER
              and by private operators.


43   Supported by the World Bank Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project.
44   World Bank, “Mali: Rural Electrification Hybrid System Project,? November 15th 2013, Project Appraisal Document,
     Report No: PAD688.
4.4    Replicability of Experience and Success
The concession model used in Mali and its success can be replicated elsewhere. Bottom-up
concessions like those envisaged in PCASER can be quite rapidly deployed and tap local
entrepreneurs quickly. Top-down concessions are slower to implement, require a more
capable rural electrification agency and more institutional support. However, electrification
progress has slowed since the Northern Mali conflict, and it remains to be seen if mini-grids
can form the foundation for a larger electrification roll-out.
4.5    Lessons for Future Concessions
The PCASER projects illustrate lessons for governments considering using a concession
approach to rural electrification:
        A poorly functioning state-owned national utility creates a drag on the
         whole sector and has negative repercussions on rural areas. EDM absorbs
         significant amounts of subsidies and sells power below cost. The difference
         between the EDM tariff and rural tariffs has been the cause of significant
         problems for private rural concessionaires, and the Government has had to
         intervene in several cases to mediate disputes.
        There is a trade-off between project approval speed and good governance.
         AMADER is a central agency with a great deal of responsibility over the rural
         electricity sector. Some people in the sector have bemoaned how much discretion
         AMADER has, and how difficult it can be to understand how they reach their
         decisions, or if they are procuring at “least-cost.? However, imposing technocratic
         requirements of good governance may in fact hamper efforts to build projects
         quickly, albeit imperfectly. Mali’s approach may have benefited from the fact that
         AMADER awards authorizations without requiring up-front competition for each
         authorization.
        Giving formal regulatory authority to the rural electrification agency may
         be the most effective way to implement mini-grid concessions. Mali’s
         success with bottom up development of private mini-grids seems attributable, at
         least in part, to the fact that AMADER performs two roles: it gives grants and
         technical assistance but it also regulates the mini-grids in its authorization and
         grant agreements (through regulation by contract). In contrast, in other countries
         (including for example Senegal), these two functions are performed by two
         different government agencies. This divided regulatory arrangement may make it
         more difficult to manage mini-grid concessions.
        Mini-grids power by diesel-fired generators can be financially sustainable.
         Despite their high unit costs and other shortcomings, diesel-fired generators have
         been a key part of Mali’s rural electrification success. However, whether Mali’s
         mini-grid concessions will be able to recover their long-run costs (including
         replacement equipment), remains to be seen.
        Appendix A: Small Concessionaire Summary – KAMA
        Background and motivation
        KAMA carries on various activities in the energy sector including supply and installation of
        generators, lines and substations.
        Founded in Mali, KAMA has established subsidiaries in Guinea and Ivory Coast.
        In 2006, Mr Mamadou SAKO, KAMA’s CEO, decided to submit a project for producing
        and distributing electricity in four villages (with four 80kW generators) within the town of
        Diakon, his native town, in the Kayes Region.
        Extent of rural electrification operation
        KAMA now operates 16 projects and serves more than 5000 clients in 31 villages located in
        five different regions (mainly in the Kayes Region). See Table A.1.
        Table A.1: KAMA Number of subscribers by type of clients and by project (cumulative
        average) in 2014
                                                                                          Public
              Residential                 Health    Public                    Cult
  Project                    Businesses                        Schools                  Lightening TOTAL
              Customers                   Centers Institutions               Places
                                                                                          Places
Sadiola           1 008           6           3           6           2         6            54        1 085
Keniéba           814             72          2          28           3         7            87        1013
Siribala          713             64          1           5           1         5            53         842
Diafarabé         343             28          1           2           1         3            72         450
Fourou            501             23          1           3           1         1            70         600
Trentoumou         71             3           1           0           1         1            12         89
Kembélé            31             10          1           0           1         1            12         56
Bendougou         131             21          0           1           0         1            14         168
Sibendi           103             0           1           0           0         1            12         117
Diakon             99             0           1           2           1         1            12         116
Sangafé            17             3           1           0           1         1            14         37
Diabadji           58             0           0           0           0         2            40         100
Diataya           123             0           0           0           1         0            40         164
Loulouni          195             4           1           0           0         4            60         264
Sandaré           174             29          1           3           1         3            39         250
Kembé              58             5           0           0           0         1            9          73
TOTAL             4 439          268         15          50          14         38          600        5 424
        Source: KAMA


        None of the projects are connected to EDM network. A project generally includes several
        generators located in several villages.
        Service hours are always beyond the compulsory seven hours per day, as provided for in the
        AMADER specifications. It may be up to 15 hours per day in the largest villages.
All the generators are diesel generators, except for two of them where hybrid
photovoltaic/diesel power plants have been installed. According to KAMA, hybrid
generators do not result in reducing the cost of kW/h due to the higher investment cost.
However, hybrid solutions allow (i) more rapid expansion of access without waiting for a
minimum number of clients, (ii) a more regular service in remedying the lack of diesel supply
and (iii) to stabilize the costs.
Tariffs
Most of the clients are billed on a monthly lump sum basis. Monthly subscriptions vary
depending on the category of service chosen.
Table A.3 shows the average kW/h charge per project in 2014.
KAMA never obtained a revision of the tariff provided for in the Authorization Agreement,
in applying the conditions of revision provided for by the general specifications attached to
the Agreement.
The average rate of collection efficiency established from KAMA data is always above 70
percent, except in two localities where it is below 60 percent. See Table A.2.
Table A.2: KAMA Collection Performance (2014)

                                         Average recovery rate
                           Location
                                                 (%)
                         Sadiola                    91
                         Keniéba                    71
                         Siribala                   72
                         Diafarabé                  85
                         Fourou                     75
                         Sandaré                    80
                         Trentoumou                 73
                         Kembélé                    82
                         Bendougou                  58
                         Sibendi                    81
                         Diakon                     77
                         Kembé                      83
                         Sangafé                    79
                         Diabadji                   59
                         Diataya                    80
                         Loulouni                   78
                         TOTAL                      77


KAMA complains about collection difficulties and is contemplating to invest in systems
allowing prepayments. However, such systems are too expensive compared to the number of
clients in a number of cases.
Financials45
KAMA has in most cases financed its capital expenditures in using the average rate of
subsidy. However in some instances KAMA share of investment financing has been larger.
The following examples of financing the reinforcement of capacities and extension of grids
have been given:
SADIOLA: reinforcement of production capacity and extension of grids
Cost: XOF 754,387,322
KAMA share: XOF 529,387,322 XOF, i.e.: 70.17%
AMADER financing: XOF 225,000,000, i.e.: 29.83%
It seems that such examples of apportionment of the financing are seldom.
SANDARE : reinforcement of production capacity and extension of grids
Cost: XOF 201,797,100
KAMA share: XOF 46,413,333, i.e.: 23%
AMADER financing: XOF 155,383,767 i.e.: 77%
Fuel generally represents more than 80% of operating expenses (excluding depreciations and
provisions). Table 4 attached shows operating expenses, revenues, profit or loss per project.
Only five projects (those with the largest number of clients) show a profit.
Main challenges and problems
The discrepancy between EDM tariff and tariff applied by rural electrification projects is too
big and is difficult to understand by consumers. Kamma had to face violent reactions from
consumers at the occasion of tariff collection.
The lack of profitability of its power generation and distribution activity reduces KAMA’s
capacities to invest in order to reinforce its production capacity or convert power plants into
hybrid systems.
KAMA recognizes AMADER’s role in the quality control, in particular by having the
services rendered controlled by independent surveyors.
However, AMADER’s efficiency has been questioned on two specific topics.
             In one occasion, KAMA received an Authorization to invest in a new project and
              started to disburse its share, while the subsidy could not be supplied since the
              corresponding financing was not anymore available due to the elapse of time.
              According to KAMA, AMADER did not inform them of the risk of unavailability
              of funds and this caused damages to KAMA.
             Another important concern is related to the non-reimbursement of VAT
              applicable to purchase of diesel for the generators. Procedures requested from
              AMADER and custom authorities are so strict and burdensome that KAMA
              never received any reimbursement of VAT, while it should benefit from it. In
              2014, this represents approximatively FCFA 81 millions of VAT paid on 820,000

45   Throughout this study we use the following exchange rate: 1 West African CFA Franc equals 0.001545 US Dollars.
             liters of diesel consumed. KAMA believe that an exemption mechanism should
             be put in place rather than a reimbursement and pointed out that EDM is
             benefitting from such direct exemption.
Table A.3: Average Price, in XOF per kWh (2014)

   Month          FOROU         SADIOLA       KENIEBA        SIRIBALA     DIAFARABE

 January             973           295           278            315            0
 February            715           280           430            300           420
 March               705           247           255            316           458
 April              1 476          273           245            323          1 069
 May                 410           253           230            335           533
 June                 0            262           240            321           550
 July                 0            264           317            415           530
 August               0            285           250            375           440
 September            0            292           260            401           560
 October              0            268           275            233           506
 November             0            255           202            208           493
 December             0            279           270            227           534



   Month         SANDARE      TRENTOMOU       KEMBELE      BENDOUGOU        SIBENDI

 January             484           1 787         1 364          377           491
 February            482           2 122         1 281          437           603
 March               383           1 594         1 102          383           532
 April                0            1 687          779           499           588
 May                 461           1 318          898           577           468
 June                368           1 315         1 262          486           535
 July                444           1 579         1 244          523           698
 August              255           1 587         1 071          345           397
 September           424           1 044         1 195          345           477
 October             546           1 906         1 475          474           539
 November            373           1 686         2 284          364           441
 December            357           816           1 086          366           508
     Month      DIAKON   KEMBE    DIATAYA




     January      490     706       728

    February      486     837       928

     March        342     805       568

      April       464     799       614

      May         398     1 269     794

      June        382     1 016     710

       July       476     991       652

     August       364     986       583

    September     471     1 003     458

     October      385     806       552

    November       0      642       486

    December      484     574        0
Source: KAMA
       Table A.4: Cumulative Operating Expenses and Revenues by Project in XOF (2014)
           Operating expenses
       (excluding depreciation and           Sadiola       Kéniéba         Siribala     Diafarabé
                provisions)
Fuel (Generator)                             142 165 000   210 938 000     41 336 400    20 369 000
Lubricants (Generator)                         2 037 595     1 504 350        885 000       483 800
Consumables                                        6 000         1 000              0             0
Office supplies                                  208 100       134 150        102 050        18 400
Fuel and lubricant (Vehicle)                     421 715       645 550        169 250       119 900
Travels                                                0        20 000          7 500         5 000
Rent and rental expenses                         455 000       690 500         18 500       137 500
Generators maintenance (external services)     5 097 960     4 405 692      2 750 800       562 300
Miscellaneous maintenance                        265 900       663 532         58 975       280 675
Miscellaneous management costs                   840 000       814 300              0             0
Personnel costs                                7 418 109     7 141 568      4 773 732     3 240 000
Miscellaneous expenses                           270 200        88 606              0       169 500
TOTAL Operating expenses                     159 185 579   227 047 248     50 102 207    25 386 075
                      Operating revenues
Sale of energy                               256 260 440   375 024 256     64 783 946    26 402 444
Subscription fees                              1 346 280     1 058 620         90 000       278 600
TOTAL Operating revenues                     257 606 720   376 082 876     64 873 946    26 681 044
               Gross operating profit/loss    98 421 141   149 035 628     14 771 739     1 294 969
           Operating expenses
       (excluding depreciation and           Fourou        Sandaré       Trentoumou     Kembélé
                provisions)
Fuel (Generator)                              26 591 800    16 885 000      3 489 100     2 706 800
Lubricants (Generator)                           225 000       626 147         70 000        65 000
Consumables                                      400 000             0        328 000       132 500
Office supplies                                   16 500        28 000         62 200        23 400
Fuel and lubricant (Vehicle)                      39 735       247 050        178 750       105 850
Travels                                                0       119 500         34 000         5 000
Rent and rental expenses                         160 000        70 000              0       100 000
Generators maintenance (external services)             0       349 000        140 000        45 000
Miscellaneous maintenance                         46 000       250 700        166 850        90 800
Miscellaneous management costs                   111 600       204 300         25 700             0
Personnel costs                                2 520 000     1 786 004        300 000       300 000
Miscellaneous expenses                            15 500       326 400        455 750        82 000
TOTAL Operating expenses                      30 126 135    20 892 101      5 250 350     3 656 350
                      Operating revenues
Sale of energy                                24 387 464    16 772 359      5 685 080      2 237 360
Subscription fees                                614 335       358 000        122 550         41 000
TOTAL Operating revenues                      25 001 799    17 130 359      5 807 630      2 278 360
               Gross operating profit/loss    -5 124 336    -3 761 742        557 280     -1 377 990
           Operating expenses
       (excluding depreciation and           Bendougou      Sibendi       Diakon       Kembé
                provisions)
Fuel (Generator)                               14 320 200    7 462 550     9 515 200     5 405 225
Oil purchase (Generator)                          177 000       68 000        75 000       300 500
Consumables                                         8 000            0             0             0
Office supplies                                     5 000       14 750         5 000         9 000
Fuel and lubricant (Vehicle)                      179 412      165 300        98 800       103 450
Travels                                            15 000       10 000             0         5 000
Generators maintenance (external services)      1 235 750      210 250       187 300       492 000
Miscellaneous maintenance                          54 300       68 850        76 100         7 500
Miscellaneous managment costs                           0            0        52 000             0
Personnel costs                                   480 000      420 000       420 000       420 000
Miscellaneous expenses                          1 620 340       37 300       758 240        17 000
TOTAL Operating expenses                       18 095 002    8 457 000    11 187 640     6 759 675
                      Operating revenues
Sale of energy                                 14 611 470     7 248 838    8 001 550     3 463 003
Subscription fees                                 148 540       127 700                     52 540
TOTAL Operating revenues                       14 760 010     7 376 538    8 001 550     3 515 543
               Gross operating profit/loss     -3 334 992    -1 080 462   -3 186 090    -3 244 132
           Operating expenses
       (excluding depreciation and            Sangafé       Diabadji      Diataya      Loulouni
                provisions)
Fuel (Generator)                                2 233 758    1 076 000     5 243 000    13 649 750
Lubricants (Generator)                             71 000       13 500       372 900       298 000
Consumables                                             0            0             0       143 000
Office supplies                                     4 000            0        11 400         8 575
Fuel and lubricant (Vehicle)                       45 950       12 000        54 100       104 250
Travels                                             8 000            0             0        27 525
Rent and rental expenses                                0            0             0       180 000
Generators maintenance (external services)        102 500       38 000       202 500        55 000
Miscellaneous maintenance                           9 000            0        35 000        43 550
Miscellaneous management costs                          0            0         7 200        13 600
Personnel costs                                   300 000      300 000     1 014 000     1 320 000
Miscellaneous expenses                             14 500       30 000       210 900        76 600
TOTAL Operating expenses                        2 788 708    1 469 500     7 151 000    15 919 850
                      Operating revenues
Sale of energy                                  1 445 540        974500    6 343 070    15 411 029
Subscription fees                                                 67400       25 000       396 400
TOTAL Operating revenues                        1 445 540     1 041 900    6 368 070    15 807 429
               Gross operating profit/loss     -1 343 168      -427 600     -782 930       -112 421
Appendix B: List of PCASER Projects
Table B.1: List of PCASER Projects
 Region       Locality               Operator                     Type of        Projects to
                                                                  energy         be
                                                                                 transferred
                                                                                 to EDM
 1 Kayes      90 Localities
              1. Ambidédikoré        SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel

              2. Awoiny              GTE                          Diesel

              3. Badinko             SOGEP                        Diesel

              4. Batama              GIE KALAOU-MOULINE           Diesel

              5. Bendougou           KAMA                         Diesel

              6. Bongourou           Comité Local-Bongourou       MFP

              7. Diakon              KAMA                         Diesel

              8. Dialaka             SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel


              9. Dialaya             Comité Local-Dialaya         MFP

              10. Diandioumbéra      Comité Local-Diandioumbéra   MFP

              11. Diankounté         KAGNELA                      Diesel

              12. Diataya            KAMA                         Diesel

              13. Diboli             SEF                          Diesel

              14. Diéma              EGB                          Diesel         x
              15. Digokory           MECOF                        Diesel

              16. Dioncoulané        SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel

              17. Diongaga           SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel

              18. Djabadji           KAMA                         Diesel

              19. Djédigui Kassé     KAMA                         Hybrid
                                                                  Diesel/Solar
              20. Djidjan            SOGEP                        Diesel         x
              21. Djoumara           BECI                         Diesel

              22. Dogofiry           SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel

              23. Doualé             KAMA                         Hybrid
                                                                  Diesel/Solar
              24. Dramanekoré        SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel

              25. Gagny              SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel

              26. Gakoura            SSD KURAYE KURUMBA           Diesel
Region   Locality                 Operator             Type of          Projects to
                                                       energy           be
                                                                        transferred
                                                                        to EDM
         27. Gory                 SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         28. Gouméra              BLUE SKY             Diesel

         29. Gourel               GTE                  Diesel

         30. Guindinta            KAMA                 Hybrid
                                                       Diesel/Solar
         31. Kabou                MECOF                Diesel

         32. Kakoulou             GIE DJEYASO          Diesel

         33. Kalaou               GIE KALAOU-MOULINE   Diesel

         34. Kandia               KAMA                 Hybrid
                                                       Diesel/Solar
         35. Kassaro              ESE2                 Biofuel Diesel

         36. Kembé                KAMA                 Diesel

         37. Kembélé              KAMA                 Diesel

         38. Kéniéba              KAMA                 Hybrid           x
                                                       Diesel/Solar
         39. Kersignané           SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         40. Kersignané Kaniaga   SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         41. Kirané               SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         42. Kodié                SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         43. Kokofata             SABOU                Diesel

         44. Koméolou             SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         45. Koniakary            SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel           x
         46. Korokodjo            BMB                  Hybrid
                                                       Diesel/Solar
         47. Kourounidifing       KAMA                 Hybrid
                                                       Diesel/Solar
         48. Kourounikoto         SOGEP                Diesel

         49. Koury                KAMA                 Diesel

         50. Krémis               SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         51. Lakanguémou          SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         52. Lambidou             ABIS DISTRIBUTION    Diesel

         53. Lany                 MECOF                Diesel

         54. Logo sabouciré       GIE DJEYASO          Diesel

         55. Loumbama             KAMA                 Diesel
Region   Locality                Operator             Type of          Projects to
                                                      energy           be
                                                                       transferred
                                                                       to EDM
         56. Loumbougana         GTE                  Diesel

         57. Madina              KAMA                 Hybrid
                                                      Diesel/Solar
         58. Madina              GTE                  Diesel

         59. Maréna Diombougou   SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         60. Mélo                BLUE SKY             Diesel

         61. Mouliné             GIE KALAOU-MOULINE   Diesel

         62. Nomo                BMB                  Hybrid
                                                      Diesel/Solar
         63. Oussoubidiagna      MOHA COM             Diesel

         64. Sadiola             KAMA                 Hybrid           x
                                                      Diesel/Solar
         65. Sagabary            EGEC                 Diesel

         66. Sambaga             SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         67. Sambakanou          SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         68. Sandaré             KAMA                 Diesel

         69. Sangafé             KAMA                 Diesel

         70. Sébékoro            ESE2                 Diesel

         71. Ségala              SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel           x
         72. Sélinkégni          MOHA COM             Diesel

         73. Séro                BLUE SKY             Diesel

         74. Sibendi             KAMA                 Diesel

         75. Sirakoro            EJD                  Diesel

         76. Sobokou             MECOF                Diesel

         77. Somankidy           SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         78. Soroané             MOHA COM             Hybrid
                                                      Diesel/Solar
         79. Tabakoto            ETL                  Diesel

         80. Tambacara           SSD KURAYE KURUMBA   Diesel

         81. Tambaga             ESE2                 Biofuel Diesel

         82. Tigana              MOHA COM             Hybrid
                                                      Diesel/Solar
         83. Toukoto             REXMETAL             Diesel

         84. Trentoumou          KAMA                 Diesel
Region        Locality            Operator                  Type of          Projects to
                                                            energy           be
                                                                             transferred
                                                                             to EDM
              85. Tringa Maréna   SSD KURAYE KURUMBA        Diesel

              86. Troun           Comité Local-Troun        MFP

              87. Troungoumbé     BMB                       Diesel

              88. Yaguiné         SSD KURAYE KURUMBA        Diesel

              89. Yélimané        SSD KURAYE KURUMBA        Diesel           x
              90. Yéréré          BMB                       Hybrid
                                                            Diesel/Solar

2 Koulikoro   43 localities
              1. Baguineda        SGEI                      EDM Grid         Transferred
              2. Daral            DENTAL                    EDM Grid         Transferred
              3. Djalakorodji     GIE YELENBA               EDM Grid         Transferred
              4. Fanafiècoro      DENTAL                    EDM Grid         Transferred
              5. Fanafiècoura     DENTAL                    EDM Grid         Transferred
              6. Kambila          DENTAL                    EDM Grid         Transferred
              7. Kanadjiguila     EOK                       EDM Grid         Transferred
              8. Mamaribougou     EOK                       EDM Grid         Transferred
              9. Ouézindougou     EOK                       EDM Grid         Transferred
              10. Samaya          EOK                       EDM Grid         Transferred
              11. Sanankoroba     ERD                       EDM Grid         Transferred
              12. Tienfala        CATERES                   EDM Grid         Transferred
              13. Banankoro       ERD                       EDM Grid

              14. Bancoumana      ACCESS                    Hybrid
                                                            Diesel/Solar
              15. Dialakoroba     MES                       Biofuel Diesel

              16. Diawanèbougou   DENTAL                    EDM Grid

              17. Didiéni         BECI                      Diesel

              18. Digan           SAFEELEC                  Diesel

              19. Dioliba         EMS                       Biofuel Diesel

              20. Farabougou      Comité Local-Farabougou   MFP

              21. Kafara          SAFEELEC                  Diesel

              22. Kéla            Comité Local-Kéla         MFP

              23. Kerouané        HORONYA                   Diesel
Region      Locality                  Operator                  Type of          Projects to
                                                                energy           be
                                                                                 transferred
                                                                                 to EDM
            24. Kolokani              SBNIF                     Diesel           x
            25. Koloni                ACCESS                    Biofuel Diesel

            26. Korokoro              Comité Local-Korokoro     Diesel

            27. Kourémalé             SPE                       Hybrid
                                                                Diesel/Solar
            28. Madiga Sacko          KAMA                      Diesel

            29. Madina Sacko          AFRIMPEXE                 Diesel

            30. Markacoungo           KNEM                      Diesel

            31. Nara                  EES                       Hybrid
                                                                Diesel/Wind
            32. Naréna                Comité Local-Naréna       MFP

            33. Nionsombougou         MES                       Diesel

            34. N'Tobougou            Comité Local-N'Tobougou   MFP

            35. Sanankoro Djitoumou   SAFEELEC                  Diesel

            36. Siby                  CHARBEL                   Diesel

            37. Simidji               Comité Local-Simidji      MFP

            38. Soninkégni            DENTAL                    EDM Grid

            39. Sougoula              SAFEELEC                  Diesel

            40. Tiendo                Comité Local-Tiendo       MFP

            41. Tigui                 Comité Local-Tigui        MFP

            42. Tinkélé               SAFEELEC                  Diesel

            43. Touba                 HORONYA                   Diesel           x
3 Sikasso   62 localities
            1. Banankoro              KAMA                      Diesel

            2. Baramba                SSD YEELEN KOURA          Individual
                                                                Solar
            3. Blindio                SSD YEELEN KOURA          Individual
                                                                Solar
            4. Bougoula               ACCESS                    Biofuel Diesel

            5. Dembéla                Comité Local-Dembéla      MFP

            6. Denié                  ACCESS                    MFP

            7. Dessina                ACCESS                    MFP


            8. Fanidiama              COGEACOM                  Diesel
Region   Locality                  Operator              Type of          Projects to
                                                         energy           be
                                                                          transferred
                                                                          to EDM
         9. Faragouara             ACCESS                MFP

         10. Finkolo               SSD YEELEN KOURA      Individual
                                                         Solar
         11. Finkolo Ganadougou    ACCESS                Diesel

         12. Foh                   Comité Local-Foh      Biofuel Diesel

         13. Foulalaba             ACCESS                MFP

         14. Fourou                KAMA                  Diesel

         15. Garalo                ACCESS                Biofuel Diesel

         16. Goualala              ACCESS                MFP

         17. Kalana                ERD                   EDM Grid

         18. Karangana             SSD YEELEN KOURA      Individual
                                                         Solar
         19. Kébila                ACCESS                Biofuel Diesel

         20. Kéléya                MES                   Biofuel Diesel

         21. Kerekoumana           ACCESS                MFP

         22. Kifosso               SSD YEELEN KOURA      Individual
                                                         Solar
         23. Kignan                SSD YEELEN KOURA      Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         24. Kléla                 SSD YEELEN KOURA      Individual
                                                         Solar
         25. Kologo                ACCESS                Diesel

         26. Kolondiéba            SSD YEELEN KOURA      Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         27. Konséguéla            SSD YEELEN KOURA      Individual
                                                         Solar
         28. Koualé                Comité Local-Koualé   Biofuel Diesel

         29. Koumantou             SSD YEELEN KOURA      Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         30. Koury                 SSD YEELEN KOURA      Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         31. Lobougoula            EAT                   Diesel

         32. Localités Solaires    SAFEELEC              Individual
                                                         Solar
         33. Loulouni              KAMA                  Diesel

         34. Madina Kouroulamini   ACCESS                MFP

         35. Mafelè                ACCESS                Diesel
Region   Locality             Operator                   Type of          Projects to
                                                         energy           be
                                                                          transferred
                                                                          to EDM
         36. Manankoro        ACCESS                     Biofuel Diesel

         37. Masssigui        ACCESS                     Diesel

         38. Missirikoro      Comité Local-Missirikoro   Biofuel Diesel

         39. Molobala         SSD YEELEN KOURA           Individual
                                                         Solar
         40. M’Pessoba        SSD YEELEN KOURA           Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         41. Nampasso         Comité Local-Nampasso      Biofuel Diesel

         42. N’Goko           COGEACOM                   Diesel

         43. Niaradougou      Comité Local-Niaradougou   MFP

         44. Niena            SSD YEELEN KOURA           Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         45. Ouassada         Comité Local-Ouassada      MFP

         46. Ouré             Comité Local-Ouré          MFP

         47. Ouré             ACCESS                     Hybrid
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         48. Ourikila         SSD YEELEN KOURA           Hybrid
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         49. Samogossoni      Comité Local-Samogossoni   MFP

         50. Sansana          SSD YEELEN KOURA           Individual
                                                         Solar
         51. Sanso            SSD YEELEN KOURA           Individual
                                                         Solar
         52. Sekorolé         ACCESS                     MFP

         53. Sido             Comité Local-Sido          Biofuel Diesel

         54. Sincina          SSD YEELEN KOURA           Individual
                                                         Solar
         55. Sirakorobougou   KAMA                       Hydroelectric

         56. Sotien           Comité Local-Sotien        MFP

         57. Yangasso         DJENNE PROXIMITE           Diesel

         58. Yiridougou       ACCESS                     MFP

         59. Yorobougoula     ELECTRIMAX                 Diesel

         60. Yorontiéla       ACCESS                     MFP

         61. Yorosso          SSD YEELEN KOURA           Hybrid           x
                                                         Diesel/Solar
         62. Zantiébougou     ACCESS                     Hybrid
                                                         Diesel/Solar
Region    Locality         Operator                  Type of        Projects to
                                                     energy         be
                                                                    transferred
                                                                    to EDM
4 Ségou   18 localities
          1. Barouéli      CTEXCEI-GNETA             Diesel         x
          2. Bla           SSD YEELEN KOURA          Diesel         x
          3. Boidié        GIE FITINE                Diesel

          4. Cinzana       SDD                       Diesel

          5. Dioro         EPRODED                   Diesel         x
          6. Dougoukouna   SDD                       Diesel

          7. Farakala      Comité Local-Farakala     MFP

          8. Kamba         GIE FITINE                Diesel

          9. Kimparana     SSD YEELEN KOURA          Hybrid         x
                                                     Diesel/Solar
          10. Kokry        GIE BEESAGO               Diesel

          11. Kondogola    Comité Local-Kondogola    MFP

          12. Konobougou   GTE                       EDM Grid       Transferred
          13. Sékoro       SDD                       Individual
                                                     Solar
          14. Siribala     KAMA                      Diesel

          15. Sokolo       EENTGEC                   Diesel         x
          16. Tènè         FASO TRAVAUX              Diesel

          17. Ténéni       SEECO                     Hybrid
                                                     Diesel/Solar
          18. Touna        EJD                       Diesel

5 Mopti   18 localities
          1. Bankass       SEB                       Diesel         x
          2. Baye          Comité Local-Baye         MFP

          3. Boni          EGI                       Diesel

          4. Dia           SEER                      Diesel         x
          5. Diafarabé     KAMA                      Diesel         x
          6. Dinangourou   KAMA                      Diesel         x
          7. Diondjory     GIE BELDEHORE             Diesel

          8. Douary        KAMA                      Diesel

          9. Gangafani     KAMA                      Diesel

          10. Hamdallaye   Comité Local-Hamdallaye   MFP
Region       Locality          Operator                   Type of        Projects to
                                                          energy         be
                                                                         transferred
                                                                         to EDM
             11. Irébane       Comité Local-Irébane       MFP

             12. Konna         GES                        Diesel         x
             13. Korientzé     HAOUKOUNA                  Diesel

             14. Koro          SEK                        Diesel         x
             15. Nouh Peul     Comité Local-Nouh Peul     MFP

             16. Sofara        SPGE                       Diesel         x
             17. Téninkou      MOYERE SB                  Diesel         x
             18. Yerendourou   KAMA                       Diesel

6            14 localities
Tombouctou
             1. Almoustrat     Comité Local-Almoustrat    MFP

             2. Atta           Comité Local-Atta          Individual
                                                          Solar
             3. Bintagoungou   Mairie Bintagoungou        Diesel

             4. Douékiré       EMC                        Diesel

             5. Essouk         Comité Local-Essouk        MFP

             6. Gossi          GOURMA CONSTRUCTION        Diesel

             7. Guindigata     Comité Local-Guindigata    MFP

             8. Léré           ENORD                      Diesel

             9. M'Bouna        ALBARKA YERKOYE            Diesel

             10. Meykoré       EMC                        Diesel

             11. Tin Tellout   Comité Local-Tin Tellout   MFP

             12. Tonka         Mairie Tonka               Diesel         x
             13. Toukabangou   Comité Local-Toukabangou   MFP

             14. Yourmi        Comité Local-Yourmi        MFP

7 Gao        9 localities
             1. Ansongo        TILGAZ                     Hybrid         x
                                                          Diesel/Solar
             2. Bagoundjé      SGE                        EDM Grid

             3. Bavaria        SGE                        EDM Grid

             4. Bentia         Comité Local-Bentia        MFP

             5. Bourem         TILGAZ                     Diesel         x
             6. Gounzoureye    SGE                        EDM Grid
 Region          Locality                Operator                       Type of   Projects to
                                                                        energy    be
                                                                                  transferred
                                                                                  to EDM
                 7. Labézanga            Comité Local-Labézanga         MFP

                 8. Menaka               TILGAZ                         Diesel    x
                 9. Ouatagouna           Comité Local-Ouatagouna        MFP



Source: AMADER and EDM interview (on projects to be transferred back)
