IN THE C4C ZONE:
Outcomes from the Connect4Climate Digital Media Zone during
the World Bank Group Law, Justice and Development Week 2016
World Bank Group.                                            REPORT AUTHORS
All rights reserved.
                                                             Lucia Grenna
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank        Francis James Dobbs
Group.                                                       Giulia Parzani
                                                             Max Thabiso Edkins
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed
in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of the
World Bank Group, its Board of Executive Directors, or
the governments they represent.

Because the World Bank Group encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be
­
reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial
­
purposes as long as full attributon to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary
                  addressed to Connect4Climate, World
rights, should be ­
Bank Group,
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA,
Email: connect4climate@worldbank.org
INDEX
2   CONNECT4CLIMATE: WHO WE ARE
    CONNECT4CLIMATE’S CORE ADVOCACY ACTIVITIES
    ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

6   ABOUT
    C4C ZONE VISION

10 “STORIES & SOLUTIONS” - DAY 1 AT C4CZONE
    OPENING CEREMONY
    DAY1 AT C4CZONE
    “BEFORE THE FLOOD” SPECIAL SCREENING

22 “PRICELESS” - DAY 2 AT C4CZONE

30 “LEADING FOR SOLUTIONS” - DAY 3 AT C4CZONE

38 “POLICIES TOWARDS SOLUTIONS” - DAY 4 AT C4CZONE

46 YOUTH VOICES

50 TAKE AWAY
Photo Credit: Kaia Rose
                                                                        2




CONNECT4CLIMATE:
WHO WE ARE
     Connect4Climate is a World Bank Group program aimed
     at raising global awareness about climate change and
     ­
     inspiring climate action. The World Bank Group, the ­    Italian
     ­Ministry of Environment and the Global Environment ­Facility
      (GEF) founded the global partnership program in 2011.
      The ­objectives of Connect4Climate involve ­  connecting with
      existing climate initiatives and activities and amplifying the
      ­
      global dialog on climate change. This helps advance the
      global climate movement, generates innovative ­    solutions,
      brings together thought leaders on climate change, and
      enables new audiences to be inspired.
      ­

     Connect4Climate          fosters    connections      between
     organizations to create strong, active networks. The
     ­
     leaders of this ­
     ­               initiative believe strongly in the creation of
     what can be called “creative coalitions”, which unites many
     ­
     stakeholders in acting toward their common goal.

     Above all, the initiative seeks to reach new, untapped
     audiences who may never have heard about climate
     ­
     change. A primary target audience for engagement is
     young ­ people, who are powerful agents of social change
     and whose creativity and energy are needed to strengthen
     the climate action movement.

     Through all these efforts, Connect4Climate aims to ­  create
     the social currency and political capital that will result in
     effective and enforceable policies for climate change
     ­
     mitigation and adaptation at the highest governmental
     ­
     ­levels.
                                                    Connect4Climate, World Bank Group, presenting
                 Max Edkins, Climate Change Expert, ­
                                                                       ­ creening of “Before the Flood”
                                        the young activists before the s
                                                                              Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi


    CONNECT4CLIMATE’S
    CORE ADVOCACY
    ACTIVITIES
                           Communicating about climate change and sharing
                           knowledge on the science of climate change, the need for
                           ­
                           behavioral changes to protect the environment and mitigate
                           climate change, and the threat posed by climate change to
                           the Bank’s primary mission of ending extreme poverty and
                           promoting shared prosperity;
                           Providing access to research and educating the public on
                           ­sustainability, carbon footprints, and water ­consumption, with
                                                                               automotive,
                            particular attention to the areas of energy, food, ­
                            fashion, film, tourism, sports, and urban environments;

                           Advocating for urgent action in mitigating climate change
                           and building resilience by individuals, communities, local
                           ­governments, private sector, and senior national ­government
                            policy makers;

                                                                           audiences,
                           Establishing creative partnerships to reach new ­
                           ­aggregate and disseminate climate knowledge and ­advocate
                            for climate solutions.
3
                                                                                        4
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
                     Connect4Climate thanks all the speakers and moderators for
                     their powerful and insightful messages:
                     • Alan Miller                   • Marco Nicoli
                     • Berenice Hernandez Toro       • Margareta Norris Harrit
                     • Charles Di Leva               • Mark Christian ­Sigrist
                     • Christopher Head              • Natalia Agapitova
                     • Enzo M. Le Fevre Cervini      • Nelson Cabrera
                     • Flavia Rosembuj               • Patricia J. Beneke
                     • James Close                   • Paul Pretitore
                     • Joe Khirallah                 • Pierre Viaud
                     • Joe Romm                      • Quentin Wodon
                     • Justine Sullivan              • Scott Cantor
                     • Kaia Rose                     • Sheila Redzepi
                     • Leandro Azevedo               • Siobhan ­McInerney-Lankford
                     • Mafalda Duarte                • Stephen Hammer
                     • Marco Musumeci                • Tazeen Hasan
                                                     • Tom Kerr



CONNECT4CLIMATE
ALSO EXTENDS A       The students and young activists Victoria Barrett, Paola
SPECIAL THANKS TO:   ­
                     Hernandez and Brian McDermott of Alliance for Climate
                     Education ­
                     ­         accompanied by Sunni Tang.

                     Colleagues Marco Nicoli, Georgina Weise, Dolie Schein,
                     Viktoria Khaitina and the Legal Team.
                     ­

                                                                             Moyer
                     Colleagues Martin Hall, Lesley Wilson, Julie Simonne De ­
                     and the Climate Investment Funds Team.

                     Colleagues Bolomaa Enkhbat, Isabel Hagbrink, Caroline
                                 Isabel Arango, Gerardo Spatuzzi, Joana Lopes,
                     Downes Ott, ­
                               Mealey, Nicholas Keyes and the Global Climate
                     Elisabeth ­
                     Change Team.

                     Connect4Climate’s team is acknowledged for organizing the
                                                                            members:­
                     event, with special thanks given to the following team ­
                     • Alyssia Campbell              • Lucia Grenna
                     • Barbara Gomez                 • Max Bartoli
                     • Francis Dobbs                 • Max Edkins
                     • Giulia Parzani                • Natalia Vega Berry
                     • Jared Marzzocchi              • Paula Da Silva
                                                                             6




ABOUT
        The Connect4Climate Digital Media Zone (C4C Zone) was a
        3 day-long initiative powered by Connect4Climate—the World
        Bank Group’s global partnership program dedicated to ­ climate
        change and advocacy— to accompany the Law, Justice and
        ­
        Development Week 2016, organized by the World Bank’s
        Legal Vice P­ residency, and the Climate Investment Funds
        Semi-Annual Meetings, ­
        ­                         hosted by the ­ Climate Investment
                                            ­ eadquarters of the World
        Funds. The events took place at the H
        Bank between December 5 and ­   December 9, 2016.

        The Law, Justice and Development (LJD) Week is the only event
        of its kind, bringing together the global community e    ­ ngaged
        in using law and legal tools to contribute to ­  development. It
           organized by the legal functions of the World Bank Group,
        is ­
        in collaboration with partners of the Global Forum on Law,
        Justice and Development and other international finance,
        ­
        knowledge and innovation actors. The 2016 edition drew over
        1,000 ­participants including legal experts, stakeholders, ­policy
        makers and private sector representatives and convened a
        ­
        broad community of development professionals who use law
        and justice tools to battle poverty and boost shared prosperity.
        In parallel, the semi-annual meetings for the Climate ­Investment
        Fund (CIF) hosted a variety of climate experts and ­ government
        representatives from all over the world to discuss climate
        finance and its ties to environmental policy.
        ­

        The C4C Zone offered an interactive media hub and gathering
        space for the main conference attendees, as well as students,
        NGOs and private sector representatives to discuss and delve
                    covered during both LJD Week and CIF meetings. ­
        into topics ­
        Climate ­ action, implemented in particular through a legal and
        youth lens, was the overarching narrative for the C4C Zone
        throughout the week. The program emphasized the importance
        and urgency of ­         action to protect future generations and
                         climate ­
        the fundamental role toda­ y’s youth can play in the fight against
        climate change. ­
    Opening day of Connect4Climate Digital Media Zone at the World Bank, in parallel to Law,
                 Justice & Development Week and Climate Investment Funds annual meeting
                                                                     Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel




               Evening events ­ presented large projections and ­  inspirational
                          engage the World Bank ­
               visuals to ­                            audience and partners.
               Film4Climate Global ­
               ­                      Video C ­ompetition ­  winners, National
               Geographic’s “Before the Flood” fea­
               ­                                     turing Leonardo ­DiCaprio
               and the TV documentary series “Years of Living ­  Dangerously”
                                   featuring Nikki Reed and Aasif Mandvi were
               episode “Priceless” ­
               screened and ­discussed by experts and influencers.

               The C4C zone offered a diverse program featuring ­         panel
               ­
               discussions, presentations, town halls, and short-15 ­  minutes
               interventions. The ultimate goal of the C4C zone was to ­
               ­                                                         deliver
               a message to a ­                          masses and ­
                               wider audience, influence ­            stimulate
               youth engagement to implement ­   climate solutions, and to align
               the proceedings with the LJD Week Program­and ­         highlight
               CIF ­experiences and expertise. The C4C Zone facilitated the
               interaction and engagement between the high-level policy
               ­
               discussions and relevant mainstream media, opening up the
               ­
               dialog to a broader audience and building on live multi-media
               and social media engagement.

               As the first Media Zone organized within the World Bank
               the C4C Zone engaged World Bank experts, world ­    leaders
               and conference attendees as well as civil society and youth
               ­representatives.
7
                                                                                                    8
                             The C4C zone was well ­        attended by ­   students from local
                             ­
                             universities ­including Stevens U  ­ niversity, NYU – Washington
                             and ­ University of ­Maryland. The C4C Zone l      ­everaged social
                             media ­ audiences by ­  offering a F ­ acebook Livestream on all
                                 sessions, which was watched by more than 1,500 people,
                             the ­
                             reaching close to 15 thousand people. The Twitter engagement
                             and ­interaction among attendees using the hashtag #C4CZone
                             reached 33 million impressions and more than a thousand
                             retweets, resulting in the #C4CZone hashtag to trend on Twitter
                             during the first day.


     C4C ZONE VISION
                             With roughly 1000 legal specialists, climate experts and ­ policy
                             ­
                             makers from all over the world in attendance, the C4C Zone
                             presented an ideal opportunity for experts from ­
                             ­                                                different fields
                             and various backgrounds to interact and share their ­experiences
                             and expertise.

                             In addition, thanks to a high participation of student from all over
                             the country, the event offered the possibility to young ­  activists
                             to share their experiences, and interact and ­   engage with those
                             advancing climate action.




7
Archim Steiner at the opening of Law, Justice and Development Week 2016
Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel
                                                                                10




”STORIES & SOLUTIONS”
DAY 1 AT C4C ZONE
OPENING
­CEREMONY
            The theme for the whole week of the event was Law, ­     Climate
            Change and Development. The conjunct ­    opening event ­ started
            strong with an inaugural session from the President of the World
            Bank Group, Jim Yong Kim, on stage with ­    Anne-Marie ­  Leroy
            ­(Senior Vice President and World Bank Group G­ eneral Council),
             Laura Tuck (World Bank Group Vice President for ­
             ­                                                  Sustainable
             ­
             Development), the keynote speaker Achim Steiner (former
             Executive Director of ­
             ­                                    Environment Programme
                                   United Nations ­
             - UNEP -, Director of Oxford Martin School), Mafalda D   ­ uarte
             (Head of the ­Climate ­ Investment Funds) and ­        Redzepi
                                                             Sheila ­
             (World Bank Group Vice President for ­ External and Corporate
             ­          accompanied by the Alliance for C
             Relations) ­                                ­ limate Education
             (ACE) ­student members Victoria Barrett, Paola ­Hernandez and
             Brian McDermott.

                                                                    current
            In addition to emphasising the historical importance of ­
            decisions with regard to implementing climate action, the
            ­
            ­speakers focused on their takeaways from the UNFCCC COP22
             meetings, which took place in Marrakech, Morocco. During the
             opening ceremony Jim Yong Kim emphasized that we need


                      “to build strategical climate
                considerations into everything we do in
                 the development world … One hundred
                million people could fall into poverty if
                    we don’t build resilient systems.”
                     World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim at the opening of
                                     Law, Justice and Development Week 2016
                                                        Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel

     In closing he underlined:
        “Every country in the world now has a
        plan for how to reduce carbon. We have
                got to make it happen. “
            keynote address, Achim Steiner restated the ­
     In his ­                                              fundamental
     importance of the Paris Agreement on Climate Change,
     ­
     highlighting that ­
     ­                 jurisprudence and the judicial systems around
     the world are increasingly ­   becoming a central part of the
     ­
     climate change ­ discourse, as they regulate how c­ limate change
        addressed. Focusing more on his takeaways from COP22,
     is ­
     Steiner ­explained how the role of the leadership powers in-
     volved in the signing process is changing. He emphasized the
                                            climate change front.
     greater responsibility of China on the ­

     Steiner also pointed out that the focus for climate action is
     moving to the national level, where real decisions will be taken.
     ­
     With profound words he announced that climate change is a
     collective challenge that needs to be addressed by everyone:

        “If we don’t succeed collectively taking
         the Paris Agreement forward we will
11                    all be losers.”
                                                                                                       12

                                   Laura Tuck also highlighted the importance of the Paris
                                   Agreement and moving forward:
                                   ­

                                     “Now that a global agreement is in place
                                       we need to start implementing it to
                                                create a change.”

                                   She also talked about the need to de-risk investments and
                                   ­
                                   lower the cost of capital and finance for renewable ­     energy.
                                   Tuck explained that in April, the World Bank Group agreed
                                   on a ­Climate Action Plan that has committed them to ­   building
                                   climate ­
                                   ­        considerations into all aspects of the World Bank Group
                                   operations. The World Bank Group laid out a number of goals
                                   ­
                                      high-impact areas and is,
                                   in ­

                                              “[…] really committed to help
                                          clients shape their national policies,
                                            development plans, budgets and
                                            investment programs, as well as
                                           committed to leveraging a lot more
                                           private financing into the process.”




Laura Tuck, World Bank Group Vice President for Sustainable Development ­
                                                                        at the opening of Law,
Justice and D
­           ­ evelopment Week 2016
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
                                                                    ­ orporate R
     Sheila Redzepi - Vice President, World Bank Group External and C                     introduced Paola
                                                                               ­ elations ­
                Hernandez, Victoria Barrett and Brian McDermott from the Alliance for C ­ limate Education
                                                                                   Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel


                           Mafalda Duarte took the stage to explain the work of the
                           ­
                           Climate Investment Funds (CIF). The CIF portfolio is one of the
                                                                        renewable energy
                           first of its kind and focuses investments on ­
                           and ­ resilience. Examples include concentrated ­solar power in
                           Morocco to geothermal in various countries. The $8.3 billion
                           ­
                           CIF is providing 72 developing and middle income countries
                           with urgently ­  needed resources to manage the challenges of
                           climate change and ­    reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.
                           Since 2008, the CIF has been leading efforts to empower trans-
                           formations in the energy, climate resilience, transport and for-
                           estry sectors.

                           The C4C Zone was introduced during the LDJ opening ­ceremony
                           by Sheila Redzepi, who emphasized:

                                    “How do we translate incredibly
                                   complex and sometimes daunting
                                  information so that there is enough
                                momentum and enough desire to want
                               to contribute among the general public?
                               To try and do this today we are going to
                                be presenting the Digital Media Zone.”
13
                                                                                                    14
                              Victoria Barrett, Paola Hernandez and Brian McDermott
                              accompanied Sheila Redzepi on stage. They are young climate
                              ­
                                                             Alliance for Climate Education
                              activists and fellows with the ­
                                                    organization that ­
                              (ACE), the non-profit ­                 educates young people
                              on the science of climate change and ­  empowers them to take
                              action.

                                 “I am here this week to show how young
                                  people and all our allies are using the
                                     legal system to drive swift climate
                                                  action.”


     DAY1 at C4CZONE

                              At the inaugural session of the C4C Zone, the ACE ­        student
                              ­activists Victoria Barrett, Paola Hernandez and Brian ­McDermott
                               joined Achim Steiner to discuss the power that young people
                               have in the fight against climate change. The students ­described
                               how they were partnering on a ­     campaign to put pressure on
                               President Obama to use his executive power to positively
                               impact the youth-led climate lawsuit b
                               ­                                      ­ eing brought against him,
                               the Federal government, and the fossil fuel industry.




13
Justine Sullivan from UN Foundation presenting “Earth To Marrakech”
Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi
     Nelson Cabrera, Film Director, Cherry Sunday Media on “The Art and Impact of­
                                               Storytelling as a Tool for Advocacy”
                                                          Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi


     This session was followed by a conversation held between
     Justine Sullivan (UN Foundation) and Max Edkins r
     ­                                                    ­epresenting
     ­Connect4Climate on the launch and impact of Earth To M­ arrakesh,
      the global movement to raise the volume and ­  profile of the dis-
                                    facilitated by UN ­
      cussion around climate action ­                 Foundation and
      GOOD magazine.

        “Earth To Marrakesh serves to continue
         momentum of following through with
                the Paris Agreement.”

      She ­explained that people tend to get tuned out after the birth
             movement so it was a bigger challenge to keep people
      of the ­
      engaged and at the forefront of the movement than Earth To
      ­
      Paris.

      Nelson Cabrera (Film Director, Cherry Sundae Media) and Max
      Edkins continued the conversation thread, e  ­mphasizing the
                                                         encourage
      use of creativity and how media and filmmaking can ­
      people to take up the environmental and climate cause to help
      achieve the sustainable ­development goals.

15
                                                                                                       16
                                   ­       showcased his experience linking advertising and
                                   Cabrera ­
                                   s
                                   ­ ustainable action through the edible six-pack beer packaging
                                   rings to help protect marine life from consuming life threatening
                                   plastic rings produced by ­Saltwater Brewery.

                                   The following session hosted a debate about ­   Perspective on
                                   ­
                                   Climate Change Policy with Stephen Hammer (       ­Manager of
                                   the Climate Policy VP at the World Bank Group) and ­   Patricia
                                   Beneke ­ (Director and Regional Representative of UNEP,
                                   North ­America). The discussion raised a number of key ­ policy
                                   questions, in ­
                                   ­             particular ensuring that climate change ­policies
                                   are not discriminating against vulnerable ­communities, ­ often
                                      low-income countries. Beneke mentioned that during the
                                   in ­
                                   ­
                                   creation of the Sustainable Development ­   Agenda there is a
                                   need to see progress on social and environmental ­   indicators
                                   and not only economic measures.

                                   Stephen Hammer emphasized the need to implement climate
                                   ­action:

                                       “Paris was just the beginning. We have
                                        been very focused this year on how to
                                         implement the Paris Agreement and
                                              where we go from here.”




Discussion with Stephen Hammer - Manager, Climate Policy, World Bank Group and P  ­ atricia J. Beneke -
Director and Regional Representative of UNEP “Perspective on Climate Change Policy”. M
­                                                                                    ­ oderated by Tom Erb,
“Put a Price On it” Campaign
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
                                                                                        14




     Stephen Hammer - Manager of the Climate Policy at the World Bank Group talking about
                                                   “Perspective on Climate Change Policy”
                                                                 Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi




              The Climate Policy discussion shifted to the role of ­ today’s
              younger generation in the movement to address climate change,
                                                           ­ arbon pricing to
              and ended with what it might take for global c
              emerge.

              Patricia Beneke explained that carbon pricing is only one tool in
              the toolbox, and for a holistic ­climate solution “a ­global ­reshaping
                     energy ­
              of our ­       economies around the world” will be required.

              Stephen Hammer agreed with Beneke and added the need to
              leverage the private sector for climate action. He ­
              ­                                                  emphasized
              that it is possible to reduce emissions at the same time as
              growing economic output, presenting Shenzhen, China, as an
              ­
              example.

              The Carbon pricing topic was explored further by ­   Thomas
              Kerr (Lead Climate Policy Officer at the World Bank Group’s
              International Finance Cooperation) later in the day when he
              ­
              delivered his Climate Talk “What is Carbon Pricing”.
              ­




17
                                                                                                      18

                                   Kerr highlighted that:


                                      “Carbon pricing is an elegant simple
                                      solution that achieves environmental
                                        targets while generating a pool of
                                     money that can be used in the political
                                    discussion about how it can help us make
                                     that shift to pricing carbon on a global
                                                       level.”
                                   Kerr emphasized that putting a price on carbon can drive
                                   innovation and change consumer and business ­
                                   ­                                                behavior, and
                                   furthermore drive investment in new solutions and ­   business
                                   models. Film4Climate winner Kaia Rose joined the session
                                   by screening her winning video “Climate ­  Countdown: ­ Carbon
                                   Pricing”, sharing her personal ­
                                   ­                              perspectives from the ­UNFCCC
                                   COP21 meetings, and e   ­ ncouraging greater support for putting
                                   a price on carbon.




                                             ­ nternational Finance
Tom Kerr - Principal Climate Policy Officer, I
Corporation (IFC), Climate Change Group, presenting “What is Carbon Pricing?”
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
                          Multi-sreening projection of “Before the Flood” featuring Leonardo DiCaprio
                                                                                Photo Credit: Kaia Rose




     “BEFORE THE FLOOD”
     SPECIAL ­SCREENING

                          The first day of the Law, Justice and Development Week
                          closed off with a multi-screen projection of key scenes from
                          Fisher Stevens’ documentary “Before the Flood” ­       featuring
                          Leonardo DiCaprio. “Before the Flood” sees ­ DiCaprio going to
                                                                    devastating impacts
                          every corner of the globe to document the ­
                          of climate change and ­                      ability to reverse
                                                  questions humanity’s ­
                          what may be the most ­              problem mankind has ever
                                                 catastrophic ­
                          faced.

                          The evening witnessed a huge turnout and featured a
                          ­
                          pre-screening discussion with ACE student activists f ­acilitated
                          by Max Edkins. The youth activists brought a p          story to
                                                                        ­ ersonal ­
                          what is being dubbed ‘The Case of the Century.’ ­  Twenty-one
                          young people are suing the Federal Government for ­        ­ ilure
                                                                                    fa
                          to protect the future from climate change and ­        violating
                          our ­                               liberty and property. The
                               constitutional rights to life, ­
                          inter-generational nature of climate change impact certainly
                          ­
                          needs to be explored in detail through legal actions.
19
Multi-sreening projection of “Before the Flood” featuring Leonardo DiCaprio
Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi and Kaia Rose
                                                                         22




“PRICELESS”
DAY 2 AT C4C ZONE
       The second day of the C4C Zone was entirely ­dedicated to the
       screening of “Priceless”, an episode from the second season
       of the TV documentary series “Years Of Living Dangerously”.

       The episode featured Nikki Reed exploring the campaign to
       put a price on carbon and Aasif Mandvi investigating the threat
       climate change poses to endangered species.

       The screening was introduced by a panel of climate change
                                                             climate
       experts who discussed carbon pricing as a solution to ­
       change. Speakers included Tom Erb (Put a Price On It),
       Joe Romm (Founding Editor of Climate ­   Progress, National
       Geographic), Kaia Rose (Film4Climate Winner), and James
       ­
       Close (Director of the Climate Change Group at the World
       Bank Group).

       Thomas Kerr (Lead Climate Policy Officer at the World Bank
       Group’s IFC and head of the Carbon Pricing Leadership
       Coalition) moderated the discussion by focusing on ­
       ­                                                   carbon
       pricing as a tool to mitigate climate change.
                                                                                   ­ eadership
     A Carbon Pricing Panel discussion moderated by Tom Kerr, Head, Carbon Pricing L
                                         Coalition supports the Put a #PriceOncarbon campaign
                                         ­
                                                                Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins




                   Introducing the topic, Tom Kerr presented today’s challenge
                   as,

                          “increasing the coverage of pricing
                             expanding the use of pricing.”


                    He then set the precursor to the discussion by explaining that


                        “there is a need for a communication
                                             ­ omentum into a
                       strategy to turn this m
                                     movement.”

                    The climate change ­ experts on stage were asked to explain
                    the elements of turning the carbon pricing momentum into a
                    revolution.



23
                                                                                                       24

                                   James Close emphasized that we will also see carbon markets
                                   developing that really enable us to significantly reduce the cost
                                   of the implementation of the climate action plans of countries.

                                   He underlined that:


                                          “It is not just putting a price on
                                      carbon, but linking it to science based
                                      targets, and also get a good sense that
                                       policymakers are committed to this –
                                      they see the benefits of the uses of this
                                      income to deploy in ways that support
                                       public finances or enable investments
                                       in research and development in clean
                                                     technology.”




19
James Close, Director of the Climate Change Group at the World Bank Group discussing ­
on Carbon Pricing
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
     Kaia de Rose, Film4Climate Winner, discussing the advantages of Carbon Pricing
                                                           Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi




       Kaia Rose, Film4Climate winner for the carbon pricing
       ­
       category, described the approach making her winning video
             Carbon Pricing:
       about ­


              “My goal was to explain in a really
             unintimidating light and in an easy,
            conversational, informal way mainly
            to get more young people involved…it
            really resonates with young people. It
             is about transforming our economy.”



       Building on the Film4Climate video shown by Kaia Rose’s film,
       Tom Erb, the organizer for the Put a Price On It Campaign,
       highlighted that young people are optimistic about climate
       ­action:


25
                                                                                                26

                                         “With Years of Living Dangerously
                                       we wanted to create not only the first
                                          climate change and clean energy
                                       show that was ever on TV, but really
                                        something quite different, […] using
                                       celebrities in a very different way [..]
                                           and really digging into stories.”

                                   As Chief Science Advisor to the TV series, Joe Romm noted:

                                          “It is important to emphasize that
                                          now more than ever there is a true
                                          optimism: we talked about climate
                                         change, rising see levels […], but we
                                       can also talk about solutions. Students
                                        are optimistically committed to make
                                                     that happen.”




Joe Romm, Founding Editor of Climate Progress discussing on Carbon Pricing
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
     Tom Kerr, Principal Climate Policy Officer, International Finance Corporation (IFC), Climate
                                     Change Group, discussing the advantages of Carbon Pricing
                                                                        Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi




                   The support for carbon pricing is certainly growing, as
                   emphasised by Tom Kerr:
                   ­



                       “There are sixty-plus jurisdictions right
                       now that are pricing carbon somewhere
                         around the world and there are over
                        1200 global businesses that are using
                         an internal carbon pricing to future
                             proof their business model.”


                   However, in conclusion Kerr also stressed that a lot more
                   needs to be done to encourage the uptake of carbon pricing
                   around the world:




27
                                                                                                 28


                                       “Only about 12% of emissions are
                                        covered by carbon pricing in the
                                       world, and the average price is a
                                      little bit under 10 dollars. So that’s
                                    the challenge: we need to increase the
                                   coverage of carbon pricing and we need
                                    to keep and expand the use of pricing.”




Panel discussion on carbon pricing with Tom Erb, Put a Price On It, Joe Romm, Founding Editor
of Climate Progress, Kaia Rose, Film4Climate Winner, and James Close, Director, Climate Change
Group, World Bank Group
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
                                                                            30




“LEADING FOR SOLUTIONS”
DAY 3 AT C4C ZONE
      The third day at the C4C Zone started off early with a ­discussion
      on Climate Change and Food Insecurity with Enzo Maria Le
      Fevre Cervini (Director, Research and Cooperation, ­     Budapest
      Center for Mass Atrocities Prevention). Le ­      Fevre Cervini
      ­
      introduced the topic of Human Security and its 7 ­    dimensions
      for human beings to live together and to support peace efforts,
      one of which is food security. Le Fevre Cervini went into detail
      about how food security is defined by food ­ availability, access
      and utilization, and how food quality is just as ­  important as
      food quantity. Changing weather patterns and climate change
      directly affect food security and capacity.
      Enzo Le Fevre Cervini shared with the audience:

                 “Of 48 developing countries,
              approximately 22% of the economic
             impact was taken by the agriculture
            industry which affects food security.”

                                                                 respect,
      He also stated that it is each country’s responsibility to ­
      protect, facilitate and provide good enough food to all of its
      ­citizens.

      Mark Sigrist (Senior Counsel at the World Bank Group) gave
      a quick Climate Talk about ­    Private Sector Renewable Energy
      Projects. Sigrist introduced the concept of energy poverty—
      when a household doesn’t have access to reliable power or
      electricity at all. Sigrist and his team at the World Bank Group
      help countries structure projects so that the price of ­electricity
      to the average consumer is kept low while ­        increasing the
      access to power for the population.
      ­
     Mark Christian Sigrist, World Bank Group presents “Private Sector Renewable Energy Projects”
                                                                         Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi



                      Sigrist concluded his talk with reference to the benefits of ­solar
                      voltaic energy in developing countries. Benefits include the fact
                      that solar is a free fuel source, that the technology is p­ roven,
                      modular, and therefore scalable, and sun energy ­       potential
                      overlaps with areas of high energy poverty in ­
                      ­                                                    developing
                      ­countries.
                      ­
                      Leandro Azevedo (Senior Climate Finance Officer at the
                      African Development Bank) delivered a talk on “The Power of
                      ­
                      Solar Energy.” Azevedo explained that:

                           “African countries must significantly
                              expand their power generation
                             capacity if we are ever to achieve
                                 universal access to solar.”

                      He followed up with the notion that achieving the ­ economic
                                                                          empower
                      growth required in Africa will in turn create jobs, ­
                      women and must be climate resilient and low carbon.
                      ­


31
                                                                                                      32

                                   Morocco is leading the way on the solar grid and shows the
                                   world that through unity, developing countries can still achieve
                                   solar and alternative energy goals.

                                   Joe Khirallah (Communications Advisor for Green Sports
                                   ­
                                   Alliance) spoke about Sport in Climate Change and the role of
                                            advocating climate action.
                                   sport in ­


                                       “Sport is a huge platform. It is a great
                                        leverage point because it crosses all
                                        those demographics and it is a great
                                       opportunity that we have as a country
                                         to use our sports platforms, to use
                                         our athletes, to use our teams and
                                      leagues as a way to get the message out
                                       about climate change, about changing
                                         our attitudes and behaviors, about
                                             engaging our politicians.”




25
Joe Khirallah, Communications Advisor for Green Sports Alliance, presented “Sport and Climate
Change: The Role of Sport In Advocating Climate Action”
Photo Credit: Max Thabiso Edkins
                                                                                                 26




     Mark Christian Moderator Max Edkins in a Town Hall session with Paul Prettitore, Senior Public
                             Specialist, World Bank, and ACE youth representative Victoria Barrett
                                                                          Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi


                      During the afternoon session on Justice and Poverty, Paul
                      Prettitore (Senior Public Sector Specialist World Bank Group)
                      and the youth representative Victoria Barrett (Alliance for
                      Climate ­
                      ­         Educators fellow) discussed how climate change
                      and ­social issues are very much interrelated. Paul Prettitore
                      started the ­conversation with the notion that, “the problem is
                      poverty and ­
                      ­             inequality and justice is part of the solution.” In­
                      order to use j ­ustice as a tool, there needs to be some way
                      to hold ­governments ­  accountable. Victoria contributed to the
                      conversation by asking how the youth are disproportionately
                      ­
                      affected by climate change.

                      An interactive learning event called the Chocolate ­   Auction
                      was led by Scott Cantor (Carbon Finance Specialist with the
                      World Bank Group) illustrating how an auction can be used to
                      determine the price of a carbon credit. This session engaged
                      ­
                                                                              private
                      the audience to learn about auctions and incentives for ­
                      sector investment as achieved by The Pilot Auction Facility for
                      Methane and Climate Change Mitigation, an innovative ­ climate
                      finance model developed by the World Bank Group to ­ stimulate
                      investment in projects that reduce greenhouse gas emissions
                      while maximising the impact of public funds and leveraging
                      private sector financing. Many attendees walked away with
                      carbon pricing knowledge, a smile, and some chocolate.
33
                                                                                                34

                              The auction was followed by a talk about “Forests – The Hearts
                              and Lungs of the World”, given by Berenice Hernandez Toro
                              (Government of Mexico). Berenice was very passionate about
                              this topic as she grew up in Mexico where forests make up 90%
                              of the land and are dependent on her community’s ­  livelihood.


                                     “Forests are a crucial part of an
                                     equitable and sustainable world
                                  tackling climate change and enabling
                                   millions of men and women in rural
                                 areas to secure greater prosperity” she
                                  declared; “they provide many social,
                                  economic and environmental benefits
                                  that have not been fully appreciated.”

                              As a policymaker, Toro discussed how policy and strategy
                              must aim to slow deforestation and forest degradation, as well
                                 improve economic opportunities.
                              as ­




Berenice Hernandez Toro, CONAFOR, Government of Mexico, presented “Forests – The hearts and
27
lungs of the world”
Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi
     Alan Miller, Principal Climate Change Specialist, International Finance Corporation (IFC)
                                        presented “Role of Law in the field of Climate Change”
                                        ­
                                                                     Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi


                On a different note, she argued that forests not only absorb the
                carbon ­emissions that would otherwise pollute the ­atmosphere,
                but also are p  ­ articularly important to the indigenous people
                that live in them.

                Alan Miller (former Principal Climate Change Specialist,
                International Finance Corporation (IFC)) presented on “The
                ­
                Role of Law in the Field of Climate Change”. He opened
                his speech with a h  ­ istorical background on climate change
                ­               lawsuits that have taken place in the last 30
                initiatives and ­
                years. Miller ­discussed that many countries have domestic
                reasons to move forward with energy policies:

                      “China and India suffer from terrible
                       air pollution with significant health
                      consequences due to the uncontrolled
                        burning of coal. In turn, they have
                       very aggressive policies to promote
                                renewable energy.”
                Ending the third day of the event was the full screening of
                Leonardo DiCaprio’s documentary “Before the Flood”.
35
ON THE TOP: Enzo Cervini, Director, Research and Cooperation, Budapest Centre for Mass Atrocities
Prevention presents “Climate Change & Food Insecurity: The Role of Environmental Risk factors in Preventing
­
Atrocities”
Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi
                                                                           38




“POLICIES TOWARDS
SOLUTIONS”
DAY 4 AT C4C ZONE

      The final day of the C4C zone opened with the panel “The
      Human-Centered Business Model (HCBM) - A Holistic
      ­
      Approach to a New Model for Doing Business” presented by
      ­
      experts Marco Nicoli (Senior Knowledge Management for the
      Legal VP, World Bank Group) and Pierre Viaud (Advisor to the
      Chairman & CEO, SICPA).
      ­

      Marco Nicoli opened the discussion explaining the HCBM as
      the
          “development of a business ecosystem
           that will enable business enterprises
           to focus on economic sustainability,
               human and social rights and
              environmental sustainability.”


      A group of over 45 development partners are planning to
      ­develop a new business ecosystem ­based on globally ­accepted
       human rights pursuing economic, social and ­       environmental
       sustainability and following ethical and moral principles with
                                                    tailored to ­
       substantial flexibility for this model to be ­           specific
       ­circumstances and countries. Pierre Viaud ­presented his study,
        which identifies the commonalities of 14 main religions around
                   According to his research, the common moral and
        the world. ­
        ethical ­
        ­              presented through these 14 religions should be
                values ­
        incorporated into the HCBM.
        ­
     Marco Nicoli, Senior Project Manager Global Forum on Law, justice and Development and Pierre Viaud,
           Advisor to the Chairman & CEO, SICPA, discussed “The Human-Centered Business Model (HCBM)
                                                                                Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi


                             On the same theme, Marco Nicoli underlined that there need
                             to be principles embedded by laws, and which have perfor-
                             mance indicators in terms of environmental impact.

                             Flavia Rosembuj (Global Lead for Blended Finance, Climate
                             Business and Trust Funds, IFC) led a talk about green bonds
                             and other financial instruments. She started the discussion
                             with the definition of bonds, and analyzed the close similarity
                             of green bonds to regular bonds. She walked the audience
                             through the more complicated process of getting green bonds
                                                                                    project
                             approved and issued, explaining that a pre-established ­
                             selection is necessary to determine whether the green bond
                             will be used for renewable energy, forest projects, e  ­nergy
                             efficiency, green building. Lastly, Rosembuj talked about
                             ­
                             how there has been explosive market growth, and is moving
                             towards a situation where IFC is now helping their clients to
                             ­
                             issue their own green bonds in their local markets.

                             Christopher Head (Private Sector Specialist, CIF) delivered an
                             engaging talk about “Private Sector and Innovative Finance to
                             Tackle the Climate Challenge”. Head started with discussing a
                             key takeaway from the UN Climate Summit— the need of the
                             private sector to foster climate smart investments.
39
                                                                                                    40

                               This speech was followed by a panel on child marriage and its
                               economic and social rationale discussed by Quentin Wodon
                               (Lead Economist, Education, World Bank Group) ­        Margareta
                               Norris Harrit (Senior Health, Nutrition & Population ­
                               ­                                                    Operations
                               ­Specialist, World Bank Group) and moderated by Tazeen Hasan
                                (Senior Private Sector Development Specialist, World Bank
                                Group’s Women, Business and the Law). Wodon ­         explained
                                the economic cost of child marriage. He suggested that,


                                 “trying to estimate the development and
                                  economic impact of the practice means
                                   looking at what it means for fertility
                                   rates, education, nutrition, decision
                                  making of women, access to land, etc.”

                               Many efforts have been made to try and end child marriage—
                               especially as it also links to the sustainable development
                               goals. However the level of funding and program interventions
                               to end this practice remains quite low. Norris Harrit described
                               the work she has been doing with her team at the World Bank
                               Group.




Quentin Wodon, Lead Economist, Education, World Bank Group, and Margareta Norris H   ­ arrit,
                                                                                         ­ Ending
Senior Health, Nutrition & Population Operations Specialist, World Bank Group discussing “
      Marriage - The Economic & Social Rationale”
Child ­
Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel
                                                                                              32




                                                                            ­ resenting “Private
     Christopher Head, Private Sector Specialist, Climate Investment Funds, p
                                  Sector – Innovative Finance to Tackle the Climate Challenge”
                                                                         Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel


                 Her works aims at empowering girls and giving them options to
                 stay in school, setting up spaces for girls and young women to
                 receive vocational training, to be exposed to a female ­leader,
                 and to be exposed to opportunities that they have never had.
                 Governments can support these processes by providing a safe
                 environment for girls to go to school as well as transportation
                 to and from school.

                 Siobhan McInerney-Lankford (Senior Council, World Bank
                 Group) presented her latest publication on Migrations, Climate
                 Change and Climate Refugees during a panel session on
                 Human Rights and Development. Lankford, introducing her
                 ­
                 report, stated confidently that

                       “the impacts of climate change are felt
                        by the more vulnerable and by those
                         who contribute the least to climate
                                      change.”
                 Following this panel discussion, Mafalda Duarte (Program
                 Manager, Climate Investment Funds) joined for a talk about
                 Climate Finance and its fundamental role in our times. Duarte
                 explained that climate finance:
41
                                                                                                42

                                    “(1) provides the type of resources
                                      that incentivize changes in the
                                   policy, regulatory and institutional
                                  environments; (2) allows for mature
                                  and proven commercial technologies
                                 available worldwide to be deployed for
                                 the first time or be scaled significantly
                                  in developing countries; (3) helps us
                                   address the risks that are inherent
                                     in certain technologies; and (4)
                                  allows for investments in less mature
                                 technologies, yet technologies that are
                                 very important to meet climate goals.”


                              The solution Duarte posed was to come up with new ­  financing
                                                                                 capital that
                              vehicles that will be unique and will mobilize the ­
                              exists but has not been embraced by developing countries.




Siobhan McInerney-Lankford, Senior Counsel, The World Bank Group, presented “Human Rights
and ­Development”
Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi
                        coordinator for the Social Enterprise Program at the World Bank
     Natalia Agapitova, ­
                      Group I            ­ olicy Program, presenting “Social Enterprises”
                             ­ nnovation P
                                                                Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi



           The C4C Zone discussions ended with a short talk about ­Social
           Enterprises delivered by Natalia Agapitova ­ (Coordinator of the
           Innovation Policy Program at the World Bank Group). She
           started out by discussing the challenges facing the most poor,
           the bottom of the pyramid, who are often not reached by basic
           service provisions, such as water, sanitation and education. To
           shift development trajectories innovative means of delivering
           access to be identified and implemented.

           Natalia presented how businesses have the capacity and the
           technology to serve these people, but because they are poor,
           they are new market frontiers that some businesses are afraid
           to explore. Agapitova explained that:

                 “It is a tough balancing act to try to
                 reach profits and develop effective,
                  innovative solutions reaching the
                 base of the pyramid in conditions of
                very tough markets, inability to pay,
               government constraints and very tough
                          yet fair competition.”
43
                                                                                         Finance –
ON THE TOP: Mafalda Duarte, Program Manager, Climate Investment Funds presented “Climate ­­­­
The Game Changer We Need”
Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi and Max Thabiso Edkins
                                                                          46




YOUTH VOICES

      The Alliance for Climate Education (ACE) student group
      ­
      participated throughout each day of the C4C Zone. ACE’s
      mission as a whole is to educate young people on the
      ­
      science of ­
      ­          climate change and empower them to take ­action.
      Representing ACE were the three young climate activists
      ­
      ­
      Victoria Barrett, Paola Hernandez, and Brian McDermott.

      The students were an integral part of this event, underlying
      how the focus of the C4C Zone was on younger generations’
      ­engagement. The ACE group joined numerous sessions during
                  including the inaugural session on the first day with
       the event, ­
       Sheila Redzepi (Vice President for External and Corporate
       Relations at the World Bank Group).

      During an interview with Achim Steiner (former Executive
      ­                                                     people
      Director of UNEP) they discussed the power that young ­
      have to make climate change initiatives and the work ACE has
      done to push those initiatives through Congress.

      The three students actively engaged with other attendees and
      ­
      students during the majority of discussions and interviews in
      the C4C Zone. ACE is continuing to work hard to make a pos-
            climate impact.
      itive ­

      When presenting the young activists before the ­screening
      of “Before the Flood,” Max Edkins, Climate Change Expert,
      Connect4Climate, World Bank Group, highlighted:
      ­
                           ­ xecutive Director of UNEP, Director of Oxford Martin School
     Achim Steiner, former E
                                                    Professorial F
                                                and ­            ­ ellow of Balliol College
                                                                 Photo Credit: Riccardo Savi




                  “These young leaders are calling
                 for climate action. They are taking
               their government to court to ensure a
               safe, resilient and low-carbon future.
             Today’s youth are the first generation to
             experience the impacts of climate change
             and the last generation to implement the
              climate actions needed to be inline with
                         what science tell us.”




47
Top: Achim Steiner, former E   ­ xecutive Director of UNEP, Director of Oxford Martin School and P­ rofessorial
Fellow of Balliol College, in a discussion with youth activists Victoria Barrett, Paola Hernandez and
­
Brian McDermott, Alliance for Climate Education
Photo Credit: Leigh Vogel
                                                                            50




TAKE AWAY
      The C4C Zone reached new audiences, engaged young
      participants and was a multi-media space for topical experts,
      ­
      who had the opportunity to share their knowledge on climate
                                                                  ­ olicy
      action. In particular, experts discussed the latest climate p
      and finance developments and explored the linkages to the
      ­legal system. Carbon pricing was highlighted as a crucial part of
       the climate solutions package, while innovative ­communication
       was noted as a key requirement for societal change.

      The C4C Zone was appreciated as an open space for LJD
      participants and CIF experts to share their knowledge and
      ­
      engage with a broader audience. Climate action is seen as
      ­
      urgent and inspiring. Building on the Paris Climate Change
      ­
      Agreement, innovative mechanism to implement more
      ambitious ­
      ­                                                        Climate
                 mitigation and adaptation action is required. ­
      finance, putting a price on carbon, leveraging the private
      ­       working through diverse stakeholders and ­
      sector, ­                                              engaging
      communication approaches can all contribute to ramping up
      ­
      climate action.

      Today’s youth are well aware of the dangers of climate change
                                                          ­ pproaches,
      and are taking their own action, also through legal a
      to demand stronger leadership on climate change. Climate
      impacts are certainly being felt around the world, as ­
      ­                                                      presented
      in Leonardo DiCaprio’s personal story in “Before the Flood”
      and in Aasif Mandvi story investigating species extinction in
      the Years of Living Dangerously “Priceless” episode.

      Young ­  people also are calling for a price on carbon and want
      to ­ engage in the new climate economy, where the costs of
      ­
      climate ­ inaction are considered. This was made clear through
      winning ­  Film4Climate videos and through Nikki Reed’s story
      in ­“Priceless.”
     Youth activists Victoria Barrett, Paola Hernandez and Brian McDermott, Alliance for Climate Education
                                                                                     Photo Credit: Kaia Rose




                              The C4C Zone presented inspiring actions and engaging
                              climate solutions from diverse speakers.
                              ­

                              Victoria Barrett explained why she is calling for climate action:


                                         “From a young age I have always
                                        been interested in justice... Climate
                                       change affects everyone, the billions
                                           of people living on this Earth.”

                              She concluded:

                                         “As the seas are rising, so are we.”




51
JOIN US!
facebook.com/connect4climate
connect4climate.org
twitter.com/connect4climate
             connect4climate@worldbank.org
Published by Connect4Climate, World Bank Group
June, 2017
