Summary of Proceedings Report
                          Summary of Proceedings
“Win-Win for Public Health & Domestic Resources Mobilization Conference”


        Organized by the World Bank Group Global Tobacco Control Program, in
    collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO), and with support from
                  the Bill & Melinda Gates and Bloomberg Foundations

         2017 World Bank Group (WBG)-International Monetary Group (IMF)
                                Spring Meetings.

                                 April 18th and 19th, 2017



April 18th, 2017

Welcome and Introduction

Patricio V. Marquez, Lead Public Health Specialist and Co-Coordinator WBG Global
Tobacco Control Program.

The conference, on April 18th and 19th, 2017, was part of the 2017 World Bank Group
(WBG)-International Monetary Fund (IMF) Spring Meetings. It was organized by the
World Bank Group Global Tobacco Control Program, in collaboration with the World
Health Organization (WHO), and with support from the Bill & Melinda Gates and
Bloomberg Foundations. The conference aimed to move tobacco taxation to the
mainstream of the global development agenda by raising its profile before ministers of
finance, ministers of health, other high level government officials, international
development aid agencies, foundations,  and civil society. As an African proverb states,
individuals can travel fast on their own but will get farther if they travel with a group. In
this spirit, the conference was centered around the sharing of country experiences on
reforming the structure and rates of tobacco taxes, lessons learned, challenges, and results
achieved. Thirty countries attended1 and participated in eleven plenary panels, as did
representatives of regional organizations and civil society, including think tanks and
academics. The panels were supplemented by keynote and other special
presentations.

The agenda of the conference is attached as Annex 1.

1Participating countries include: Armenia, Azerbaijan, Bangladesh, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Botswana,
Brazil, China, Colombia, Ethiopia, Gabon, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Lesotho, Mexico, Moldova,
Mongolia, Montenegro, Myanmar, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Philippines, Senegal, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Tonga, Turkey, Ukraine, United States, and Vietnam, in addition to the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU), the Caribbean Economic Community (CARICOM), the African Union
Commission (AUC), and the European Commission (EC).


                                                 2
The link to a video with some key messages from the conference at the WBG site is:

http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/video/2017/04/18/tobacco-taxation-
win-win-for-public-health-domestic-resources-mobilization-conference-
highlights

The link to the conference site, where documents and presentations have been
placed, is:

http://www.worldbank.org/en/events/2017/04/18/tobacco-taxation-win-
win-for-public-health-domestic-resources-mobilization-conference

Opening Panel: Why Tobacco Taxation Matters: A Multisectoral Perspective from the
World Bank Group (WBG).

Tim Evans, Deborah Wetzel, Sudharshan Gooptu, World Bank Group (WBG); William
Savedoff, Moderator, Center for Global Development; Shiyong Wang, Rapporteur,
WBG
The opening panel set the stage for the conference, invoking key themes that were then
discussed in depth in other sessions. The main objective of tobacco taxes is to reduce or
prevent tobacco use, protect the health of the population by reducing health risks associated
with tobacco use, the onset of tobacco-related diseases, premature mortality and disability.
They also provide the fiscal ‘externality’ of higher tax revenues. The impact of tobacco
taxes on improving health also results in reducing health care expenditures, particularly the
impoverishment impact of out-pocket payments associated with the treatment of tobacco-
related diseases, increased productivity, and increased healthy life expectancy. But
tobacco taxes have too often “fallen between the cracks” of health and finance. The y also
raise important issues of political economy, given the economic and political influence of
the tobacco industry in most countries. Senior managers of World Bank Global Practices
on health, nutrition and population, governance, and macroeconomics and fiscal
management emphasized how they were committed to working together on tobacco
taxation as a multisectoral effort. World Bank Group support includes the provision of
technical assistance for the undertaking of tax policies assessments, including modelling
work to estimate the impact of tobacco tax reforms on prices, consumption, and domestic
revenue mobilization under different policy scenarios, as well as helping countries with
capacity building, evidence, and facilitating learning among countries. Speakers stressed
the need for building strong political coalitions that can mobilize political support to fight
tobacco addiction and can resist industry lobbying. Speakers noted that additional revenue
from higher tobacco taxes could contribute to expand the fiscal space to finance priority
investments and programs that benefit the entire population, including the scaling up of
universal health coverage or other pro-poor uses. However, international norms and good
practice on tobacco taxation need to be adapted to take account of country specificity.




                                              3
Keynote Presentation 1: Global Effects of Smoking, Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco.

Prabhat Jha, University of Toronto.

Commentators: Haruna B Jibril, Botswana; Juan Arturo Sabines Torres, Mexico;
Aliona Serbulenco, Moldova; Anselmo Hennis, PAHO/WHO; Jill Farrington,
EURO/WHO, Feng Zhao, Moderator, WBG; Renzo Sotomayor, Rapporteur WBG.

The presentation provided a broad survey, supplement by an extensive set of charts and
graphs, of worldwide evidence of effects of tobacco consumption on health and of tobacco
taxes on tobacco consumption. It shows that tobacco kills more than half its confirmed
users prematurely at a rate of about 5 million deaths per year, costing an average loss of
two decade of life for those who die prematurely and an average loss of one decade for
confirmed smokers overall. He has estimated that the tobacco industry profits are
equivalent to US$10,000 per death.

However, premature death is not a given. Cessation by age 40, for example, avoids 90% of
the excess risk of continued smoking, and even quitting by age 50 or 60 reduces the risks
of death. Tobacco is a big cause of poverty, and tobacco control reduces poverty. The poor
win rather than lose with tobacco control policies. Because the poor smoke more and are
more price responsive, eliminating mortality from tobacco would reduce by about half the
inequality in adult mortality among socioeconomic groups. Excise taxes are the most
important intervention to reduce consumption but increases must be large (substantial and
not gradual), and smart (simplify taxes to prevent downward substitution). A tripling of the
excise tax on cigarettes worldwide would cut consumption by one third and avoid about
200 million deaths in the remainder of the 21st century. Large and smart tax increases
should be accompanied by complementary tobacco control measures.

Plenary Panel 1: Tobacco Taxation, Tax System Reform, and Fiscal Consolidation:
Recent Country Experiences.

Arman Poghosyan, Armenia; Luis Fernando Villota Quiñones, Colombia; Veronica
Vragaleva, Moldova; Jeremias Paul, WHO, Philippines; Oksana Syvak and Konstantin
Krasovsky, Ukraine; James Brumby, WBG, Moderator, Roberto Iunes, WBG,
Rapporteur.

Specific country circumstances are important, but all country experiences evidence the
win-win-win nature of tobacco taxation: good health outcomes and equity and fiscal gains.
Tobacco taxes work. Countries need to have a clear strategy that relies on solid analytical
work, identifies champions and leaders and builds coalitions. They need to make tobacco
taxes simple (structure matters) and to stand up to the challenges that will be placed by the
tobacco industry.




                                             4
The countries in the panel had all made major efforts to increase and reform tobacco taxes.
Moldova showed best practice in moving from just an ad valorem tax to a three-component
structure that added both specific and minimum excise taxes per 1,000 cigarettes. Tobacco
taxes went from 1 to 6 percent of taxes from 2009-2016. Colombia also combined specific
and ad valorem taxes and has shown best practice in indexing tobacco excise taxes to
inflation plus 4%. It earmarks part of tobacco tax revenues to health. Armenia has rapidly
increased tobacco taxes, again combining ad valorem and excise taxes, reaching 1.3% of
GDP in 2017. Philippines shows best practice in reducing 4 tiers of taxes to 1 – so
maximizing health benefits. Tobacco tax revenues increased by 1.5 times in 3 years and
were used to triple the health budget and the number of people covered by health subsidies.
The Finance Ministry saw earmarking as theoretically bad but pragmatically as a necessary
part of the political process of getting support for sharp tax increases. Tobacco prevalence
declined from 30 to 24 percent. Ukraine’s 10-fold increase (in current prices) in tobacco
taxes from 2008-2015 contributed substantially to a 40 percent decrease in consumption,
even more so among the young. They also contributed to decreases in diseases related to
secondary smoking, such as sudden infant death syndrome, and even in fires.

Remarks by Keith Hansen, Vice President, Human Development, WBG; Moderator
Sheila Dutta, Senior Health Specialist, WBG.

Tobacco presents a case of unique harm and unique opportunity. Tobacco, like carbon,
requires special taxes because they are so noxious. But in addition tobacco is the only
product that kills when used as directed. Even its confirmed users try to quit. Unlike most
health or other interventions, the World Bank Group discusses with countries, it generates
additional domestic resources. Tobacco taxes offer a unique policy offer. It gives fast and
measurable benefits – the higher the tax increases the bigger the health and fiscal benefits.
It is increasingly the poor who smoke. So tobacco taxes have equity benefits and also
reduce chances of catastrophic health events. Not making rapid progress on tobacco taxes
is the equivalent of an “own goal” in soccer. The World Bank Group is committed to
support tobacco taxes as a key element of its policy dialogue, analysis and operational
tools.

PLENARY PANEL 2: Country Evidence: The Economic Cost of Smoking and the
Benefits of Tobacco Taxes on Averting Health Harm.

Mark Goodchild, WHO; Xin Xu, CDC; Stephane Verguet, Harvard University: Laura
Webber, U.K. Health Forum. Comments by: Jeyhun Mammadov, Ministry of Health,
Azerbaijan; Shi Qi, National Health and Family Planning Commission of China; Bekir
Kenkinkilic, Public Health Institution, Turkey; Sione Hufanga, Ministry of Health,
Tonga. Enis Baris, Moderator, ECA HNP GP Program Manager, WBG; Dorothee
Chen, Rapporteur, Health Economist, WBG.

This session presented evidence from surveys and simulations of the economic cost of
smoking and the benefits of tobacco taxes at global and country levels. Today, 25% of men

                                             5
and 5.4% of women smoke daily globally. Progress in reducing smoking prevalence has
slowed down over the last ten years relative to the previous 15 years, indicating the need
to double our efforts. In 2015, 11.5% of global deaths were attributable to smoking (more
than half in just four countries – USA, China, India and Russia).

Caring for those dying or severely ill from tobacco is expensive, with the share of health
care in total government budgets rising when tobacco-related diseases and deaths do. The
total economic cost of smoking -- from health expenditures and productivity losses together
-- was estimated at 1.8% of the world's annual GDP, with almost 40% of this cost in
developing countries. Within these totals, health care costs are relatively more important
in rich countries, with productivity losses more important in developing countries.

Commentators highlighted the need to continue to provide decision-makers and
populations with solid evidence, based as much as is feasible on local data, as well as with
brief and convincing messages. To do so, there is a need to better understand the deceptive
manipulation of data and analysis used by the tobacco industry.

The China case study presented in this panel dealt with regressivity. In China, tobacco tax
increases would be progressive, because poor households have markedly more price elastic
demand. A 50% increase in tobacco price through excise tax would lead to a massive
estimated 231 million years of life gained over 50 years, a third of which would be in the
lowest income quintile. In contrast, only 14% of additional tax revenues would come from
the lowest income quintile. The lowest income quintile would also capture 74% of the
benefits from protection against the financial risk of catastrophic health events.

Plenary Panel 3: Are Tobacco Taxes Regressive?

Frank Chaloupka, University of Illinois; Alan Fuchs, WBG; Rouselle Lavado and
Moritz Meyer, WBG. Comments: Roxana Quader, Bangladesh; Diogo Henrique Tomaz
Afonso Alves, Brazil; Blanca Llorente, Colombia; Paul Isenman, Moderator, formerly
WBG; Francisco Meneses, Rapporteur, Duke University.

The session offered presentations that provided a broad review of the global evidence. The
analyses of Chile and Armenia, as well as the comments from Bangladesh, Brazil and
Colombia, showed that while country income and other socio-economic situations vary
widely, their experience is also consistent with the points below. Tobacco taxes are widely
considered to be regressive, since the poor spend a higher share of their incomes on tobacco
than do the rich. Too often, the analysis stops there. However, it is smoking, not tobacco
taxes, that is highly regressive. Lower income groups (the lowest or second lowest income
quartiles depending on the country) tend to smoke more. So they both suffer more than the
rich from tobacco-related diseases and premature death and to have less money available
for non-tobacco family needs. In contrast, increasing tobacco taxes is highly progressive
for several reasons. First, the higher price elasticity of demand (price responsiveness) of
the poor means that in comparison with the rich they reduce tobacco consumption

                                             6
proportionately more and so increase tobacco spending proportionately less. So higher
tobacco taxes are on the margin increasingly less regressive. In some cases, such as Turkey,
they are even progressive. Second and most important, their higher price responsiveness
means that the poor get a disproportionately high share of the health benefits of reducing
tobacco consumption. This is simply ignored in conventional fiscal analysis of regressivity.
Among five Asian countries, the share of taxes paid by the poorest quintile to the health
benefits they received ranged from 1.5:1 in India to almost 10:1in Thailand. Third, the
disproportionately high health benefits to the poor also contribute to higher productivity in
their work and to longer work lives. Fourth, the poor benefit disproportionately also from
reduced financial risk of the catastrophic health events that often drive families into
poverty. This increased resilience contributes directly to Sustainable Development Goal
(SDG) 1 on poverty eradication (and effect on education of children). Fifth, reducing
spending for tobacco frees up household financing for high priority, or at least less noxious,
uses. Tobacco is, after all, the only mass market consumer product that when used as
directed kills more than half its confirmed users, a large share of whom would pay a lot to
be freed from their tobacco addiction. Sixth, revenue from tobacco taxes can be, and very
often is, used for health and other pro-poor expenditures. Seventh, as reported in the case
of Ukraine in Plenary Panel 1, the poor (with their higher smoking rates) benefit most both
from the reduced risk of fires or of consequences of second-hand smoke. Eighth, the points
above contribute to meeting several SDGs. The reduced risk of falling into poverty
contributes to SDG 1 on eliminating poverty. Freeing up family spending contributes to
SDGs 2 and 4 on hunger and education. And the highly progressive distribution of health
benefits contributes to SDG 10 on reducing inequalities. Other estimates presented show
that tobacco accounts for half of adult mortality differences by socio-economic status. So,
in sum, it is smoking, not tobacco taxes, that are highly regressive. Increased tobacco taxes
are highly progressive.

Plenary Panel 4: Tobacco Tax Harmonization under Regional Economic and Political
Pacts  . Regional integration: Is tax harmonization a natural next step?

Sophia Delipalla,  Macedonia University, Greece; Annerie Bouw, European
Commission; Assane Diouf, Senegal; Karl Theodore, University of the West Indies,
Trinidad and Tobago. Estelle Dauchy, Moderator, Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids
(CTFK); Darko Paranos, Rapporteur, WBG.

There are strong reasons for harmonizing excise taxes on tobacco products. Harmonization
avoids distortions and tax erosion from illicit trade or from legally buying in neighboring
countries, thus raising both tax revenues and the health benefits that come from tax
increases. It eliminates tax competition (a race to the bottom in terms of health as well as
revenues) and increases overall revenues. Regional economic and political pacts offer a
way of achieving harmonization of tobacco excise taxes at lower political and
administrative cost, building on existing institutional, analytic, tax, implementation and
advocacy structures. However, most economic and political pacts do not have the

                                              7
mechanisms for mandatory joint standards and enforcement of the European Union, which
has seen rapid progress both among its members and among candidate countries. In other
cases, such as CARICOM, changes in tobacco taxes still need to be agreed to by individual
countries. So there is more need for country-specific data and analysis as well.

April 19th, 2017

Plenary Panel 5: Tobacco Farming and Tobacco Affordability: What Do We Know?

Initial Results from Indonesia Tobacco Employment Studies: Edson Araujo (WBG),
Pandu Harimurti (WBG), Jeffrey Drope, American Cancer Society. Tobacco Farming:
Insights from Country Experiences: Teh-wei Hu, Public Health Institute’s Center for
International Tobacco Control, Berkeley, California. Tobacco Affordability in China:
Rose Zhen, University of International Business and Economics (UIBE), Beijing,
China, and WHO Tobacco Control Collaboration Center, Beijing, China. Mark
Parascandola, Moderator, Tobacco Control Research Branch, U.S. National Institute of
Cancer Research; Melissa Brown, Rapporteur, WBG.

This session was based on case studies from Indonesia, China, Tanzania and Kenya. In
general, tobacco is a crop of middling profitability, depending on national and local
circumstances. Demand for tobacco farming has not yet declined to any significant extent
but is expected to as tobacco control programs make progress. In most cases tobacco
farmers already adjust the share of their land allocated to tobacco in response to market
forces. And losses of income and employment in most countries would be low as well as
gradual, permitting transfer to other crops or other employment. However, in some
countries there is an important group of farmers who are dependent on the tobacco industry,
which provides credit for inputs -- leaving farmers indebted -- and purchasing at guaranteed
prices. This dependency explains why they do not shift to other crops that at first glance
look more profitable. Crop substitution also has a gender dimension, as poor tobacco
farmers in Africa are primarily women, and they suffer from the health hazard of green
tobacco disease. So small tobacco farmers would need special help, whether on technical
and institutional aspects of crop substitution or on getting social protection through
conditional cash transfers to facilitate substitution. Diagnosing and addressing emerging
problems is particularly important because the tobacco industry makes use of negative
effects on small tobacco farmers as a way of generating political opposition to tobacco tax
increases.




                                             8
A companion study on China provides dramatic evidence of the need to take account in
tobacco tax policy of changes in affordability of cigarettes – i.e. of changes in per capita
income as well as of inflation – in understanding changes in tobacco consumption.
Adjusting taxes for inflation is by no means sufficient. China’s sustained rapid growth
means that the average priced cigarette was 1.85 times more affordable in 2016 than in
2001. And cheap brands were 2.09 times more affordable. This has an important effect on
increasing tobacco consumption, since even a 10% increase in cigarette affordability will
result in a 6% increase in cigarette consumption.


Keynote Presentation 2: Lessons from the United States’ and Norway’s Experience with
Tobacco Taxes.

Jason Furman, Former Chairman of the United States President’s Council of Economic
Advisors and Senior Fellow, Peterson Institute. Bjørn-Inge Larsen, Secretary General,
Ministry of Health and Care Services, Norway. Bert Hofman, Commentator, WBG.
Alexander Kremer, Moderator, WBG; Rapporteur Rosa Sandoval, Rapporteur,
PAHO/WHO

Tobacco taxation policies have been effectively used in the United States, where the price
elasticity of demand was a surprisingly high 0.5%, and in Norway to reduce tobacco
consumption. Tobacco taxes are not regressive. In fact, they are very progressive. Tax
increases should be high, consistent, and indexed above the inflation level.

Both experiences highlight the benefits of earmarking as a way of responding to objections
to tax increases, particularly in the face of industry lobbying. In the United States, soft
earmarking for health insurance for children permitted more than tripling the federal excise
tax in the face of industry lobbying against tax increases. This led to a 15% decline in
smoking among the young and saved 50-75,000 lives, although this gets little public
recognition. The commentator added that he had formerly opposed all tax earmarking but
that he was convinced of its desirability for tobacco control, including as a way to increase
progressivity. Lessons learned in the United States were the need to index tax increases at
least to inflation and to apply them equally to all tobacco products to avoid substitution
from more expensive to lower-priced cigarettes.

Norway also shows the importance of viewing taxes as part of a broader tobacco control
strategy. Public approval for banning smoking in public places grew rapidly from 45 to 90
percent. This included strong approval from daily smokers, showing how smokers want to
quit. Other steps were plain packaging, mass media campaigns, and smartphone apps –
which were more effective than hotlines to encourage quitting. Norway also shows the
importance of increasing taxes faster than purchasing power.




                                             9
Special Presentation 1: Tobacco Tax Policy Reform as part of Macro Fiscal Reforms
supported under WBG Development Policy Operations (DPO): An Overview from
Colombia’s Experience

Jasmin Chakeri, WBG and Roberto Iunes, WBG; Patricio V. Marquez, Moderator,
WBG.

World Bank Group support for tobacco taxes goes well beyond health projects. There is
increasing use of tobacco taxes as integral parts of Development Policy Operations (DPOs),
as well as in operations with a longer time frame including Program for Results (PforR).
DPOs provide general budget support based on agreed policy programs. In Colombia, the
focus was on fiscal sustainability and competitiveness, particularly to support the
implementation of the recently-signed and approved Peace Agreement ending more than
60 years of civil war in the country. Tobacco taxes, which had been low, were increased
sharply, particularly through rapid increases in specific excises. There was also indexing
at 4% over inflation, which serves as an excellent example for other countries for
addressing the ‘affordability’ issue that arises when excises increase less rapidly than
current incomes. Revenues were earmarked mostly for health. Tax reforms were
accompanied by stronger tax administration and anti-contraband measures. There was
close collaboration among World Bank Group macro-fiscal, trade & competitiveness and
health teams as well as with their Colombian counterparts. There was priority attention to
evidence needed to inform public opinion, challenge interest groups opposed to tax
increases, and reassure decision makers of the theoretical and empirical soundness of the
basis for their decisions.

Special Presentation 2: Tobacco Taxation and Control in Sub-Sahara Africa: A
Perspective from the African Union Commission (AUC).

Ambassador Chihombori Quao, AUC Ambassador to the United States; Patricio
Marquez, Moderator, WBG; Alejandra Garcia-Meza, Rapporteur, George Washington
University.

Ambassador Quao, who is a physician, gave a stirring presentation on the dangers of the
tobacco epidemic to Africa, the need for strong cross-sectoral action, including the key step
of raising tobacco taxes, and the increasing priority being given to it by the African Union
Commission. She said that “there is not a single cell [in the body] that is not affected by
smoking”. It is not only a drug but a gateway drug. In African villages, out of ignorance,
young people start smoking at 5 and 7 years of age, the same way people once did in the
United States. The epidemic in Africa is not understood and not discussed enough. This
issue is being addressed at the African Union Commission level and is being taken very
seriously. They understand the impact tobacco can have on both economic development
and the health status of their countries.



                                             10
Taxation is the way to help slow down the prevalence of new users and to cut down on
those who already smoke. Sustainable development is not consistent with the current trends
of cigarette smoking in Africa. Some countries already have strong programs that ban
advertisement and support other tobacco-control policies. She hopes that all countries will
do the same. She concluded by expressing her hope that Africa is beginning to turn a corner
and that it will get to a point where African countries can say “cigarettes no more”.

Plenary Panel 6: Tobacco Taxation and Control: Lessons from Country Experiences.

China: Shi Jian, China; Shri Devi Prasad Misra, India; Jose Luis Pedraza Cervantes,
Mexico; Mpho Vincent Legote, South Africa; Sione Vave Faleafa, Tonga; Mustafa Utku
Özmen, Turkey; Doan Thi Thu Huyen, Vietnam; Nigar Nargis, Moderator, American
Cancer Society; Patricia Sosa, Rapporteur, Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids (CTFK).

In Mexico the adoption of a tobacco tax to reduce consumption has served as a model for
taxing other products that threaten public health (junk food and sugar beverages). The
Mexican Finance Ministry opposes earmarking of tobacco taxes, which would be enough
to cover only US$1.8 of the US$3 billion health budget. In Tonga, the biggest challenge is
the sale of local tobacco, Tapaka Tonga, since it is sold by farmers informally on their own
farms and in local shops. In 2014, Tonga also adopted non-tobacco tax measures including
a smoking ban, a minimum age of 18 for purchasing tobacco products, and a ban on sale
of individual cigarettes.

In Turkey, the tobacco tax quadrupled and consumer price almost doubled between 2005
and 2016. These tax increases have successfully reduced consumption among low- and
middle-income smokers, although not among those consuming premium brands, whose
higher incomes made them less price responsive. Turkey illustrates the broader need to
reconcile diverse interests: finance officials focus on revenues and stability; health officials
and NGOs focus on reducing consumption; economic officials focus on production; and
the industry focuses on increasing consumption.

In South Africa tobacco tax has reduced consumption although the government lacks data
to assess the impact of illicit trade. In 2015, it removed the VAT, and decided to focus
solely on excise tax, with a tax burden of 40%. This would be adjusted based on retail price
and inflation. The tax is collected at the point of manufacturing and importation. As a result
of the tax increase, South Africa experienced a dramatic increase in the revenues.

In Vietnam, excise taxes earmarked to fund a “National Tobacco Control Fund” allowed
the Ministry of Health to fund initiatives for awareness of the harms of tobacco and for
smoke-free public areas and to expand access to cessation programs. This is a first step in
translating policy to reality at the local level in a country with one of the highest smoking
rates among men in the world. In India, the tax structure is complex with a variety of
measurements used to assess taxes, including length of cigarettes and size of filter, and
with a variety of other taxes at the state level. India also taxes locally produced bidis,

                                              11
hookahs and chewing tobacco. This variety of cigarette ‘tiers’ and products makes it
difficult to tax to reduce consumption, since smokers shift from one product to another.

Keynote Presentation: Tobacco Taxation and Financing for Development.

Masood Ahmed, president of the Center for Global Development, and former IMF
Director, Middle East and Central Asia Department. Paul Isenman, Moderator, WBG
consultant; Omer Ramses Zang Sidjou, Rapporteur, WBG.

Mr. Ahmed drew on his personal experience as IMF regional director to regret that tobacco
taxes are too often not even part of the conversation in circles where tax policy is discussed
and set. There is need for greater recognition by development and finance leaders that
tobacco excise taxes are an extremely effective way to reduce tobacco consumption and
mobilize domestic revenues. It is important to counter key objections raised by policy
makers. One such objection is that tobacco taxes will not make a significant contribution
to total tax revenues. Mexico and Poland are among the examples that have shown
significant revenue gains. A second objection is that tobacco taxes are regressive, when in
fact evidence shows that the poor benefit more than the rich. A third objection is that
tobacco taxes will cause increased illicit trade that countries cannot counter, when the
evidence is that countries like Kenya and Brazil have done so and that price rises reduce
consumption even in the face of some smuggling. The World Bank Group and IMF should
build on real progress being made by many countries, put tobacco taxes more firmly at the
forefront of their engagements, and play a lead role in a broader coalition to get tobacco
taxes recognized as a top development priority. He ended by committing CGD to active
participation in that coalition.

Plenary Panel 7: How to Design and Enforce Tobacco Excises.

Patrick Petit and Janos Nagy, Fiscal Affairs Department, International Monetary Fund.
Blanca Moreno-Dodson, Moderator, WBG; Violeta Vulovic, Rapporteur, WBG.

The IMF has recently issued a ‘How to” note, drafted by the presenters, on how to design
and enforce tobacco excises. This note was issued in the context of the IMF’s commitment
to supporting SDGs and the Financing for Development Addis Ababa Action Agenda to
strengthen tax systems in developing countries. Potential revenue from the tobacco taxation
is not as high as from major income or consumption taxes but has real potential and already
accounts for over 1% of GDP in a number of countries. And it supports important public
health objectives, both in the short and long-term. Key determinants of revenue potential
are the price elasticity and current levels of tobacco excises as well as current levels of
tobacco consumption and administrative capacity.
The IMF finds that earmarking of taxes increases budget rigidity and complicates budget
management. However, it recognizes the political attractiveness of dedicating revenues
from proposed tax increases to particular popular health or related programs. If earmarking


                                             12
is used, it should preferably be “soft”, politically linking commitment to raise taxes to
specific initiatives but without an accounting or legal link between the two,
Governments increasingly are using specific excise taxes, which are compatible with health
objectives and are easier to manage than ad valorem excises. Ad valorem excises, have the
advantage of de facto automatic adjustments for inflation. But similar periodic increases of
specific excises could also be achieved by building the increases into excise legislation.
The IMF has a preference for a gradual approach to tax increases and capacity building.
Countries should focus on building their administrative capacity to more effectively
enforce the tobacco tax policies through: strengthening the legal framework; empowering
the excise administration to audit and conduct criminal investigations; penalizing illegal
activity; sharing and using monitoring information; and working with regional and
international organizations, including in implementing the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit
Trade in Tobacco products.
Plenary Panel 8: Tobacco Taxation and Illicit Trade: Are they Connected?
Latin America’s Experience: Enrique Fanta, WBG; Turkey’s Experience: Volkan
Cetinkaya, WBG; Kenya’s Experience: Caxton Masudi Ngeywo, Kenya; Philiso Phodiso
Valashia, Commentator, Botswana; Matt Myers, Moderator, Campaign for Tobacco
Free Kids; Magaly A. Clavijo, Rapporteur, WBG.
Countering criminal networks and strengthening customs and tax administration are “win-
win- win”- better health, more revenue, and less tax avoidance. However, there is a need
to separate out facts from myths on illicit trade. The tobacco industry has used illicit trade
as a reason to raise tobacco taxes slowly if at all. While illicit trade requires priority
attention, country evidence shows that raising tobacco taxes nonetheless generates
substantial additional government revenue. Evidence presented from Turkey, Kenya and
Latin America showed clearly that the main cause of cigarette smuggling is not tobacco
taxes but institutional issues that include: weak government enforcement capacity; overly
complex tax systems; organized crime and corruption; complicity of the tobacco industry;
and lack of sufficient regional and international cooperation.
These cases also showed how strengthening administration reduced illicit trade even with
sharp tax increases. Turkey raised tobacco taxes to 8% of total revenues, three times the
budget of the Ministry of Health and significantly reduced both consumption and illicit
trade. The Kenya case was also an example of how the tobacco industry, which claimed
that every tobacco control measure causes illicit trade, both provided misleading data to
government and was complicit in illicit trade.
Experience in Latin America shows that strong professional customs administrations and
good information technologies (IT) and registration systems provide the ability to
identify and counter illicit trade actors. Some countries have improved this by having a
single tax payer number, which aids efforts to “follow the money”. Electronic stamps are
also important. However, weak coordination and sharing of information between tax and
customs administrations, as well as in some countries corruption even at high levels, set
back the continuing battle against illicit trade.

                                             13
Plenary Panel 9: Tobacco Taxation: Policy Options for Moving Agenda Forward:
Country Perspectives.
Nojibur Rahman, Bangladesh; Snjezana Brckalo, Bosnia and Herzegovina; Suahasil
Nazara, Indonesia; Joel Oguima, Gabon; Motena Tsolo, Lesotho; Khin Yamon Aung,
Myanmar; Toluwalola Kasali, Nigeria; Sajjad Haider Khan, Pakistan; Lilibeth David,
Philippines; Mor Sall, Senegal; Hung Quoc Nguyen, Vietnam; Patricio V. Marquez,
Moderator, WBG; Vandana Shah, Rapporteur, Campaign for Tobacco Free Kids
(CTFK).

The rich diversity of country experience strongly reconfirmed key points coming from
previous conference sessions. Simplification and use of specific excise taxes, including
reduction of ‘tiers’ of price levels, as in the Philippines and Pakistan, are a priority for
increasing health benefits and revenues. World Bank Group technical support had helped
in such design issues in a number of countries. Taxes should cover other tobacco products
as well as cigarettes, as in Myanmar. Tobacco industry intervention to discourage sharp
increases and improvements in structure of tobacco taxes was widespread. The industry
used misleading arguments and data to claim that the effect would be losses in jobs and in
revenue and increases in illicit trade. But funds not spent on tobacco would be spent on
other goods and services, creating other jobs directly and through their multiplier effect.

Tax revenues had become a major part of overall tax revenues in those countries that had
acted boldly to raise tobacco taxes and to strengthen tax administration to ensure
compliance. These additional taxes can be used, as in the Philippines and a number of other
countries, to support other health programs, including the expansion of health insurance
coverage. This helps strengthen coalitions, including with civil society organizations, to
favor tobacco tax increases and to resist industry lobbying. Regional cooperation and pacts
are important and need to be strengthened, including, for example by addressing the West
Africa Economic Monetary Union (WAEMU) tax ceiling, which constrained Senegal’s
bold increases in tobacco taxes. Tobacco taxes should have multi-year roadmaps, as in
Indonesia and should be integral parts of broader tobacco control strategies, as in Vietnam.

Plenary Panel 10: Some Perspectives for the Future

Slavea Chankova, The Economist; Michael Myers, Rockefeller Foundation; Sheila
Dutta, Moderator, WBG.

It was emphasized the progress that has been made, initially slowly and recently more
rapidly, since the landmark report of the U.S. Surgeon General in 1964. A striking slide
demonstrated graphically that although tobacco taxes were the most effective means to
reduce tobacco consumption, overall progress in reducing consumption between 2007 and
2014 was strongly influenced by whether complementary steps for tobacco control were
introduced. The complementary steps covered included advertising bans, cessation
programs, warning labels, and bans on smoking in public places. Turkey, which sharply

                                            14
increased and reformed tobacco taxes, was the only country to take all the complementary
steps covered, and it achieved one of the biggest declines in smoking.

Additional emphasis was placed on the importance of tobacco taxes in the context of
broader tobacco control programs. It was reiterated the importance of additional evidence,
citing the progress made in the United States after the spread of new knowledge on second-
hand smoke. Like previous participants, presenters emphasized also the importance of
dedicating resources from tobacco taxes as crucial for generating political support.
Dedicating resources for health programs and for complementary programs affecting
health in other sectors helped mobilize constituencies, including civil society organizations
and religious leaders, to counter political and industry resistance.

Closing Session: The Way Forward and WBG Commitment

Tim Evans, Senior Director, WBG;

Patricio V Marquez and Blanca Moreno-Dodson, Moderators WBG.

Tim Evans thanked all participants and thanked the Bill & Melinda Gates and Bloomberg
Foundations for their support to the conference. He emphasized some of the key themes
that had emerged from the conference. Tobacco taxes are strikingly effective in reducing
the enormous disease and death toll caused by smoking. They are a necessary but not
sufficient part of broader national tobacco control programs. Attention to detail is important
in planning and implementation, for example in the structure of tobacco taxation and in tax
administration. How tobacco taxes are used is also critical to obtaining political support for
moving forward. They should be seen, for example, as health promotion or health dividend
taxes.

However, it was advised that is important to rise “above the weeds” and make sure there is
broader recognition and political support for tobacco control as a ‘best buy’ for health and
for development as a whole. Its major objective is reduced disease and death and improve
the overall social and economic well-being of countries. Country evidence also shows that
it can make a major contribution to domestic resource mobilization and so can get strong
support from finance ministries. And it is crucial to meeting Sustainable Development
Goals (SDGs), both for improving health and for combatting poverty. Country strategies
for tobacco taxes should be integrated into broader tobacco control strategies and should
establish specific targets to mobilize political support and drive action. These targets should
include reduction in smoking prevalence, lives saved, revenue increases, and incremental
dividends for health and other development programs.

The World Bank Group is committed to providing support for the planning and
implementation of country strategies for tobacco control through its operations, analysis,
technical assistance and shared learning. Success also requires strong commitment by top
leadership at both country and global levels. World Bank leadership will work closely with

                                              15
leadership of other development institutions to this end. And it will seek to convene
Finance Ministers to inform them and get their commitment to tobacco control. The World
Bank Group is looking forward to working with the conference participants and with their
countries and institutions in this crucial common effort.

Special thanks was conveyed to World Bank Group staff who were working hard to support
country efforts, citing strong progress that some countries, including Ukraine, Moldova,
Colombia, Kenya, Armenia and the Philippines, have made. The importance of shared
knowledge and of solidarity among those working on tobacco taxes at country level was
also emphasized. What is done at global level is significant only to the extent that it makes
a positive difference in what gets accomplished at country level, and in particular in how
it helps those – children, men and women – who will suffer from tobacco-related diseases,
premature death and lasting disability as a result of their having been deliberately addicted
to tobacco.




                                             16
17
