              Paraguay Jobs Diagnostic


The Dynamic Transformation of Employment in Paraguay


                       Draft
                      July 2017
            Abbreviations
CPI      Consumer Price Index

DGEEC    General Directorate for Economic Surveys and
         Censuses (Dirección General de Estadísticas,
         Encuestas y Censos)

GDP      gross domestic product

HDI      Human Development Index

ILO      International Labour Organization

PPP      purchasing power parity

RUC      registration number (Registro Único de
         Contribuyente)
SEDLAC   Socio-Economic Database for Latin America
         and the Caribbean

WDI      World Development Indicators
                                         Table of Contents


Acknowledgements……………………………………………………………….....…i
Executive Summary…………………………………………………………..………..ii
Chapter I: Introduction……………………………………………………………...…1
    A. Jobs for development……………………………………………………..…...1
    B. Paraguay’s development context……………………………………….…..…3
Chapter II: Demographics, Job Creation, and Labor Productivity.................................8
    A.   Demographic pressures on the labor market….……………..………….….…8
    B.   Job creation and labor productivity during the past 15 years……………..…12
    C.   Sectoral and regional employment trends……………………………….…..17
    D.   Impact on job quality…………………………………………………….…..23
Chapter III: Labor Market Outcomes and Labor Transitions……………………..…27
    A.   Access to jobs……………………………………………………………..…27
    B.   Microdeterminants of labor market participation and employment………...32
    C.   Link between earnings, work status, and skills…………………………….…34
    D.   Microdeterminants of earnings……………………………………………...37
    E.   Labor transitions into, out of, and between jobs……………………………...40
Chapter IV: Conclusions, Remaining Knowledge Gaps, and Next Steps………….…46
References………………………………………………………………………….…50
Annexes
                                     Acknowledgments


This report was written by Elizabeth Ruppert Bulmer (Lead Economist, Jobs Cross-Cutting
Solutions Area of the World Bank Group) with a team comprising Samantha Watson
(Operations Officer) and David de Padua (Consultant) from the Jobs Cross-Cutting Solutions
Area, and Adrian Garlati (external consultant). The report benefited from inputs by Diana
Hristova (Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank Group), Stefano Curto
(Macro and Fiscal Management Global Practice), and Maria Ana Lugo (Poverty Global
Practice).
The team is grateful for the comments provided by peer reviewers John Speakman (Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice), Parmesh Shah (Agriculture Global Practice), Jennifer Keller
(Macro and Fiscal Management Global Practice), and Pedro Rodriguez (Peru Country
Management Unit). The report was written under the guidance of Jesko Hentschel, Country
Director for Paraguay, and David Robalino and Mary Hallward-Driemeier of the Jobs Cross-
Cutting Solutions Area.
This Jobs Diagnostic report, which represents the first phase of the Let’s Work program in
Paraguay, was made possible through a grant from the World Bank’s Jobs Umbrella Trust
Fund, which is supported by the Department for International Development/UK AID, and the
Governments of Norway, Germany, and Austria, as well as the Austrian Development Agency
and the Swedish Development Agency, SIDA.
Let’s Work partners include the African Development Bank Group (AfDB), Asian
Development Bank Group (ADB), Austrian Federal Ministry of Finance (BMF), Department
for International Development (DfID), European Investment Bank (EIB), European
Development Finance Institutions (EDFIs), Inter-American Development Bank (IADB),
International Labor Organization (ILO), International Youth Foundation (IYF), Islamic
Corporation for Development of Private Sector (ICD), Ministry of Foreign Affairs of
Netherlands, Overseas Development Institute (ODI), Private Infrastructure Development
Group (PIDG), Swiss Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO), World Bank Group (WBG),
and World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD).
Forthcoming analysis to be carried under the Let’s Work Paraguay program will include labor
demand analysis (typically part of a Jobs Diagnostic), value chain analysis, and a qualitative
youth survey, inter alia.
The team wishes to express its gratitude for the close collaboration of the Government of
Paraguay’s Secretaría Técnica de Planificación del Desarrollo Económico y Social, as well as
the statistical agency, Dirección General de Estadísticas, Encuestas y Censos (DGEEC). The
team is also grateful to the International Labour Organization for its effective partnering on
Let’s Work Paraguay.




                                              i
                                  Paraguay Jobs Diagnostic
                The Dynamic Transformation of Employment in Paraguay


                                      Executive Summary
Paraguay in the last decade and a half not only experienced robust economic growth and
improved labor outcomes across sectors, it also saw marked improvements in job quality
and the creation of many new jobs that are good for development. Good jobs for
development, the focus of this analysis, are those that boost living standards, have higher levels
of productivity, and enhance social cohesion through positive social externalities. The analysis
in this report describes the ways in which employment outcomes have improved for a majority
of Paraguayans, the degree to which certain types of workers have not benefited from ongoing
dynamic transformations, and the challenges for sustaining and enhancing labor market gains
in the future.

The observed transformation of employment reflects multiple concurrent underlying dynamic
factors:

      Decades of sustained economic growth
      Structural shifts in economic production away from agriculture toward services
      Demographic forces that have expanded the working-age population
      Increased urbanization
      A growing public sector providing expanded public services
      Increased domestic demand for goods and services in both the informal and formal
       sectors

Demographics and the changing pattern of economic production

Paraguay’s rapid demographic growth has put considerable pressure on the labor
market. The current youth bulge has the potential to create an important demographic
dividend, but at the same time increases pressure for faster job creation. The labor force
expanded by 2.5 percent annually over the past decade, but job creation more than kept pace,
at 2.7 percent per year.

Economic growth was therefore robust enough to increase employment during this
period. The employment-to-GDP elasticity of 0.55—in line with global norms—translated into
over 72,000 net new jobs annually. Looking to the future, Paraguay’s labor force is projected
to add 990,000 workers between 2015 and 2030, requiring 66,000 new jobs every year; this
target is achievable if the economy sustains annual average growth of 3.7 percent.

Paraguay’s economy is in the midst of a structural transformation from an agricultural
to a services-based economy. The majority of recent job growth was concentrated in retail
(accounting for 40 percent of net new jobs) and government services (20 percent), followed by
manufacturing (13 percent); finance, real estate and other services (each about 10 percent); and
construction (8 percent).

Job creation was accompanied by very strong within-sector labor productivity growth,
averaging 2.3 percent per year in real terms, much higher than the observed between-sector
productivity gains that occur when workers shift from less productive to more productive
sectors. Agricultural productivity growth was the main driver of aggregate gains in the first
                                                ii
part of the last decade, but other sectors subsequently gained steam, leading to more widely
shared productivity gains between 2008 and 2015. For example, transport, communications,
financial, and other services had the strongest productivity growth (0.9 percent per year since
2008), followed by public administration (0.6 percent), construction (0.5 percent), and
agriculture (0.4 percent). Manufacturing and utilities, in contrast, actually lost productivity.

Very positive labor market outcomes

The large increase in the number of formal sector jobs further contributed to higher labor
productivity. Formal job creation was in fact double informal job creation, despite the
dominance of informal jobs in Paraguay. Between 2008 and 2015, 372,000 formal jobs were
added, compared with 179,000 informal jobs (in net terms), and the informality rate fell from
79 to 71 percent in less than seven years. The private sector added nearly 200,000 formal jobs,
while the public sector added 94,000 formal jobs (equivalent to a 54 percent increase). Large
formal firms were responsible for adding the majority of private sector jobs since 2008.

These patterns of job creation translated into improved job quality, both because many
formal jobs were created, but also because real wages grew across the board—that is, in all
sectors and for most types of work status. Self-employed smallholder farmers experienced very
large income gains in the early part of the period, averaging 9 percent per year in real terms
between 2001 and 2008, but earnings fell between 2008 and 2015. Since 2008, formal wages
rose by 3 percent per year in real terms, self-employed (non-farmer) wages experienced 5
percent annual growth, and wages of informal wage workers rose 3 percent per year.

The combination of robust job growth and higher incomes led to significant reductions
in poverty and inequality. Extreme poverty fell from 21 percent in 2003 to 10 percent in 2015,
and moderate poverty fell from 44 percent to 22 percent in the same period. Rural poverty rates
remain much higher than urban poverty, but both saw rapid improvements in the last decade.

Unequal access to better jobs

Not all workers have been able to benefit from the increased demand for labor and rising
incomes, however. This is especially true when considering the welfare of informal and formal
workers, and reflects unequal access to good jobs. In comparing labor outcomes across
different worker characteristics such as gender, age, and education, the data show that young
workers, women, and those with less education are more likely to work informally. Women
have lower rates of labor force participation, and those in the labor force earn significantly less
than men, even when controlling for individual characteristics such as education and sector of
work. Regression analysis indicates an earnings gap between men and women that ranges from
18 to 42 percent.

Household characteristics also affect access to good jobs. Workers in the bottom 40 percent
of households are one-third more likely to be in informal work, and rural workers are about
one-fourth more likely to be in informal work. Part of this unequal access to formal
employment stems from education differences, although educational attainment for both rural
and urban youth has increased sharply in recent years. Workers from Guaraní-speaking
households also have a higher probability of being in informal work.

The observed imbalances in access to formal jobs also reflect geographic inequalities in
terms of the rural–urban composition of jobs. Job growth has been skewed to urban formal
jobs: whereas rural employment grew steadily after 2001, urban jobs grew much faster, adding

                                                iii
three times the number of new rural jobs. And of the urban jobs added since 2008, about four-
fifths were formal.

Despite strong formal job growth, informal workers have difficulty transitioning into
formal employment, according to panel data that track worker transitions into and out of the
labor force and between jobs. The data reveal a dynamic labor market on the informal side, but
a degree of rigidity on the formal side. Workers move easily into and out of activity, into and
out of unemployment, and between informal jobs, the latter reflected by high rates of rotation
among self-employed, informal wage employee, and employer status. Labor turnover in the
formal sector is very low, by contrast, reflecting more stable employment contracts, particularly
in the public sector. Firm size plays a role in labor transitions, as large firms are more likely to
create formal jobs, and informal workers in large firms are more likely to land a formal job.

Individual characteristics—including education level—have only modest effects on the
likelihood of transitioning from informal to formal jobs, even though formal employees
have more education on average. This education paradox suggests that other factors play
a larger role in impeding worker mobility into formal work, factors such as regulatory
impediments on formal firms which encourage underreporting and informal contracting, weak
governance, structural factors, and sectoral composition effects. For instance, workers in a rural
area will have difficulty finding formal jobs without moving to the city, even if they have high
levels of education. The government may prefer to hire new graduates rather than those with
only informal work experience, and/or tertiary graduates may prefer to enter directly into
formal employment; both would be consistent with low transition rates from informal to formal
work for the highly educated.

Despite this paradox, education is nevertheless an important driver of job outcomes.
Having a tertiary degree significantly increases a worker’s probability of being in formal
work—especially in the public sector—and even a secondary degree increases the likelihood
markedly. Earnings analysis shows that higher levels of education bring higher wages, and the
returns are large; for example, tertiary graduates earn nearly double the wages of a worker
lacking a primary degree and nearly a third more than those with an incomplete tertiary degree,
even controlling for other characteristics such as formality.

The connection between economic growth and jobs

The trends in employment, productivity, and job quality show that Paraguay’s
productivity growth was diversified across most services sectors (except retail) and
construction. In addition, rising aggregate demand and rising incomes stimulated further
demand for goods and services in sectors across the economy. The mutually reinforcing
feedback effects fostered job creation in both formal and informal activities. The higher share
of formal and urban employment—boosted by public sector hiring—contributed to higher
average wages and better job quality. Informal workers benefited from these quality
improvements as well, through strong wage growth for self-employed and informal wage
workers.

Informal low-productivity employment still dominates. Most new jobs—whether formal or
informal—were added in the retail sector, followed by government services, manufacturing,
other services, and construction. Despite this diverse sectoral distribution of added jobs, most
jobs in Paraguay are still found in agriculture, retail, and other services—three sectors with the
lowest productivity, the lowest wages, and a high degree of informality. Although agriculture
is no longer the dominant employer, it nevertheless plays a central role in the economy,

                                                 iv
providing a fifth of GDP, the majority of exports—especially in capital-intensive soy and beef
—and a fifth of jobs, mostly smallholder farmers.

Questions of sustainability

The continued dominance of informal, low-productivity, low-skilled jobs despite
significantly improved labor outcomes raises concerns about the sustainability of
Paraguay’s future growth path. Demand for Paraguayan goods and services is constrained
by the small domestic market, and existing links to export markets are highly concentrated in
capital-intensive agricultural products that provide little scope for spurring export-oriented
employment. Rural workers are moving to more productive jobs in urban areas, but many of
these are in retail, construction, or other services, suggesting only modest gains in labor
productivity. Although educational attainment is rising, education quality is weak, limiting the
prospects for improved labor productivity. Moreover, the preference for government jobs could
dampen future productivity growth, if the country’s most skilled workers are not becoming
innovators and creating or entering businesses with high growth potential.

The shift out of agriculture has been accompanied by rapid urbanization, but this in turn
hinders balanced job creation and widespread access to good jobs. Because jobs in urban
centers tend to be better than rural jobs, urbanization pressures will persist in the coming years,
especially as youth become increasingly mobile. But as more and more youth migrate to the
capital, and the growing urban population has children at the present high rate, there may not
be enough productive jobs in the urban private sector to absorb the number of entering workers.

A more effective transformation would be more evenly distributed across urban centers,
secondary towns, and rural regions, to foster better links between the rural and urban
economies and between domestic and external markets in a way that reduces rather than
exacerbates the gaps in regard to lagging regions and economically marginalized population
groups. A key objective is to harness the ongoing structural transformation out of agriculture
into more productive work in a way that transforms the nature of jobs toward higher-value
activities that are better connected to larger, more competitive domestic and external markets,
and at the same time generates positive social spillovers that support inclusive development.

Future challenges

Ensuring a development path that supports more, better, and inclusive jobs in Paraguay
requires meeting four fundamental challenges: (i) continued rapid job creation that keeps
pace with labor force growth; (ii) more diversified economic activities that enable job creation
in a wide range of sectors and geographic locations, and across the skills spectrum to
accommodate the diverse labor supply, especially higher-skilled workers; (iii) improved job
quality, especially within existing informal jobs in agriculture and services, through higher
productivity and earnings; and (iv) better access to jobs for workers with fewer opportunities
or weaker attachment to the labor market, including women, youth, rural, and poor workers.




                                                v
                                        Paraguay Jobs Diagnostic
                   The Dynamic Transformation of Employment in Paraguay


I. Introduction

A. Jobs for development

Jobs are central to economic development. Economies grow when more people work, when
jobs become more productive, and when workers move to better jobs—e.g., from low-
productivity farm work into jobs in the modern manufacturing or services sectors, or from
remote rural areas to urban centers with greater specialization and more job opportunities.
Similarly, living standards improve and poverty declines when individuals move from
inactivity or unemployment into jobs, or when workers’ labor income rises. Transformation
that occurs at the level of the individual takes place through employment earnings that raise
household living standards and welfare, contributing to social development. A jobs-centered
development path that effectively connects vulnerable groups to jobs can have positive
reinforcing effects on social cohesion, leading to a virtuous cycle of rising incomes,
productivity, and inclusion (see the World Development Report on Jobs, World Bank 2012).

For Paraguay, achieving development objectives with respect to economic growth,
diversification, competitiveness, and poverty reduction requires meeting specific goals for
job creation, job quality—especially informal jobs1—and access to jobs. The country’s
recent strong economic performance and significant reductions in poverty are, in fact,
explained by improvements in labor market outcomes. The aim of this report is to describe the
types of employment transformations that enabled this to happen and the remaining challenges
going forward. Characterizing labor outcomes requires characterizing jobs, but job attributes
vary, playing different roles for different segments of the population and different sectors of
the economy. A nuanced interpretation of job quality is therefore required.

Good jobs for development are those that boost living standards, have higher levels of
productivity, and enhance social cohesion through positive social externalities (box 1).
Good jobs for development are also context-specific, and thus depend on country
circumstances. In Paraguay, the types of jobs that can help achieve development objectives
might include modern manufacturing jobs that employ semiskilled workers producing for large
export markets or skilled service sector jobs that facilitate integration into global markets
through better logistics, business services, and ICT, among other things. Skilled agriculture
jobs that enhance Paraguay’s competitiveness in the soy and cattle markets, where it is already
a global player, would boost productivity and incomes, and help sustain export revenues and
aggregate economic growth.




1
  Informal jobs are defined in this report to include (i) farmers, herders, and fishers (self-employed or employers
of firms with no Registro Único de Contribuyente, or RUC); (ii) unpaid family workers; (iii) non-farmer self-
employed, employee, or employer of firm with no RUC; and (iv) wage employees not contributing to Social
Security. Formal jobs include (i) wage employees contributing to Social Security, (ii) employers of a registered
firm (with a RUC), and (iii) self-emz`ployed workers with a registered firm (with a RUC).
                                                         1
    Box 1: Jobs are transformational




    Source: World Bank 2012


But Paraguay also needs better jobs for workers who lack the education and skills to
access jobs at the high end of the productivity spectrum. For example, small-scale farmers
and rural non-farm workers need enhanced income-earning opportunities such as through
better-quality crops, through larger harvests or larger and healthier herds per unit of input, or
through easier access to markets with more demand for their products or services. The large
number of workers in the unskilled services sectors—many of whom are self-employed or work
in microenterprises—earn low and unstable incomes from low-productivity work and have
limited prospects for upgrading job quality.

Demographic pressures are feeding rising urbanization in Paraguay, yet cities are ill-
equipped to absorb new arrivals into sustainable productive work. A key challenge for
developing countries including Paraguay is to harness the shift out of agriculture into more
productive work—within cities, secondary towns, and rural regions—in a way that transforms
the economy and the nature of jobs toward higher-value activities connected to larger, more
competitive markets. Three types of transformation are needed to achieve lower poverty
together with increased economic diversification and growth: creating more jobs, improving
the quality of existing jobs, particularly informal jobs, and increasing access to jobs for
vulnerable groups. Dynamic economies experience churning in the labor market, and in
developing economies, this churning can take the form of job destruction in less productive
activities, replaced by new, more productive jobs in other activities or sectors. But the process
can be risky if the volume and types of jobs created are inadequate to absorb job seekers,
especially in countries that are experiencing a youth bulge. The result can be a vicious cycle of
high youth unemployment or underemployment, low productivity growth, low earnings, labor
force exit or out-migration, and dissatisfaction, which undermines social cohesion and leads to
low-level equilibria in output and labor markets.

This Jobs Diagnostic examines employment outcomes over the past 15 years so as to
understand the degree to which economic growth translated into more jobs, better job
quality, and more equal access to employment. The analysis utilizes household and labor
force survey data to derive the characteristics of workers and the types of jobs they hold.2 The
2
 The analysis in this report primarily relies on microdata from the annual household income survey, Encuesta
Permanente de Hogares, for 2001 through 2015, carried out by the Dirección General de Estadísticas, Encuestas
y Censos (DGEEC) under the Ministry of Planning. Reliable information on formality status is available only
beginning in 2008, however; so for any analysis referring to work status, the period of study is 2008 to 2015.
                                                      2
report also estimates productivity trends, using macroeconomic data combined with the labor
data to explore the links between jobs and growth across all economic sectors.

The analysis illustrates that structural transformation is underway, as rural workers shift
into largely urban services sector employment. Productivity growth since 2008 has been
robust and widely shared across service sectors (except retail) and construction, but these
sectors still have relatively low productivity. In contrast, the more productive utilities and
manufacturing sectors actually lost productivity. Since 2008, the private sector has added many
formal jobs, double the number of informal jobs created. As a result, average wages and
average job quality have improved markedly. In fact, both formal and informal workers
benefited from strong wage growth, which improved welfare and reduced poverty. These
trends suggest first, that growth was diversified across economic sectors, particularly multiple
services sectors, and second, that rising aggregate demand and rising incomes led to further
demand for goods and services in sectors across the economy and to the creation of formal and
informal jobs. The expanded working-age population resulting from rapid population growth
provided an additional stimulus, as did the growing government sector.

Despite improved labor outcomes for many, employment remains dominated by informal
jobs that are low-productivity, poorly paid, and relatively low skilled. On the one hand, the
informal sector has generated jobs for most unskilled workers in the labor force and boosted
aggregate demand and GDP growth. On the other hand, the continued dominance of informal
employment raises questions about Paraguay’s future growth path and the extent to which
broad-based productivity gains can be sustained. Rising educational attainment is a positive
indicator for skilled workers finding high productivity jobs, but the generally weak educational
quality will ultimately undermine future returns to education. Moreover, a large share of
tertiary graduates prefers to enter public service, reducing the stock of highly skilled workers
available to spur productivity growth in the private sector. The youth bulge has heretofore
helped economic performance; however, sustaining welfare gains and inclusive GDP growth
going forward will require, among other things, increased diversification of production,
including in more productive and/or export-oriented activities, and improved access to high-
quality employment for a wider swath of the population.

This Jobs Diagnostic is the first stage of a multipronged analytical program to address
Paraguay’s jobs challenges under the Let’s Work partnership, a program financed by
multiple donors led by the World Bank’s Jobs Cross-Cutting Solutions Area. The program
supports jobs diagnostics, sectoral analyses, and policy design using a multisectoral approach
that brings together government, civil society, the private sector, and donors within a
consultative framework. Subsequent work to be carried out under the program includes firm-
level analysis to diagnose the challenges affecting labor demand by private employers, value-
chain analysis to understand selected existing production chains and how small producers are
connected or could be better integrated, and a qualitative youth survey to deepen knowledge of
the factors affecting education and labor supply decisions by young population cohorts. The
findings of this Jobs Diagnostic will be combined with the findings of these subsequent
assessments to inform policy design and priorities for a multi-sectoral jobs strategy to help
Paraguayans reach their development potential through more, better, and inclusive jobs.

B. Paraguay’s development context



The second main data source, which is used to analyze between-period labor transitions, is the panel component
of the labor force survey, Encuesta Continua de Empleo, for 2010 to 2014.
                                                      3
Jobs challenges are closely tied to the realities of Paraguay’s economic and
sociodemographic structure and resources. This development context shapes the
characteristics and potential role of jobs for realizing the country’s economic and social
development potential. Paraguay is a small, open, but landlocked economy. Its population of 7
million is dwarfed by those of neighboring Brazil and Argentina, and the country has abundant
and rich land resources and a river system that provides hydroelectric power. Over the past 45
years, Paraguay’s GDP grew almost eightfold; this development trajectory enabled GDP per
capita to nearly triple in real terms since 1970, reaching US$3,825 in 2015 (upper-middle-
income country status; figure 1). This strong economic growth was accompanied by significant
improvements in living standards, although Paraguay’s rate of improvement lagged that of
some of its neighbors in the region (figure 2). During the last decade, Paraguay’s continued
strong economic performance resulted in annual average growth of nearly 5 percent, albeit with
sizeable year-to-year fluctuations.

Figure 1: GDP and GDP per capita
(2005 USD)




Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators (WDI).

Figure 2: Human Development Index, Paraguay and LAC comparators




Source: UNDP, Human Development Index (HDI).


                                                  4
The structure of economic production is undergoing a profound transformation away
from agriculture toward services and, to a lesser degree, industrial activities (figure 3).
Nevertheless, agriculture continues to play a central role. It accounts for 20 percent of both
employment and GDP, and is a significant source of export earnings. Paraguay is the fourth
largest soybean exporter in the world and the ninth largest beef exporter. More than three
quarters of all exports are food and agricultural products, and another 22 percent is energy from
hydroelectric generation (figure 4). Commercial, capital-intensive agricultural production has
boomed over the past 15 years, with total cultivated area more than doubling since the 1990s
and pasture land increasing nearly 50 percent. In addition to expanded production, Paraguay’s
sustained export-driven growth partly reflects entry into new markets.

Figure 3: Sectoral value added shifts to services
(2005 USD)




Source: World Bank, WDI.

Figure 4: Export basket, 2014




Source: Harvard University, Atlas of Economic Complexity (http://atlas.cid.harvard.edu).




                                                       5
Paraguay’s trade is highly concentrated in relatively few products and markets. Paraguay
trades primarily with its South American neighbors (MERCOSUR—Southern Cone Common
Market—partners, and especially Brazil), but since 2008 it has increasingly exported to
European markets and imported from East Asia (see annex A, figures A1 and A2). Paraguay’s
highly concentrated export basket and fairly narrow non-agriculture activities are consistent
with a high level of imports (the country is a net importer). Even foodstuffs are imported,
although the share has declined in recent years (from 15 to 7 percent). Concurrent with
expanded exports, imports have also risen sharply, nearly tripling between 1995 and 2014.
Machinery and electrical products account for the highest share of imports, much of which are
capital inputs into agricultural production.

Paraguay’s agriculture sector has a dual nature, and each segment plays a distinct role.
The modern agriculture sector relies on technology-intensive production methods, is oriented
toward commodity export markets, and employs a relatively small number of highly skilled
workers. Traditional agriculture, by contrast, accounts for nearly a fifth of total employment—
mostly self-employed farmers or unpaid family workers—and is highly labor intensive. This
segment tends to produce traditional products for auto-consumption or for local markets, and
has very low productivity. The links between the modern and traditional agriculture sectors are
minimal, as their relative contributions to growth and employment diverge. Neither engages in
significant local transformation or value addition.

A nearly half-century of robust economic growth has translated into significant—albeit
slower—job growth. With an employment-to-GDP elasticity of 0.55, close to the global norm,
employment growth has averaged 2.7 percent per year over the past decade, faster than the very
high rate of growth of the labor force. The sectoral distribution of job growth reveals a
structural transformation away from agriculture employment toward mostly services sector
jobs (figure 5), in accord with the shift in economic production. In additional to modest
increases in industry jobs, employment in the services sector expanded by 63 percent between
2001 and 2015, absorbing most of the rapidly growing labor force.
Figure 5: Employment by sector, 2001, 2008, and 2015




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

This strong job growth brought higher incomes, both in the aggregate and across sectors
and population groups, which contributed to significant reductions in poverty and
inequality. Extreme poverty fell from 21 percent in 2003 to 10 percent in 2015, and moderate
poverty fell from 44 percent to 22 percent in the same period (figure 6). Real incomes of the
bottom 40 percent increased by 8 percent annually between 2009 and 2014, and the Gini
                                               6
coefficient declined from 0.55 in 2003 to 0.49 in 2015, consistent with large reductions in
inequality in the rest of Latin America (World Bank 2016a). Poverty reduction was primarily
driven by increases in labor income, but non-labor income—for example, from pensions and
from private and public transfers—has played an increasingly relevant role.

Figure 6: Poverty and inequality trends




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares, DGEEC.

The prospects for continued strong, export-driven growth buoyed by the commodity
price boom have faded, creating uncertainty for the future. Even the diversification of
Paraguay’s trading partners away from now-struggling Brazil and Argentina toward European
markets and China will expose trade balances to increased pressure due to diminished demand
for exports and a slowdown in FDI from these quarters (World Bank 2015).3 The resulting
decline in a key impetus of Paraguay’s income growth—including through aggregate demand
effects—raises questions about future labor market developments. Other commodity- or
resource-based economies face similar challenges in generating enough good jobs to foster
broad-based and inclusive growth.4 The structural challenges facing Paraguay highlight the
need for careful analysis of recent employment and productivity outcomes across sectors and
income groups, in order to understand the challenges and opportunities for sustainable growth
and inclusive job creation going forward.

The remainder of this report is organized as follows. Chapter II examines demographic trends,
labor productivity, and job creation in the aggregate and across sectors, and assesses their
impact on job quality. Chapter III documents gaps in access to better jobs and analyzes the
microdeterminants of employment outcomes and wages. It uses panel data to examine worker
transitions between jobs and the factors linked to transitions into formality. The final chapter
summarizes the main findings, identifies key remaining knowledge gaps, and describes next
steps under the Let’s Work Paraguay program to fill these gaps.



3
  Thirty percent of Paraguayan exports go to Brazil and 11 percent to Russia. The economic outlook for the
European and Chinese economies is also subject to significant uncertainty.
4
  In Indonesia, for example, the commodity boom actually reversed the co untry’s industrialization trend, and the
concurrent depreciation of the exchange rate made exports less competitive. This coincided with a shift in
employment from manufacturing to relatively low-productivity, largely informal service, retail and construction
jobs (World Bank 2016b). In Côte d’Ivoire, the incidence of informality and especially self -employment in
household enterprises are very high, as workers unable to access scarce formal work set up their own income-
generating activities. But these typically have very low productivity and low earnings, and ultimately constrain
aggregate productivity growth through low investment due to low potential returns (World Bank 2016c).
                                                        7
II. Demographics, Job Creation, and Labor Productivity
This chapter begins by describing the demographic transition in Paraguay and how it will
influence the evolution of the working-age population and the labor force. The analysis then
looks at aggregate job creation and discusses how it affected per capita output and labor
productivity growth, and the distribution of these productivity gains across sectors. This is
followed by an analysis of sectoral and regional employment trends, and their resulting impact
on job quality.

A. Demographic pressures on the labor market

Paraguay’s population age structure is changing, driven by two offsetting demographic
factors: declining fertility rates and rising life expectancy. During the last century, countries
around the world experienced significant improvements in both, which increased the shares of
prime-age and elderly populations. This demographic phenomenon is more advanced in OECD
countries and in the rest of Latin America, but Paraguay is in the midst of both transitions
(figures 7 and 8).

Figure 7: Fertility rates and life expectancy, international comparison, 2014




Source: World Bank, WDI.




                                               8
Figure 8: Paraguay’s Declining fertility, 2001–25




Source: DGEEC.

As a result of this demographic shift, the dependency ratio also fell, creating the potential
for a demographic dividend (annex A, figure A3). In Paraguay, the share of the working-age
population increased from 63 percent in 2002 to 69 percent in 2015, and is projected to reach
73 percent by 2025; it is, however, expected to slow after 2030 (figure 9). In order to reap the
full benefit of this surge in the share of the working-age population, however, labor demand
must increase sufficiently to absorb the new labor force entrants into productive jobs.




                                               9
Figure 9: Population pyramids for Paraguay: 2002, 2015, 2030
a. 2002




b. 2015




c. 2030




Sources: DGEEC; projection for 2030 based on 2025 DGEEC projections and staff estimates.




                                                   10
A disproportionate share of the recent population growth was in urban areas,
particularly in greater Asunción, and this trend is projected to continue over the next 15
years (figures 10 and 11). The share of the urban population in total population rose from 55
percent in 2002 to 60 percent in 2014, and is expected to surpass 64 percent by 2025.

Figure 10: Population growth by region, 2001–14 (indexed to 2001)




Source: DGEEC.

Figure 11: Urban versus rural population, 2000–30
                                                    Projections




Source: DGEEC.

Labor force participation rates in Paraguay are already high by international standards
and might not provide much additional scope for future labor force growth. In 2014, 69
percent of the working-age population was economically active, as compared with the LAC
average of 65 percent. Almost 83 percent of men aged 15 and older participated in the labor
market, compared with 55 percent of women—which, although significantly lower than the
rate for men, is still above regional and global averages (figure 12).5




5
 According to the WDI, in 2014 the global average labor force participation rate for men was 74 percent and for
women was 53 percent.
                                                      11
Figure 12: Labor force participation rates, Latin America and the Caribbean Region
                        a. Men                                                 b. Women




Sources: World Bank WDI, ILO, and DGEEC.

As a result of these demographic forces and assuming constant participation rates, the
Paraguayan labor force is projected to add 990,000 workers between 2015 and 2030,
equivalent to an annual growth rate of 1.8 percent. This will require the creation of 66,000 new
jobs every year to absorb the added workers and avoid higher unemployment.

B. Job creation and labor productivity during the past 15 years

As more people (with fewer dependents) work, incomes typically rise, and as workers
become more productive, average incomes increase and countries grow faster. Workers
can become more productive by getting better at what they do, producing higher-quality
products or services due to better inputs or production technologies, and/or moving from lower-
to higher-productivity jobs. The analysis that follows looks at the degree to which the
Paraguayan economy has been able to create enough jobs to keep pace with labor force growth
and the role that productivity increases and demographic factors played in this economic
performance.6

Employment has been growing at just above the rate of labor force growth over the last
decade, despite the rapid labor force expansion. Annual labor force and employment growth
averaged 2.5 and 2.7 percent respectively during 2004–2014, much higher than the projected
future labor force growth. Paraguay’s historical pace compares with job creation rates of 2.6
percent in Argentina, 1.7 percent in Brazil, 2.3 percent in Colombia, 3.6 percent in Honduras,
and 2 percent in Uruguay during the same period (figure 13).
6
  The analysis in this section uses the Jobs Structure tool for the period 2001 –15. This tool, developed by the
World Bank Group’s Jobs Cross-Cutting Solutions Area, decomposes income per capita growth into (i) changes
in the size of the working-age population, (ii) changes in participation rates, (iii) changes in employment rates,
(iv) changes in average labor productivity resulting from within-sector changes in labor productivity, and (v)
changes in average labor productivity resulting from the movement of workers between more and less
productive economic sectors. Three main sources of data are used in the analysis: national accounts data on
value added by sector, demographic data, and household-level data on employment by sector (see annex B, table
B1).
                                                       12
Figure 13: Employment and labor force growth across countries, 2004–14




Source: Based on ILO estimates.

Paraguay’s economy has created fewer jobs for a given level of economic growth than
other countries in the region, however. The last decade saw average economic growth of 5
percent per year, about double the rate of employment growth. In effect, each percentage point
increase in GDP was associated with a 0.55 percent increase in employment—an
“employment-growth elasticity” that is below the average of Latin America (1.04) (figure 14).
This lower elasticity implies fewer jobs for a given level of economic growth, though it also
means higher labor productivity growth.

Figure 14: Employment growth and GDP growth across countries, 2004–14




Sources: Based on WDI and ILO estimates.




                                             13
Paraguay experienced very strong growth in per capita output over the past decade and
a half, averaging 3.6 percent annually.7 This was driven primarily by strong growth in labor
productivity8—which contributed 2.3 percentage points—but was significantly helped by the
boost in the working-age population—responsible for another 1.2 percentage points (figure
15). The increase in the employment rate also made a modest positive contribution to output
growth, while changes in the labor force participation rate had little net impact on output.
Paraguay’s productivity growth was far above average for the Latin America and Caribbean
region, ranking in the 76th percentile (figure 16). And the positive contribution to value added
growth of Paraguay’s demographic surge was higher than in most of the region during the
period, ranking in the 97th percentile.

Figure 15: Decomposition of growth in per capita output, 2001–15




Source: Staff calculations.




7
 For detailed results from the Jobs Structure Tool, see annex B, table B1.
8
 Labor productivity is measured by value added per worker. Using this broad measure as a proxy for
productivity, it is not possible to differentiate between price effects and output effects. For example, agricultural
productivity may be high when market prices of agriculture products are high. Similarly, productivity in the
government sector may be high as a result of high government wages, independent of the level of output
produced by government employees.
                                                         14
Figure 16: Productivity growth in Paraguay and the region, 2001–15




Note: Paraguay compared with group of 15 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean (2,798 periods). Growth
rates refer to left axis; percentile ranking refers to right axis.
Source: Staff calculations.

Decomposing by sector, agriculture9 led in productivity growth in the first part of the
past decade, but other sectors subsequently gained steam, leading to more widely shared
productivity gains (figure 17). During the 2001–2008 subperiod, agricultural output posted
strong growth—driven by the modern agriculture subsector—at the same time that agricultural
employment stagnated—primarily in the traditional agriculture subsector—together resulting
in annual productivity growth of 2.4 percent. The other main performing sector during this
earlier subperiod was retail, restaurants, and hotels10 (0.8 percent annual productivity growth).
Between 2008 and 2015, productivity growth was more evenly distributed across sectors:
transport, communications, finance, real estate, and other services had the strongest
productivity growth at 0.9 percent per year; followed by government services (0.6 percent
annual productivity growth11), construction (0.5 percent), and agriculture (0.4 percent). Very
small productivity increases stemmed from structural employment shifts as workers on net
moved into higher-productivity sectors; this effect explains only 0.1–0.2 percentage points of
annual productivity growth.

The average level of labor productivity in agriculture is very low, despite recent gains
that caught up to the levels in manufacturing and in transport, communications, finance,
real estate and other services, and surpassed the level in retail (figure 18). In fact, value
added per worker in agriculture doubled between 2001 and 2008, and continued to grow
modestly thereafter. Construction also experienced robust productivity gains, overtaking the
transport, communications, finance, real estate and other services sector by 2008, and passing
most remaining sectors by 2015, with the exception of utilities and the government sector.
These productivity gains are surprising, given the concurrent increase in employment in service
sector jobs (recall figure 5).


9
  Note that the dual nature of agriculture means that measures of sector productivity represent an average of the
traditional and the modern subsectors. Data limitations preclude disaggregating production by subsector.
10
   Referred to as the “retail sector” henceforth.
11
   This is largely explained by recent wage increases in the government sector.
                                                       15
Figure 17: Labor productivity growth, within sectors and between-sector shifts, 2001–08
and 2008–15




Source: Staff calculations.


Figure 18: Value added per worker by sector, 2001, 2008, 2015




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Within sectors, labor productivity growth emerged from different quarters, some driven
by dynamism in the informal sector, some by gains in the formal sector. And some
productivity gains resulted from the reallocation of workers toward more productive jobs,
either from less to more productive sectors, or from informal work into formal work.
Comparing the productivity implications of job churning in the informal and formal sectors
                                               16
during 2008–2015, the period for which data on formality status are available,12 shows that
many more formal jobs were created (in net terms) than informal jobs—by a ratio of 2:1. At
the same time, the formal sector saw large productivity gains, particularly within the
government sector and in transport, communications, finance, real estate and other services
(figure 19, left panel). There was also a positive productivity effect from workers reallocating
to formal jobs in retail; transport, communications, finance, real estate and other services;
manufacturing; and agriculture (the hyphenated line in figure 19). In the informal sector, the
largest productivity increases were observed within construction and transport,
communications, finance, real estate and other services, and to a lesser extent in manufacturing.
These were offset by significant productivity losses in informal retail, the largest non-farming
employer of unskilled workers.

Figure 19: Productivity change decomposed by formality and sector, 2008–15


        Formal                                                                         Informal




Note: Retail indicates wholesale and retail trade, and restaurants and hotels.
Source: Staff calculations.


C. Sectoral and regional employment trends

New job creation resulted in a significant rise in the share of formal employment, from
21 percent of total employment to 29 percent, in just seven years. Between 2008 and 2015,
372,000 new formal jobs were created (in net terms), as compared with 179,000 new informal
jobs (figure 20a).13 The private sector added nearly 200,000 formal jobs, an 80 percent increase,
and the public sector added 94,000 formal jobs, a 54 percent increase (figure 20b).
12
   The questionnaire for the Encuesta Permanente de Hogares was amended in 2007 to collect data on pension
contributions and firm registration (RUC), among other things, but the 2007 data suggest spotty coverage for
these new questions. Therefore the formality-related variables are used here beginning in 2008.
13
   Note that alternative definitions of informality would generate different magnitudes. For example, using the
productivity-based definition employed by SEDLAC in which all employers, workers in firms with more than
five employees, public sector workers, and self-employed workers with a tertiary degree are deemed to be
formal, Paraguay’s informality rate is a more modest 58 percent.
                                                        17
Figure 20: Growth in formality of employment, 2008–15
         a. Employment (thousands)                              b. Formality and informality share (%)




       79%                                          71%




                                                    29%
       21%



Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Microenterprises dominate the landscape of economic activity, but large and very large
formal firms added the majority of jobs. Microenterprises—those with fewer than six
employees, mostly informal—employ over half of all workers (including self-employment)
(figure 21). Large and very large formal firms—those with 20–49 and 50+ workers,
respectively14—account for only a sixth of total employment.

Figure 21: Employment by size of firm, 2001–15
(employment, thousands)




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Between 2008 and 2015, the distribution of informal jobs and formal jobs shifted toward
the latter. An eight percentage point reduction in the share of informal jobs in the subperiod
was accompanied by a significant increase in the share of formal jobs in retail, government,

14
  Note that these firm-size classifications differ from the standard thresholds but provide more insight in the
Paraguayan context.
                                                          18
manufacturing, and finance and real estate (net flows) (table 1). Even in the agriculture sector,
5,000 formal jobs were added on net between 2008 and 2015, while 45,000 informal jobs were
lost. In retail, a low-productivity sector dominated by informal jobs, over half of the added jobs
were formal. The manufacturing sector added three times more formal than informal jobs. And
although most informal job creation was in the retail sector, 35,000 informal construction jobs
were also added, with average productivity two-thirds higher than the average informal
agriculture job. Although these recent trends suggest a degree of sectoral diversification, most
jobs are still found in agriculture, retail, and other services (figure 22), three sectors with the
lowest productivity (figure 23) and the lowest wages (figure 24).

Table 1: Change in employment by sector, formal and informal, 2008–15
                                                                                       Share in total change
 Sector                                     Type of job                  Number                          (%)
 Agriculture, cattle, and fishing          Formal                          5,288                           1
                                           Informal                      -44,798                          -8
 Manufacture and mining                    Formal                         54,710                          10
                                           Informal                       14,376                           3
 Electricity, gas, and water               Formal                          5,316                           1
                                           Informal                        2,457                           0
 Construction                              Formal                         13,254                           2
                                           Informal                       35,300                           6
 Retail, restaurants, and hotels           Formal                        112,355                          20
                                           Informal                      108,587                          20
 Transport and communications              Formal                         18,834                           3
                                           Informal                       -7,689                          -1
 Finance and real estate                   Formal                         39,002                           7
                                           Informal                       17,449                           3
 Government and public
 administrationa                            Formal                         94,051                           17
                                            Informal                       18,297                            3
  Other services                            Formal                         29,391                            5
                                            Informal                       34,604                            6
  Total net job creation                    Formal                        372,201                           68
                                            Informal                      178,583                           32
a. The sector is self-reported in the household survey, and data on government employment differ from the
public administration records. Informal workers in government are mostly full-time, fixed-term contractors,
concentrated in more skilled occupational categories (e.g., scientists, technicians, clerks) as well as in manual
labor.
Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares, 2008–2015.




                                                          19
Figure 22: Sectoral breakdown of employment, 2001–15
(thousands)




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Figure 23: Change in employment across more and less productive sectors, 2005–15




Note: Circle size is proportionate to employment share in 2005.
Sources: Based on data from SEDLAC, Banco Central de Paraguay, and Encuesta Permanente de Hogares.




                                                  20
Figure 24: Wages by sector, 2001–15
(monthly wage from main occupation, 2005 USD PPP)




Note: Monthly income in 2005 USD PPP = Income from main occupation * (CPI 2005 / CPI observation year) /
PPP Index 2005.
Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.


The geographical distribution of job growth has been uneven, skewed to urban formal
jobs (figure 25). Rural employment (85 percent of which is informal) has grown steadily since
2001, but urban employment (61 percent of it informal) grew much faster, adding 690,000 jobs
between 2001 and 2015, three times the number of new rural jobs. And of the 370,000 urban
jobs added since 2008, about four-fifths were formal. This shift was accompanied by an
increasing urbanization of aggregate employment, overwhelmingly toward Greater Asunción,
principally in the Central region (figure 26).




                                                   21
Figure 25: Growth in urban and rural jobs, 2001–15




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Figure 26: Employment breakdown by region, 2001–15




Source: Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

These sectoral job growth trends and the concurrent contraction in the informal share of
employment boosted average labor productivity, as formal jobs are more productive than
informal ones (the reallocation effect mentioned above). This productivity growth was
diversified across sectors, reflected by the dispersed data points in figure 23, showing different
productivity–employment combinations, likely the result of different factors in different
sectors. In some sectors, productivity growth was jobless, while in other sectors productivity
growth was accompanied by strong job growth. Some sectors actually lost productivity.15


15
  Recall that the proxy used for labor productivity – value added per worker – may not fully reflect firm
productivity, but without firm-level data on production inputs and outputs, it is not possible to gain insight into
                                                         22
       In transport and communications, productivity growth was relatively jobless. This
        suggests either that increases in efficiency, technology, and quality were the result of
        capital inputs rather than additional labor or that less productive labor was replaced by
        more productive labor, as seems to be the case (recall from table 1 that informal jobs
        were eliminated while formal jobs were added).
       Productivity gains in agriculture were also relatively jobless, and most likely stemmed
        from a combination of price and output effects for large producers,16 the addition of
        formal jobs at the more productive end, and a contraction in the number of small
        farmers.
       In manufacturing, construction, and finance and real estate, productivity gains were
        accompanied by robust job growth, implying that output gains were so large that they
        more than absorbed the added labor—even the large influx into construction by less
        productive informal labor.
       In the government sector, the concurrent increases in productivity and employment
        were driven by especially high wage growth.
       The retail sector—already one of the least productive sectors and the largest employer
        (accounting for over a quarter of aggregate employment in 2015)—actually lost
        productivity while adding 300,000 jobs over the last decade. The fact that half of the
        jobs added since 2008 were formal did not sufficiently boost productivity to generate a
        net positive effect across the sector. The role of the retail sector in absorbing unskilled
        self-employed and informal wage employees is not unique to Paraguay; on the contrary,
        it is common in countries across the development spectrum.

D. Impact on job quality

How has job quality evolved in recent years, and has that evolution been good for
Paraguay’s development? Answering this question requires defining criteria for measuring
job quality in the development context; these span a range from productivity and skill level
(important from the growth and competitiveness perspectives), to wages, benefits, access to
social insurance, contract duration, working conditions, and required effort (all important from
the worker’s welfare perspective), to inclusiveness of vulnerable groups (key to building social
cohesion). Some of these desirable criteria are present in formal jobs. By definition, a formal
job is in a registered firm and the worker is covered by social insurance (an important non-
wage benefit providing income security before and after retirement) as well as labor laws
governing (i) workers’ rights (such as minimum wage, severance entitlement, voice or
representation when negotiating with management), and (ii) working conditions (e.g.,
occupational safety, limits on working hours, holidays). However, since a majority of
Paraguayans cannot access formal employment, it is important to consider quality criteria that
are relevant for informal jobs as well. To capture these various aspects, wages are therefore
analyzed by work status and sector and by their evolution.

Formal sector jobs, on average, are more productive and pay significantly higher net
wages than those earned by farmers and the self-employed, which tend to be low and
irregular (figure 27a). Formal employees also tend to have more education than informal

the demand-side factors affecting sectoral productivity performance. This type of firm-level analysis is planned
under the Let’s Work Paraguay program.
16
   The beneficiaries of commodity price-driven productivity gains were primarily the large producers. Note that
although real agriculture wages grew by 6 percent annually between 2008 and 2014, they fell in 2015, pulling
the period average down to -0.7 percent annual growth for 2008 –15. Self-employed farmers’ wages grew by 8.8
percent annually during 2001–08, but fell by 4.4 percent per year during 2008 –15, pulled down by a nearly 19
percent wage drop in 2015.
                                                       23
workers and therefore are more likely to engage in skilled work. For example, private sector
wage employees in a formal job had an average of 12 years of education in 2015, compared
with nearly 9 years for the self-employed and only 5 years for the average farmer. The
education effect is even greater in the public sector, where workers on average have 14.8 years
of education, equivalent to the tertiary level.17

Most formal workers have open-ended or fixed-term written contracts, which come with
significantly higher wages (figure 27b).18 Informal employees, by contrast, lack access to
social security and other work-related benefits, must rely on themselves to ensure workplace
safety, and work under either unenforceable verbal contracts or no contract whatsoever.

Figure 27: Wages by work status and contract type, 2008–15
(monthly wage from main occupation, 2005 USD PPP)
                           a. Work status                                        b. Contract type




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

In addition to the significant increase in the number of formal jobs discussed above, a
marked improvement in job quality can be observed in terms of formal wages. They grew
by 3.1 percent per year in real terms between 2008 and 2015, driven by especially strong growth
in public sector wages, which averaged 5 percent per year (figure 28). Formal private sector
wages grew more modestly at 2 percent per year. Wages for open-ended contract jobs grew
faster than for fixed-term contracts, by 3 percent and 0.2 percent respectively. Average earnings
in informal jobs also improved, but more slowly, averaging 1.5 percent annual wage growth.
Self-employed farmers’ incomes experienced very large gains during 2001–2008 and
subsequently fell, particularly in 2012 and in 2015, the latter pulling down the average growth
calculation for 2008–2015. By contrast, earnings of the self-employed outside of farming rose
significantly, averaging nearly 6 percent annual gains. This mixed performance illustrates the
volatility in informal incomes, another indication of lesser job quality among lower income
groups.




17
  Sixteen years of education typically translates into a complete tertiary degree.
18
  All wages in the analysis are net of social security contributions and taxes, and as such are comparable across
formality status.
                                                       24
Figure 28: Average annual wage growth, 2008–15
(monthly wages measured in 2005 USD PPP)




Note: Farmers’ income growth is particularly low over this period, due to relatively high incomes in 2008 than in
subsequent years, and due to the decline in 2015 relative to 2014.
Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Wage growth was strong in most sectors over the past decade, even in sectors that added
significant jobs (figure 29). In retail, for example, which added the largest number of jobs,
real wages increased by nearly 4 percent per year. Not surprisingly, job growth was stronger
than wage growth, consistent with increased labor demand putting downward pressure on
wages. Stronger formal job growth and formal wage growth together pulled up average wages,
implying an overall improvement in average job quality. Even in the relatively less productive
and highly informal sectors of retail, construction, and other services, average job quality
improved as measured by wages. For the sectors to the right of the 45 degree line in figure 29,
employment growth exceeded wage growth. But in several sectors—namely agriculture and
electricity and gas—wage growth outstripped job growth.




                                                       25
Figure 29: Wage and employment growth, 2005–15
(% change in employment level, % change in real 2005 USD PPP monthly wages)




Note: Circle size is proportionate to 2005 employment share.
Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

In agriculture, employment actually contracted while average real wages increased. The
observed strong productivity growth in agriculture belies the binary nature of the sector,
where production is dominated by large commercial farms using capital-intensive technology
to produce commodities for export, but employment is dominated by self-employed
smallholder farmers using unsophisticated techniques to produce staples for local consumption.
Although self-employed farmers’ earnings declined by over 2 percent annually over the last
decade, average agriculture wages rose by 1.4 percent over the same period, at least partly
explained by commodity price effects (as mentioned above). Moreover, most of the agricultural
jobs added since 2008 were formal, to meet the rising demand for skilled labor in the modern
agriculture subsector.

The highest job growth was recorded in finance and real estate, followed by
manufacturing, government, and construction, mostly concurrent with robust annual
wage growth, with the exception of manufacturing, where wages were flat. In public
administration, for example, the expansion of government employment was accompanied by
significant wage increases, exceeding all other sectors. This implies a potentially distorting role
of public employment, given that public wages and hiring are not market-driven but rather
represent policy choices. As will be shown in the next chapter, the public sector wage premium
is estimated to be large, ranging from 21 percent (for monthly wages) to 38 percent (for hourly
wages), controlling for experience, education, and region, among others.

Note that in the preceding analysis, wage comparisons reflect average wages by worker
category and do not control for composition effects or for individual characteristics such as
education, work status, or sector. These are addressed in detail in the next chapter.

                                                      26
III. Labor Market Outcomes and Labor Transitions
This chapter analyzes labor market outcomes—participation rates, employment, types of jobs,
and earnings—for different categories of workers. The first part of the analysis provides a
snapshot of the labor market in terms of work status, and explores differences in access to jobs
by age, gender, household income, and region. The second part looks at the statistical correlates
of labor force participation and employment. The analysis subsequently explores the links
between wages and skills, and the main determinants of earnings, including education. The last
section addresses labor transitions between jobs and the factors likely to contribute to
successful transitions into formality.

A. Access to jobs

More than half of workers in Paraguay—1.8 million out of a labor force of 3.4 million—
are wage employees, either formal or informal (figure 30). But farmers, unpaid family
workers, and other self-employed workers together account for another 1.3 million jobs,
reflecting the very high levels of informality. Among non-farmers, nearly two-thirds of
employment is wage employment, three-fifths of which is informal. Another 22 percent of non-
farmers are self-employed. Employers can be either formal or informal, and informality is
significant within this group as well (one-third of employers were informal in 2015).19 Taken
together, nearly 2.4 million workers were employed informally in 2015, accounting for over
71 percent of all jobs.

Figure 30: Snapshot of the working-age population in Paraguay, 2015




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Youth find it harder than prime-age workers to land jobs, particularly in the formal
sector. Unemployment is modest at 6 percent, similar to the regional average (see figure 31).
Although unemployment has been mostly declining since 2002, there are important variations
in unemployment by age group. Whereas prime-age (ages 25–59) unemployment averaged 3.6
percent over the past decade, the rate was more than triple for youth (ages 15–24), and in fact
spiked to 13 percent in 2014. The elderly (age 60 and over) are less likely to participate in the
labor force, and among those who do, they experience low rates of unemployment.




19
   The share of informal employers in total employers fell from over 50 percent in 2008 –10 to about 40 percent
in 2011–14, and subsequently to 34 percent in 2015.
                                                      27
Figure 31: Unemployment in the region and in Paraguay by age group, 2001–15
a. By region                                                 b. Paraguay, by age group




Note: Youth: ages 15–24; adult: 25–59; elderly: 60+.
Sources: WDI 2014 and Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Among active youth, over half are informal wage workers, and most of the rest are in
other types of informal work: 13 percent are unpaid family workers, 6 percent are self-
employed, and 4 percent are farmers (figure 32). Only 12 percent of 15- to 24-year-old workers
have managed to access a formal job in either the public or the private sector, compared with
29 percent of 25 to 39 year olds. Among those age 40–59, the shares of farmers and self-
employed are significantly higher than for younger age groups, and they are higher still in the
60+ years age category (although the number of Paraguayans still working after age 60 is
relatively low).




                                                  28
Figure 32: Work status by age group, 2015




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

More and more women are working, but compared with men they struggle to attain good
jobs with good wages. Paraguay’s labor market is characterized by large disparities along
gender lines. Men’s labor force participation rates are about 30 percentage points higher than
women’s, although the disparity has narrowed somewhat over the last six years (figure 33).
And men’s average wage earnings are about 50 percent higher than women’s, not accounting
for differences in education, occupation, or hours worked (annex A, figure A4). Women are
slightly more likely to be in informal work than men (by about two percentage points),
primarily due to the greater preponderance of self-employment among women. Women also
experience higher rates of unemployment.

Figure 33: Gender gaps in labor market outcomes, 2001–15
(male minus female, %)




                                                   29
Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Workers from poor households are likely to be excluded from formal jobs. In terms of
household income status, there are persistent differences in participation rates, informality
shares, and wages between workers living in the poorest 40 percent of households and those in
the richest 60 percent of households. Workers living in the bottom 40 percent of households
are less likely to participate in the labor market. Since 2005, participation rates for non-poor
households averaged 7 percentage points higher than poor households, and the gap has widened
in recent years (figure 34). But poor households have much higher rates of informality: over
90 percent, compared with 60 percent for non-poor households in 2015. Households in the
bottom 40 percent also experienced slightly higher unemployment rates. The wage differences
between poor and non-poor households are particularly large; for example, the average
compensation of workers from non-poor households was two and a half times that of workers
from poor households, reflecting a high degree of income inequality. Note that these
comparisons do not indicate the direction of causality and do not control for compositional
effects20 or individual characteristics such as education or sector of work, which are addressed
later using regression analysis.

Figure 34: Gaps in labor market outcomes between top 60 percent and bottom 40 percent
of households, 2001–15




Note: Gap calculated as top 60 percent minus bottom 40 percent.
Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Outcomes for rural workers are lagging owing to their more limited opportunities. Rural
and urban workers exhibit diverging labor outcomes, partly driven by the preponderance in
rural areas of agriculture-based work, much of which tends to be less productive and requires
lower skills. As shown in figure 35, rural workers have slightly higher labor force participation
rates and significantly lower unemployment rates, reflecting greater household needs owing to
the lower rural incomes, as well as their ready access to agricultural activities. Rural workers
are also much more likely to be in informal work, although the informality trend is declining
among both rural and urban workers. Interestingly, both urban and rural populations increased
their educational attainment—each adding on average two years since 2001, a remarkable

20
  The wage data are from workers’ main occupation only, whereas many poor and/or informal workers are
engaged in multiple activities; thus, these data are likely to overstate the gap.
                                                     30
achievement. But the gap in average education levels between urban and rural workers
remained relatively steady at about three and a half years (figure 36).

Figure 35: Regional gaps in labor market outcomes, 2001–15
(urban minus rural, %)




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Figure 36: Educational attainment by urban and rural workers, 2001–15
(years)




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Strong job creation and wage growth over the last decade had a very positive impact on
reducing both rural and urban poverty; nevertheless, rural poverty remains significantly
higher than urban poverty (figure 37). In 2014, whereas moderate poverty in both rural and
urban regions continued to decline relative to 2013, extreme poverty actually spiked upwards
in rural areas, from 17.6 percent in 2013 to 19.2 percent in 2014. This occurred concurrent with
a large increase in average agriculture incomes, however, which suggests that smallholder
informal farmers and rural non-farm workers did not benefit from these income gains.




                                                   31
Figure 37: Urban and rural poverty trends, 2003–15




Sources: Lugo and Viveros (2016) using DGEEC national poverty lines.

The comparisons of labor market outcomes across population groups suggest large
disparities in accessing formal jobs. This in turn leads to an unequal distribution of
income, illustrated by the fact that poverty is highly correlated with informal work status
(figure 38). These differentiated outcomes likely affect workers’ decisions to seek particular
types of work in particular sectors or locations, potentially creating negative dynamic effects
that perpetuate the observed inequitable outcomes.

Figure 38: Poverty incidence by employment status, 2008–15
(% of workers in each labor force state whose per capita household income falls below the
poverty line)




Sources: Based on SEDLAC data, Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data, and DGEEC poverty measures.

B. Microdeterminants of labor market participation and employment

Gender differences in work status remain large, even controlling for individual
characteristics, as shown in logit regressions and multinomial logit regressions used to derive



                                                   32
a more precise picture of the main variables that contribute to different labor outcomes.21 For
example, being a woman increases the likelihood of being unpaid, self-employed, an informal
wage worker, or a public employee, while being a man increases the likelihood of being a
farmer, an employer, or a formal wage worker in the private sector (for regression results, see
annex C, table C1). Higher levels of education also increase the likelihood of having a formal
job in the public or private sector, or being self-employed or an employer, especially among
those who have completed a tertiary degree. Comparing the likelihood of being active versus
inactive, we find that men are 27 percent more likely to be in the labor force and that higher
levels of education increase the probability of entering the labor force (see annex C, table C2).

For those in the labor force, certain characteristics increase the likelihood of being
unemployed, such as being female, being young, or living in urban areas or in Alto
Paraná. The effects are small, however, as shown in figure 39. Education has no statistically
significant effect on the likelihood of being employed.

Figure 39: Correlates of being employed versus unemployed, 2015
(average marginal effects, age 15+)
                                  -0.08         -0.06        -0.04         -0.02           0           0.02            0.04       0.06

                              Age                                                                0.006

                             Male                                                                              0.024

 Attending any education level                                                                                        0.032

                         Guaraní                                                                                0.026

                            Other                                                                                             0.047

                           Urban                                -0.027

                       Caaguazú                                                                               0.021

                     Alto Paraná -0.069


Note:
Logi t regres s i ons wi th wei ghted obs erva ti ons
Incompl ete pri ma ry or l es s i f l es s tha n 6 yea rs of educa ti on; Pri ma ry compl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa ti on a nd
not enrol l ed; Seconda ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa ti on a nd enrol l ed or ha s (6-12) yea rs of educa ti on;
Seconda ry compl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa ti on a nd not enrol l ed; Terti a ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of
educa ti on a nd enrol l ed or ha s (12-16) yea rs of educa ti on; Terti a ry compl ete i f wi th more tha n 15 yea rs of
educa ti on.
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buti ng to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-
empl oyed workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); Informa l i f (i ) fa rmers /herders /fi s herma n (s el f-empl oyed or
empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee or empl oyer of fi rm
wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge empl oyees not contri buti ng to Soci a l Securi ty.
Al one ca tegory i n Fi rm s i ze i ncl udes s el f-empl oyed a nd domes ti c empl oyees .
Source: Sta ff ca l cul a ti ons ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta .

What factors determine access to formal jobs? Probabilistic regressions comparing those in
informal and formal work indicate that even lower levels of education make a small positive

21
  Logit regressions allow for bilateral comparisons between two work states, whereas multinomial regressions
compare worker characteristics across the entire set of work states. Neither regression tests for causality, only
correlation.
                                                                   33
contribution to the likelihood of formal employment. Secondary and especially tertiary
education significantly increase the probability of being in formal work, by 21 and 35
percent, respectively (figure 40; see also annex C, table C2). Being from a Guaraní-speaking
household reduces the likelihood of being in formal employment. Most formal jobs are
located in Asunción, reflected in the reduced likelihood of formal work among those living in
other regions, including Central. Agriculture, construction, and other services have the
lowest formality rates, and workers in medium and large firms are much more likely to be
formal than those in microenterprises.

Figure 40: Correlates of being in formal versus informal employment, 2015
(average marginal effects, age 15+)
                                   -0.2            -0.1      0              0.1            0.2           0.3       0.4

                            Age                                   0.009

                           Male                                      0.038

                        Guaraní                    -0.054

                          Other                                               0.091

              Primary complete                                            0.061

         Secondary incomplete                                                         0.145

           Secondary complete                                                                    0.213

            Tertiary incomplete                                                                                0.334

              Tertiary complete                                                                                  0.353

                          Urban                                     0.031

                      San Pedro            -0.101

                      Caaguazú            -0.106

                    Alto Paraná                    -0.054

                            Rest               -0.063

  Agriculture, cattle and fishing -0.153

                   Construction       -0.129

    Govt/public administration                                                        0.149

                 Other services           -0.108

                          Alone                     -0.052

                          [6-10]                                             0.08

                         [11-20]                                                    0.13

                         [21-50]                                                              0.198

                           [50+]                                                                   0.238


Note:
Logi t regres s i ons wi th wei ghted obs erva tions
Al one ca tegory i n Fi rm s i ze i ncl udes s el f-empl oyed a nd domes tic empl oyees .
Source: Staff ca l cul a tions ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta.




                                                             34
C. Link between earnings, work status, and skills

Earnings differences across employment types are significant, with employers and public
sector employees earning the highest wages on average, and the self-employed and
farmers earning the lowest (see figure 27). Looking at the entire wage distribution for full-
time workers in 2015, farmers and self-employed workers earned significantly less than
workers with any other employment status, with most earning less than the minimum wage on
average (figure 41). The average wage for informal wage workers is also slightly less than the
minimum wage, although a significant share of informal wage workers earns more. This
suggests that some firms hire informally to evade minimum wage regulations, which
contributes to high informality rates. Formal private sector wages are higher than informal
wages but still close to the minimum wage, whereas the average public sector wage is nearly
twice the minimum wage. This pattern of wage distribution is in fact very similar to that
observed in Peru in 2013 (Ruppert Bulmer et al. 2017).

Figure 41: Distribution of wages for full-time workers by employment status, 2015
2005 US$ PPP




Note: Wage distributions are gross hourly wages plotted for each worker category; vertical line shows national
minimum wage in 2015 (2005 USD PPP).
Source: Based on 2015 Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Wage differences partly reflect worker productivity differences due to higher or lower
skills, and more or less education. Earnings are positively correlated with education level,
with the largest effect at the tertiary level (figure 42). The observed increases in aggregate
real wages are partly due to the fact that educational attainment has increased sharply among
younger age cohorts, even in the short space of the last decade (figure 43). The number of
workers in the labor force with postsecondary education has more than doubled since 2005,
while the number of those completing a secondary degree increased by two-thirds.
Nonetheless, given that these education gains are strongest among new labor force entrants,
who in turn tend to have lower wages than more experienced workers, the effect of more
education on average wages is likely to be modest over this relatively short reference period.
Comparison of relative wages of more and less educated workers over time reveals that the

                                                      35
wages of unskilled workers22 grew faster than those of skilled workers during 2001–-2008,
implying reduced wage inequality during this period; thereafter, however, skilled wage growth
averaged 3 percent per year, compared with only 2 percent for unskilled wage growth, thus
exacerbating wage inequality.

Figure 42: Correlation of wages with education, 2001–2015
(monthly wages 2005 USD PPP)




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.

Figure 43: Positive trends in educational attainment, 2001–15
(% of labor force)




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.



22
     Unskilled workers are defined as those who have an incomplete secondary education or less.
                                                        36
Questions about education quality are relevant to whether more education has an impact
on wages; this is an area where Paraguay continues to struggle, despite reform efforts. In
the last decade, the education system has made considerable strides, including expanded
coverage at all levels and improvements in the sector’s internal efficiency. Public expenditure
on education—at about 4 percent of GDP—is one of the highest in the Region. But the
performance of the education system is relatively weak and may be declining: there has been a
reduction in net primary school enrollment rates in the last few years, and a still substantial
share of children aged 13 to 17 are not in school, pulling Paraguay’s secondary enrollment rates
below the regional average. Learning is rated as insufficient according to national assessments
indicating that more than 50 percent of third graders do not reach the expected proficiency level
in mathematics, and 40 percent do not reach the expected proficiency level in Spanish. In a
regional assessment of learning outcomes, Paraguay ranked among the lowest five countries
(Wodon 2016). The latest World Economic Forum ranking placed Paraguay 140th of 144
countries with respect to the quality of primary education, and 139th with respect to the quality
of secondary education and above (Schwab 2015). Together these indicators point to low
education quality, which would dampen any positive wage effects of rising educational
attainment.

D. Microdeterminants of earnings

Using Mincer-type regressions to control for individual characteristics, we estimate the effects
of work status, education level, and sector, among other factors, on workers’ monthly
earnings.23 When earnings are compared across workers, being in a formal job raises
earnings by over 50 percent, controlling for other factors such as education and region (figure
44 and annex C, table C3). Returns to education increase monotonically with education
level: tertiary graduates earn a significant wage premium—equivalent to 93 percent—over
similar workers lacking a primary degree (and controlling for formality), and even the relative
return to completing university compared with only some tertiary schooling is large at 29
percent. Workers from Guaraní-speaking households earn significantly less than those
from non-Guarani-speakinghouseholds. And there is a large wage premium for Asunción-
based workers. Note that after controlling for selection bias using a Heckman correction, the
results are nearly identical to the ordinary least squares (OLS) estimates.

The gender wage gap is estimated at 42 percent, reflecting a very large earnings
advantage in favor of men, other things being equal. Several factors contribute to the large
gap, including the fact that women work fewer hours on average than men and that women are
more likely to be in non-wage work. Looking only at wage workers (excluding self-employed
and employers), the gender gap narrows to 33 percent, and limiting the comparison to full-time
workers only shows that the gap narrows still further, to 27 percent. By using monthly earnings
as the unit of measure, the estimates reflect the relative wellbeing of male and female workers.
But in a more specific comparison of wages for the same hour of work, the gender wage
gap is close to 18 percent (see annex C, table C4, in which the regressions are run using hourly
wages of full-time wage workers as the dependent variable). The wage discrimination
encountered by Paraguayan women is slightly less than the average for the Region when
estimated using a simplified specification (Ruppert Bulmer and Garlati, forthcoming).




23
  The unit of measure used here—monthly wage earnings in each worker’s main occupation—reflects actual
hours worked.
                                                   37
Figure 44: Correlates of earnings, real (2005) monthly wages, 2015




Note: OLS regres s i ons wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors a nd i ncome wei ghts . Onl y s how s i gni fi ca nt a vera ge
ma rgi na l effects .
Wa ges ca l cul a ted a s a vera ge of monthl y ea rni ngs from ma i n occupa ti on tra ns formed i n 2005 US$ PPP us i ng
SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors . Incl ude moneta ry i ncome a nd a l l other i ncome rel a ted to the job, s uch
a s bonus es a nd i mpl i ci t va l ue of rent, food, a nd uni form, recei ved regul a rl y. Tra ns formed i n 2005 US$ PPP
us i ng SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors .
Experi ence = Age - Yea rs of educa ti on + 6
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buti ng to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-
empl oyed workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); i nforma l i f (i ) fa rmers , herders or fi s hers (s el f-empl oyed or
empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee, or empl oyer of fi rm
wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge empl oyees not contri buti ng to Soci a l Securi ty.
To expl ore for s el ecti on bi a s we a l s o es ti ma ted Heckma n model s . Res ul ts a re i denti ca l to OLS a nd ca n be
s uppl i ed by reques t.
Source: Ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta .


Other factors affect wage levels, such as sector of work and firm size. In order to consider
additional factors that might affect earnings, a number of regression specifications were tested
(reported in annex C, table C3, columns 2–5). The results suggest that earnings vary
significantly across sectors even after controlling for personal characteristics such as language,
region, and education. The returns to education are much higher when formality is not
accounted for, implying that workers with higher education levels tend to select into formal
jobs. The public sector wage premium is significant and therefore distortionary at 21 percent
over a formal private job, other things being equal.24 Agriculture workers earn 53 percent less
than retail sector, itself characterized by low productivity and wages. Manufacturing work is
not well-remunerated (1.1 percent less than retail), whereas workers in transport and
communications and in construction earn significantly more than retail workers (18 and 20

24
     For hourly wages, the public sector premium is 38 percent.
                                                                   38
percent, respectively).25 Note that the difference in sectoral returns changes when considering
hourly wages of full-time employees only. For example, full-time wage work in agriculture
pays 19 percent less than retail for workers with otherwise similar characteristics, driven by
the fact that workers in retail work longer hours. Similarly, when comparing hourly wages,
workers in manufacturing earn 15 percent more than those in retail, while construction and
transport workers earn about 30 percent more.26

Firm size is positively correlated with earnings, even within the formal sector; employees in
firms with 6–10 employees or 11–20 employees earn 16 percent more than those in firms with
5 or fewer workers. Although this premium declines slightly for larger firms, the premium is
still 11 percent for firms with over 50 employees.

The time trends in gender wage gap, formality premium, and educational returns do not
tell a consistent story. Repeating the Mincer regression analysis for each year between 2008
and 2015 can provide insight into how wages have evolved in conjunction with the changing
composition of employment. Nonetheless, caution is required in interpreting the large observed
year-to-year variations—both positive and negative—in the estimated coefficient values,
particularly if they stem from year-to-year data comparability issues. The regressions show no
consistent trend in the gender wage gap, formality premium, and educational returns between
2008 and 2015, but rather a declining trend from 2008 to 2010, a rising trend between 2010
and 2012, and a declining trend from 2012 to 2014 (see annex C, tables C5 and C6). With
respect to education, returns rose and fell the sharpest in the middle education levels, while the
returns to a primary education and a complete tertiary education changed by relatively less.
When comparing the skill premium for workers who have a complete tertiary education over
those who have an incomplete secondary education or less, there is no consistent trend, which
rules out a “degraded tertiary education effect.”27 Given that educational attainment increased
monotonically over the past decade, these fluctuating trends in educational returns may suggest
that supply-side factors were not the only driver of recent wage trends, but rather that changing
labor demand also played a role.28 Returns bumped up sharply for all education levels in 2015,
which is difficult to explain.29

The time trends in sectoral returns also do not tell a consistent story, as shown by
irregular annual fluctuations. In fact, relative to wages in retail, the returns to working in all
other sectors more or less stagnated between 2008 and 2015 (figure 45; annex C, table C6).30
A closer look at the last three years indicates a jump in agriculture earnings in 2013 and 2014
but a drop in 2015. This is observed both in the average sectoral wage and in the sectoral returns
based on regression analysis. Most other sectors suffered a drop in returns after 2012, especially
in utilities, construction, finance and real estate, and other services, as real wages in the
reference sector—retail—trended upward.


25
   See specification 5 in annex C, table C3.
26
   See specification 5 in annex C, table C4.
27
   A “degraded” education effect at the tertiary level, tested by Campos-Vazquez et al. (2014) in Mexico, would
result from an influx of students into tertiary education which dilutes the quality of the education itself due to
system limitations.
28
   World Bank (2016a) explores a range of transmission channels on both the supply and demand sides to
explain the declining skills premium observed in Latin America and the Caribbean in the 2000s.
29
   The largest increases are at the high end of the education spectrum. The sample frame used in the 2015
household survey was adjusted, but the educational composition of the new sample frame does not vary
significantly from previous years.
30
   Sectoral returns are relative to reference sector retail/hotels/restaurants, and control for individual
characteristics and regions.
                                                        39
Figure 45: Sectoral returns, regression results, 2008–15




Note: Estimates from OLS Mincer regressions controlling for individual characteristics, Specification 3, with
robust standard errors and income weights. For full results, see annex C, table C6. Retail was the base category.
Wages are calculated as average of monthly earnings from main occupation transformed into 2005 US$ PPP using
SEDLAC CPI and PPP conversion factors. Includes monetary income and all other income related to the job, such
as regular bonuses and implicit value of rent, food, and uniform.
Source: Staff calculations based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.


E. Labor transitions into, out of, and between jobs

Whereas the preceding analysis allows estimation of the correlates of labor outcomes based on
a very large sample of workers, it does not allow tracking of individual workers over time.
Using a smaller panel dataset from the labor force survey, Encuesta Continua de Empleo,
makes it possible to track workers’ labor outcomes and movements during repeated survey
periods. Doing so enables studying the labor transitions of workers—e.g., out of inactivity into
the labor market, into or out of unemployment, or between informal and formal jobs—to gain
insight into patterns of labor mobility and the characteristics that help workers make successful
labor transitions. The analysis in this section draws on a multiyear panel component of the
quarterly Encuesta Continua de Empleo spanning 2010–14.31 It begins with a description of
average quarterly labor transitions, followed by probabilistic regressions to assess how
individual and household characteristics correlate with these transitions.

The labor market is dynamic, but labor transition patterns between labor market states
are highly segmented. Averaging the quarterly changes in work status for each person in the
panel dataset (over the four-year period) reveals evidence of large transitions between some
labor states—mostly into informal jobs and into and out of unemployment —but rigidities in
formal sector job turnover. Table 2 summarizes the share of workers in a given work status in
31
  The dataset includes 62,957 observations of 19,150 individuals over a period of 20 quarters from Q2 2010 to
Q4 2014. The geographic coverage of the survey includes Asunción as well as urban areas in the Central
department, together representing about 40 percent of the national workforce and a little more than 60 percent of
the urban workforce. The panel is unbalanced in that data are not available for all quarters for all individuals.
The data for 2015 are not included in the analysis because the panel changed in that year.
                                                       40
period t-1 who transition to another work status in period t. The share of workers who make no
transition, i.e., the “stayers,” appears along the downward-sloping diagonal.

Table 2: Transitions between labor market states, by quarter, as average shares of initial
work status
                                                                       Shares
                                                                   Labor State at t
                                                                           Self-                    Formal     Formal
                                                                                    Informal
                             Inactive Unemployed Unpaid Farmer Employer employed                     wage       wage
                                                                                      wage
Labor state at t-1                                                     (non-farmer)                 private    public
Inactive                        81.7         5.6     1.4     0.5        0.6            5.7    4.1        0.3       0.1
Unemployed                      27.1        34.8     1.1     0.4        1.5           10.9   21.4        2.5       0.3
Unpaid                          24.3         3.0    35.8     0.4        4.4           18.0   13.8        0.3       0.0
Farmer                          14.9         1.4     0.8    68.1        2.3            4.4    4.7        2.5       0.8
Employer                         3.8         2.3     1.3     0.4       60.2           22.5    8.1        0.7       0.8
Self-employed (non-farmer)      12.8         3.2     2.0     0.3        7.0           65.5    8.0        0.8       0.3
Informal wage                    7.2         5.5     1.2     0.2        2.3            6.7   67.0        9.6       0.3
Formal wage private              1.1         1.9     0.2     0.3        0.5            1.3   10.1       84.0       0.7
Formal wage public               0.7         0.3     0.0     0.1        0.2            0.7    0.7        1.5      95.9
Note: The vertical axis of the matrix indicates the labor market state in period t-1, and the horizontal axis
indicates the labor market state in period t. Values are the average of quarterly transitions (as a percentage of the
labor force), Q2 2010 to Q4 2014. Values on the diagonal reflect the share of workers who did not change work
status. Formality is defined on the basis of pension contribution, as information on the firm registration (RUC)
is not available for 2010 and 2011.
Source: Staff calculations based on Encuesta Continua de Empleo data.

Transitions out of inactivity are fairly common, but they take place mainly into
unemployment, self-employment, or informal wage employment. Each quarter, of the 18
percent of the inactive population who enter the labor market, one-third become self-employed,
one-fifth become informal wage employees, and one-third fail to find work. Direct transitions
from inactivity into formal employment are very rare; only 0.4 percent of inactive workers
succeed in doing so.

In line with the economic literature, the main drivers of entry into the labor market are
gender, education, and to some extent age. This was confirmed using logistics regressions
estimating the likelihood of transition between one labor market state and another. In terms of
gender, men are 12 percent more likely than women to transit from inactivity to activity, other
things being equal (figure 46; see also annex C, table C7). The observed gender differences in
aggregate participation rates shown in figure 33 are larger because they reflect other
differences in individual characteristics. Education is an important correlate as well: those who
have postsecondary education have a likelihood of entering the labor market that is 7 to 10
percentage points higher than those who have a primary education or less. Relative to 15–19
year olds, workers in their twenties are more likely to become active, whereas slightly older
workers—those aged 45–49—are less likely to enter the workforce (controlling for other
factors). Household characteristics such as size or number of dependents do not have a
statistically significant impact on participation decisions.




                                                           41
Figure 46: Likelihood of entering the labor force




Note: Weighted logistic regressions from panel data. Average marginal effects with p value of 0.1 or less.
Only significant values are charted.
Source: Staff calculations based on Encuesta Continua de Empleo data.

The informal labor market is largely separate from the formal labor market. The matrix
of worker transitions in table 2 illustrates a very high degree of worker mobility into and out
of activity, into and out of unemployment, and between informal jobs. Only 37 percent of
unemployed workers remain unemployed from one quarter to the next; 27 percent exit the labor
force, and nearly 40 percent find some type of work, mostly informal wage work (21 percent)
or self-employment (11 percent). Unpaid family workers also experience significant turnover.
Farmers tend to stick with farming or exit the labor force, but employers, the self-employed
and informal wage workers show high rates of rotation among these three work states.

The formal sector exhibits much lower turnover. Among formal private wage employees,
for example, over four-fifths do not change work status from one quarter to the next, although
there are significant flows between informal wage jobs and formal private wage jobs. Among
public sector workers, however, whose employment contracts tend to be stable and open-ended
and to have attractive benefits, turnover is extremely limited: 96 percent on average remain in
government posts from quarter to quarter. Together these results imply that the majority of
workers in Paraguay struggle to access these higher-quality formal jobs which tend to come
with higher wages, benefits including social insurance coverage, and better working conditions.
The lack of turnover in the public sector, while normal in many developing countries, could
have distortionary effects on the labor market if job-seekers eschew opportunities for
productive employment in favor of queuing for a government job. The economic costs include
output losses due to foregone production, and an inherent anti-entrepreneurship bias that could
limit innovation and ultimately productivity gains and job creation in the private sector.

Men have a slightly lower probability of transitioning from informal to formal work than
women, and the likelihood of landing a formal job increases with age up to age 49 (figure
47), as shown by using logistic regressions to estimate the correlates of successful transitions
into formal jobs. The sectoral variables indicate that workers in construction are less likely than
those in the retail sector to transition into formal work. The same is true for workers in
government jobs; the likelihood of an informal worker transitioning into the public sector is
extremely low (consistent with the low inflows shown in table 2). Firm-size variables are
included in the regression to capture formality differences across firms of varying size.

                                                       42
Tracking informal-to-formal worker flows by firm size (table 3), we find that regardless of the
size of the firm in which the worker was informally employed in period t-1, the likelihood that
their new formal employer was a large firm of over 50 employees is very high, and significantly
higher than any other firm size category. It is also the case that informal workers employed in
larger firms are more likely to become formal than those employed in smaller firms.

Figure 47: Likelihood of transitioning from informal to formal work




Note: Weighted logistic regressions from panel data. Average marginal effects with p value of 0.1 or less.
Only significant values are charted. Individual characteristics relate to status in period t-1. Firm size refers to
period t (end-period). The reference sector is retail; the reference age group is age 15–24; the reference firm size
is 2–5 employees.
Source: Staff calculations based on Encuesta Continua de Empleo data.




                                                        43
Table 3: Informal-to-formal transitions by firm size, annual average
                                                       Shares
                                                    Firm size at t

                              Alone       2 –5      6–10        11–20    21–50       50+
     Firm size at t-1
     Alone                        9.3       2.8        0.9        3.7        5.6      77.6
     2 –5                         1.9      27.0        8.8        3.8        5.0      53.5
     6–10                         0.0      20.8       29.2       12.5        8.3      29.2
     11–20                        0.0       5.2       17.2       34.5       17.2      25.9
     21–50                        0.0       4.1        8.1       12.2       20.3      55.4
     50+                          0.0       1.6        1.6        2.6       10.9      83.4
Note: Column indicates firm size of informal employer in period t-1, row indicates firm size of formal employer
in period t. Values are average of annualized transitions, Q2 2010 to Q4 2014. Values on the diagonal reflect the
share of workers who did not change firm size. Formality is defined on the basis of pension contribution, as
information on firm registration (RUC) is not available for 2010 and 2011.
Source: Staff calculations based on Encuesta Continua de Empleo data.

Higher levels of education do not increase the likelihood of transitioning out of
informality, even though the average education level of those in formal jobs is significantly
higher than those in informal work. This education paradox contrasts with similar estimations
for Peru, where secondary or tertiary education increased the likelihood of landing a formal job
by 3 or 6 percent, respectively (Ruppert Bulmer et al. 2017). The lack of statistical significance
of education in Paraguay suggests that other factors—such as regulatory impediments, weak
governance, structural factors, and/or sectoral composition effects—play a larger role in
impeding access to formal jobs. Another potential explanation could be that upon entering the
labor force, recent graduates with higher education levels are being recruited directly into
formal jobs, rather than passing through a period of informal employment, a pattern widely
observed in Brazil, for example (Arias-Vazquez et al. 2013).

Overall, the evidence suggests a dynamic yet segmented labor market. Movements in and
out of inactivity and unemployment and between informal jobs are common, but transitions
from informal to formal jobs are rare, and individual characteristics—such as education level—
have only modest effects on the likelihood of transitioning from informal to formal sector jobs.

When informal workers manage to become formal ones, their wages do not necessarily
rise. There is a high degree of wage heterogeneity, even comparing wages within work status.
Although formal jobs pay higher net wages on average than informal jobs (see figure 27), the
data from the panel labor force survey show that workers transitioning into formal work
sometimes incur a loss in earnings. Figure 48 shows that whereas a majority of both men and
women experience wage gains following a shift from informal to formal work (reflected by the
wages plotted above the 45 degree line), a significant share experience a reduction in wages.
This implies that workers change jobs for many different reasons, not only in search of higher
earnings. For example, a government job may be less exciting but may bring stability in
earnings, fewer hours of work, and a safer working environment, in addition to providing
higher non-wage remuneration in terms of social insurance coverage, paid holidays, and the
like. Workers also change jobs for family reasons or personal preference, factors that are
unobservable and therefore cannot be measured using statistical analysis.32



32
     For an extensive treatment of labor mobility and labor adjustment costs, see Hollweg et al. (2014).
                                                           44
Figure 48: Pre-transition versus post-transition wages of workers age 15+ moving from
informal to formal jobs, quarterly observations 2010–2014 (monthly wages in 2005 USD
PPP)




Note: Forma l i ty defi ned on the ba s i s of pens i on contri bution.
Source: Staff ca l cul a tions ba s ed on Encues ta Continua de Empl eo (ECE) da ta.




                                                                 45
IV. Conclusions, Remaining Knowledge Gaps, and Next Steps

Paraguay has enjoyed strong economic growth over the past decade and a half; at the
same time, employment and the labor market have undergone a dynamic transformation.
This Jobs Diagnostic examines employment and labor market outcomes over the past 15 years
to assess the magnitude of job creation, the sectoral distribution of employment, the types of
jobs that have been created, and the types of workers who have benefited from these jobs.
These employment patterns have implications for productivity and future growth prospects.
They also have implications for worker welfare and household living standards. The degree to
which different types of workers are benefiting from improved labor outcomes—for example,
through increased labor demand or higher wages—will in turn have spillover effects on social
cohesion and Paraguay’s broader development objectives of poverty reduction and inclusion
of vulnerable groups.

The high rate of demographic growth put considerable pressure on the labor market,
expanding the labor force by 2.5 percent annually. Job creation kept pace, however, as
employment grew by 2.7 percent in the same period. GDP growth—highly dependent on
agricultural output and exports—was sufficient to absorb new labor force entrants and still
accommodate productivity increases: in the aggregate, value added per worker grew by 2.3
percent per year in the decade since 2005.

The economy is in the throes of a structural transformation from an agriculture-based
economy to a service-based one. The majority of recent job growth was concentrated in retail
(accounting for 40 percent of net new jobs) and government services (20 percent); followed by
manufacturing (13 percent); finance and real estate, and other services (each about 10 percent);
and construction (8 percent).

Whereas all sectors except agriculture experienced solid job growth, the sectoral
distribution of labor productivity growth was mixed, and is reflected in the types of jobs
created. Paraguay’s high average rate of productivity growth was driven by large gains in
agricultural productivity during 2001–08, but after 2008, the gains were more widely dispersed.
Between 2008 and 2015, the services subsector comprising transport, communications,
finance, real estate, and other services experienced the largest productivity gains, and these
gains were observed in both the formal and informal sides of this sector. Government services
also experienced large productivity growth, a reflection of wage increases rather than a
significant increase in the services delivered per government employee. Construction saw a
jump in productivity as well, primarily among informal construction workers.

The large productivity gains in agriculture since 2008 had a mixed impact on jobs and
job quality. The number of workers informally employed in agriculture, mostly self-employed
farmers, contracted by 45,000 (an 11 percent drop) and farmers’ incomes fell by 4 percent per
year on average, but 5,000 formal and relatively skilled agriculture jobs were added in the same
period, which partially offset the decline in average wages for the entire agriculture sector.
These outcomes reflect the dual nature of agriculture in Paraguay: large-scale, capital-intensive
commodity production for export on the one hand and smallholding, labor-intensive production
of staple products for local markets on the other hand. The small-scale production model is not
contributing to significant output gains or generating productivity or income gains for small
farmers, but it nevertheless plays an essential role in feeding and generating income for
unskilled rural workers who lack alternative employment options.



                                               46
Formal (net) job creation outstripped informal job creation by two to one, driving the
informality rate from 79 percent of total employment in 2008 to 71 percent by 2015, a
remarkable achievement that resulted in improved job quality, as reflected in higher average
wages and wider access to social insurance. In fact, real wages increased across the board—for
both formal workers (3 percent annual growth since 2008) and informal workers (1.5 percent).
Whereas farmer incomes fell, mainly due to the weak performance in 2015, self-employed
earnings rose sharply (by 5.5 percent annually), as did the wages of formal public sector
workers (4.9 percent).

The resulting improvements in job quality contributed to better living standards and
significant reductions in inequality and in both extreme and moderate poverty in urban
and rural settings. Extreme poverty fell from 31 percent in 2003 to 18 percent in 2015 in rural
areas, and from 13 to 5 percent in urban areas. This translates into significant welfare gains for
large numbers of Paraguayans, including vulnerable population groups. On balance, therefore,
the country’s recent path of job creation has been good for development due to positive
contributions in terms of productivity growth, wage growth, reduced informality, and boosted
earnings at the low end of the income and skills spectra.

Not all workers benefited equally, however. Workers have unequal access to good jobs:
women, rural, less educated, and younger workers are significantly more likely to be stuck in
informal employment, and the gap between men’s and women’s earnings is large, even when
controlling for individual characteristics and sector of work. In 2015, men’s monthly earnings
were 42 percent higher than women’s; the gender gap in hourly wages of full-time wage
workers was 18 percent and has widened in recent years. The monthly wage gap between
informal and formal workers is also very large, although the returns to being formal fell slightly
from 57 percent in 2012 to 52 percent in 2015 (not controlling for sector of work).

Despite improved labor outcomes for many, employment remains dominated by informal
jobs that are low-productivity, poorly paid, and require relatively low skills. The
segmented nature of the labor market is reflected in the small number of worker transitions
between informal and formal jobs. Although the labor market exhibits dynamism with respect
to worker transitions into and between informal jobs, formal jobs—and especially public sector
jobs—reflect more stable employment contracts and therefore have very limited labor turnover,
effectively precluding other workers from accessing formal jobs.

The continued dominance of the informal sector raises questions about the sustainability
of Paraguay’s future growth path and the degree to which income inequality can be
bridged. On the one hand, educational attainment is rising and rural workers are moving to
more productive jobs in urban areas, leading to relative income gains for previously excluded
groups. On the other hand, education quality is weak and rural workers are still mostly
unskilled, factors that undermine the potential boost to labor productivity. Moreover, a majority
of urban employment remains in less productive sectors such as retail, construction, and other
services, which absorb youth in particular. These sectors are unlikely to be the source of
dynamic growth or innovation that can lead to widely shared productivity gains in the future.
The preference of workers with a tertiary degree to enter public employment could ultimately
have productivity-dampening effects if the country’s most skilled workers are not becoming
innovators or entering or creating businesses with high productivity. Another fundamental
challenge is Paraguay’s small domestic market, which means that it needs to seek new or
expanded external markets for a more diversified basket of exports, preferably with higher
labor content.


                                               47
Paraguay’s economy has two bright spots, agriculture and manufacturing, which—
despite inherent limitations—have great potential for inclusive growth:
    Agricultural output is highly concentrated in a small number of products using capital-
       intensive technology with limited domestic processing and therefore limited
       opportunities for adding domestic value. But Paraguay has abundant land and excellent
       growing conditions, providing smallholders with production opportunities that require
       inexpensive inputs. There is scope to better exploit this comparative advantage through
       producing for niche markets (for export) or extending domestic production chains for
       common food products, particularly those in demand by large trading partners. Agro-
       processing at a larger scale ultimately requires investment and quality and safety
       standards, but has the potential to generate formal manufacturing jobs in locations that
       are closer to rural producers, and to raise job quality for currently excluded groups (e.g.,
       rural, less educated, women, informal), thereby generating positive social externalities.

      The manufacturing sector has generated nearly 55,000 formal jobs since 2008, and most
       of these were created by large firms. These two facts suggest an important role for
       manufacturing investments in generating more and better jobs, particularly for job
       seekers with only secondary education. But a maquila-based strategy that relies on
       unskilled labor-intensive technologies and imported inputs will have limited
       productivity spillovers beyond direct job creation. The challenge will be to attract
       investments in production lines that can create opportunities for local firms to enter
       along the production chains, preferably located in lagging regions to foster geographic
       diversification as well, and raise the level of domestic value added. The range of
       existing production activities remains narrow, and the quality and/or sophistication
       level of production is relatively low and in some cases inadequate to compete globally.

The demographic bulge has helped economic performance, but sustaining welfare gains
and more inclusive GDP growth will require additional policy effort to address key
impediments. In order for Paraguay to continue to benefit from the demographic dividend, the
economy will need to average 3.7 percent real annual growth and add 990,000 jobs between
2015 and 2030. Recent employment creation and growth trends indicate that this is feasible,
but the challenge will be to generate better jobs in terms of higher productivity, higher wages,
and/or that create more opportunities for vulnerable groups to participate in productive work
that raises living standards and household welfare at the low end of the income distribution.

Addressing these various challenges will require a multi-pronged approach. Prior to
designing policy interventions or programs to promote certain types of job creation, some key
knowledge gaps need to be filled. A wide range of potential factors can impede access to good
jobs or act as obstacles to creating more and better jobs or undermine efforts to upgrade job
quality. Whereas the analysis herein provides valuable insights into labor supply behavior in
conjunction with economic performance and job creation, the interplay of labor supply and
labor demand cannot be well understood using only household survey data. Several
fundamental knowledge gaps need to be filled to help policymakers design interventions that
facilitate a pro-jobs, pro-growth, pro-poor dynamic for Paraguay’s future economic path.

This Jobs Diagnostic will be complemented by the following analytical activities under the
Let’s Work Paraguay program:




                                                48
    Labor demand. The 2010 firm census and recent firm surveys33 can provide insight into
     firm productivity and growth through data on key firm variables. Analyzing firms’
     decision-making related to hiring, training, and/or substituting non-labor investment for
     labor inputs is essential to a comprehensive understanding of labor demand.
    Entrepreneurship. Identifying entrepreneurship patterns and associated challenges will be
     increasingly important for addressing inadequate private sector labor demand. Household
     data on self-employed workers and on employers of micro-enterprises, together with firm-
     level data on micro-enterprises, can provide insight into the characteristics of entrepreneurs
     and the contribution of entrepreneurship to productivity and livelihoods.
    Youth perspectives. Paraguay’s demographic situation points to continuing rapid labor
     force growth and the associated pressures of new entrants looking for work, and looking
     for better work than their predecessors. The Let’s Work Paraguay program plans to carry
     out qualitative analysis using focus groups targeting both male and female youth in rural
     and urban zones in order to understand the factors driving their decisions regarding
     education, job search, employment expectations, and migration.

The findings of these analyses will be inputs into the design and prioritization of policies
aimed at helping Paraguay reach its development potential through more, better, and
inclusive jobs.




33
 A survey of medium-size and large formal firms in select urban areas was completed in 2015, and a survey of
micro and small firms was completed in 2016.
                                                     49
                                          References
Arias-Vazquez, F. J., E. Artuç, D. Lederman, and D. Rojas. 2013. “Trade, Informal
       Employment, and Labor Adjustment Costs.” Policy Research Working Paper 6614,
       World Bank, Washington, DC.
Campos-Vazquez, R., M., L. F. Lopez-Calva, and N. Lustig. 2014. “Declining Wages for
     College Educated Workers in Mexico: Degraded Tertiary or Skills Obsolescence?”
     Background paper for “Wage Inequality in Latin America: Trends and Puzzles,”
     unpublished regional study, World Bank, Washington, DC.
DGEEC (Dirección General de Estadística, Encuestas y Censos). 2014. “Principales
     Resultados de Pobreza y Distribución del Ingreso.” Encuesta Permanente de Hogares
     2014, Secretaría Técnica de Planificación del Desarrollo Económico y Social,
     Gobierno Nacional de Paraguay: Asunción.
Hollweg, C., D. Lederman, D. Rojas, and E. Ruppert Bulmer. 2014. Sticky Feet: How Labor
      Market Frictions Shape the Impact of International Trade on Jobs and Wages.
      Directions in Development: Trade. Washington, DC: World Bank: Washington, DC.
Lugo, M. A., and M. Viveros. 2016. “Paraguay: Evolution of Poverty by 2015.” Unpublished
      paper, Latin America and Caribbean Poverty and Equity Global Practice, World
      Bank, Washington, DC.
Ruppert Bulmer, E., and A. Garlati. Forthcoming. “The Gender Wage Gap in LAC.” Jobs
      Cross-Cutting Solutions Area Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ruppert Bulmer, E., M. Perinet, R. Aterido, D. Robalino, A. Elzir and L. Iacovone. 2017.
      “Peru Jobs Diagnostic: Dynamics of Job Creation and Implications for the Future”. Jobs
      Cross-Cutting Solutions Area, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Schwab, K. 2014. The Global Competitiveness Report 2014–2015. Switzerland: World
      Economic Forum.
Wodon, Q. 2016. “School Infrastructure in Paraguay: Needs, Investments and Costs.” Report
     No. 100062, World Bank, Washington, DC.
World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2013: Jobs. Washington, DC: International
      Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
World Bank. 2015. “Jobs, Wages, and the Latin American Slowdown.” Semi-Annual Report
      of the Office of the LAC Regional Chief Economist (October), World Bank,
      Washington, DC.
———. 2016a. “Wage Inequality in Latin America: Trends and Puzzles.” Office of the Latin
   America and Caribbean Regional Chief Economist, World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2016b. “Indonesian Economic Transformation and Employment: Policy Input for an
   Indonesia Jobs Strategy.”, Report No. AUS13186, East Asia and Pacific Region,
   World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2016c. “Towards Better Quality and More Inclusive Employment: A Jobs
   Assessment for Côte d’Ivoire.” Social Protection, Labor, and Jobs Global Practice,
   World Bank, Washington, DC.
                                               50
                                                  Annex A
Figure A1: Destination markets for exports




Source: Atlas of Economic Complexity, Harvard University (http://atlas.cid.harvard.edu).

Figure A2: Source markets for imports




Source: Atlas of Economic Complexity, Harvard University (http://atlas.cid.harvard.edu).




                                                      51
Figure A3: Dependency ratios, Paraguay, region, and world, 1950–2100




Note: Total dependency ratio = (Population age <15 and 65+)/(Population age 15–64), for the period 1950–
2100.
Source: UNDESA.


Figure A4: Average gender wage gap, male to female, 2001–15




Source: Based on Encuesta Permanente de Hogares data.




                                                     52
                                                                             Annex B


Table B1: Jobs structure decomposition tool
                                                                            Period: 2001 to 2015


                                                                                                   % change         CAGR 2001-
Aggregate Data and Indicators          Unit                        2001             2015           2001-2015           2015
Aggregate Data:
  Total Value Added                    thousand 2005 PPP USD            18,667            36,113            93.46            4.83
  Population, total                    1000 people                       5,815             6,898            18.62            1.23
  Population 15+                       1000 people                       3,591             4,990            38.95            2.38
  Labor force 15+                      1000 people                       2,484             3,407            37.19            2.28
  Employment 15+                       1000 people                       2,296             3,226            40.49            2.46
  Dependent Population <15             1000 people                       2,224             1,908           -14.21           -1.09
Indicators:
  Value Added per Capita                per 1000 people                    3.21             5.24            63.10            3.56
  Value Added per Worker                per 1000 people                    8.13            11.20            37.71            2.31
  Share of Working Age Population      % of population                    61.76            72.34            17.14            1.14
  Labor Force Participation            % of WAP                           69.15            68.28            -1.27           -0.09
  Employment Rate                      % of Labor Force                   92.45            94.67             2.40            0.17
  Unemployment Rate                    % of Labor Force                    7.55             5.33           -29.42           -2.46
  Dependents / WAP                     ratio                               0.62             0.38           -38.26           -3.39
  Dependents / LF                      ratio                               0.90             0.56           -37.47           -3.30
  Dependents / Employed                ratio                               0.97             0.59           -38.94           -3.46
Source for Total Value Added: Manually added data                                                                                                                     Help?

                                                                                                                                                    % Yearly
                                                                                                                     Shapley    % Contribution to Contribution
Shapley Aggregate Decomposition                                    2001             2015            Notation         Change         Change         to Growth          Help?
Change in per capita value added                                            3.2              5.2       y                    2.0              100%         3.56
 due to changes in productivity                                               8               11       w                    1.3               65%         2.32
 due to changes in employment rate                                         92%              95%        e                    0.1                 5%        0.17
 due to changes in participation rate                                      69%              68%        p                   -0.1                -3%       -0.09
 due to changes in share of working age population                         62%              72%        a                    0.7               32%         1.15
                                                                                                           Check:            -                   -            -


                                       Shapley equation segment     w                 e                p                a                                             Help?
                                                               I            1.2              0.1              0.0            0.6
                                                              II            1.4              0.1             -0.1            0.8
                                                             III            1.2              0.1             -0.1            0.8
                                                             IV             1.2              0.1              0.0            0.6
                                                              V             1.4              0.1              0.0            0.5
                                                             VI             1.2              0.1             -0.1            0.8
                                                            VII             1.5              0.1             -0.1            0.7
                                                            VIII            1.4              0.1              0.0            0.6

                                                                                                   CAGR 2001-        Share in                           Average     Change in
Sectoral Employment Data (1000 people)                             2001             2015              2015            2001          Share in 2015        Share       Share
Total Employment                                                          2,296            3,226           2.46          100%                   100%
 Agriculture                                                                706              641          -0.68          30.7%                  19.9%       25.3%         -10.9%
 Manufacturing and Mining                                                   277              404           2.74          12.0%                  12.5%       12.3%           0.5%
 Electricity, Gas and Water                                                  11               18           3.71           0.5%                   0.6%        0.5%           0.1%
 Construction                                                               112              220           4.92           4.9%                   6.8%        5.8%           1.9%
 Retail, Restaurants and Hotels                                             554              860           3.19          24.1%                  26.7%       25.4%           2.5%
 Transport, Comm, Finance, Real Estate and Other                            490              756           3.15          21.3%                  23.4%       22.4%           2.1%
 Gov't, Public Administration                                               147              327           5.88           6.4%                  10.1%        8.3%           3.7%
 Agriculture                                                                706              641          -0.68          30.7%                  19.9%       25.3%         -10.9%
 Industry                                                                   400              642           3.44          17.4%                  19.9%       18.7%           2.5%
 Services etc.                                                            1,191            1,943           3.56          51.9%                  60.2%       56.0%           8.4%




                                                                                   53
(continued)
                                                                                                                                              %           Yearly
                                                                                             Absolute                                    Contribution Contribution to
Shapley Decomposition - by Major Sector                         2001          2015           Change      Average     Shapley Change       to Change      Growth
Total change in per capita value added                                   3              5            2.0                                                         3.56
Total change in productivity (value added per worker)                    8             11            3.1        10                 3.1        100.0%             2.32
Contribution of within-sector productivity change       Help?                                                                      2.8          91.6%            2.13
  Agriculture                                                            5             11           6.6         8                  1.7           54.1%           1.26
  Industry                                                              12             13           1.6        13                  0.3            9.6%           0.22
  Services etc.                                                          9             10           1.5        10                  0.9           27.9%           0.65
Intersectoral Shift                                     Help?                                                                      0.3           8.4%            0.20
  Agriculture                                                        706             641          -64.7                            0.2            6.0%           0.14
  Industry                                                           400             642          242.2                            0.1            2.4%           0.05
  Services etc.                                                    1,191           1,943          752.1                            0.0            0.1%           0.00
Contribution of sectoral changes in employment rate     Help?       92.4            94.7            2.2                                       100.0%             0.17
  Agriculture                                                       28.4            18.8           -9.6                                        -432.3%          -0.75
  Industry                                                          16.1            18.8            2.7                                         123.6%           0.22
  Services etc.                                                     47.9            57.0            9.1                                         408.7%           0.71
Total change in participation rate                                  69.2            68.3           -0.9                                                         -0.09
Total change in share of working age population                     61.8            72.3           10.6                                                          1.15


                                                                                                                                              %           Yearly
                                                                                             Absolute                                    Contribution Contribution to
Shapley Decomposition - by Sector                               2001          2015           Change      Average     Shapley Change       to Change      Growth
Total change in per capita value added                                   3              5            2.0                                                         3.56
Total change in productivity (value added per worker)                    8             11            3.1        10                 3.1        100.0%             2.32
Contribution of within-sector productivity change       Help?                                                                      2.6          86.2%            2.00
  Agriculture                                                            5             11           6.6         8                  1.7           54.1%           1.26
  Manufacturing and Mining                                              12             12          -0.3        12                  0.0           -1.1%          -0.02
  Electricity, Gas and Water                                            46             26         -20.5        36                 -0.1           -3.5%          -0.08
  Construction                                                           8             16           7.3        12                  0.4           13.9%           0.32
  Retail, Restaurants and Hotels                                         7              8           0.9         7                  0.2            7.3%           0.17
  Transport, Comm, Finance, Real Estate and Other                       10             11           1.5        11                  0.3           11.2%           0.26
  Gov't, Public Administration                                          14             16           1.6        15                  0.1            4.3%           0.10
Intersectoral Shift                                     Help?                                                             0.421666539           13.8%            0.32
  Agriculture                                                          706            641         -64.7                            0.2            6.0%           0.14
  Manufacturing and Mining                                             277            404           127                            0.0            0.3%           0.01
  Electricity, Gas and Water                                             11             18             7                           0.0            0.8%           0.02
  Construction                                                         112            220           108                            0.0            1.5%           0.03
  Retail, Restaurants and Hotels                                       554            860           306                           -0.1           -2.0%          -0.05
  Transport, Comm, Finance, Real Estate and Other                      490            756           266                            0.0            0.6%           0.01
  Gov't, Public Administration                                         147            327           180                            0.2            6.7%           0.16
Contribution of sectoral changes in employment rate     Help?          92.4          94.7            2.2                                      100.0%             0.17
  Agriculture                                                          28.4          18.8          -9.6                                        -432.3%          -0.75
  Manufacturing and Mining                                             11.1          11.9            0.7                                         32.4%           0.06
  Electricity, Gas and Water                                            0.4            0.5           0.1                                          4.2%           0.01
  Construction                                                          4.5            6.4           1.9                                         87.0%           0.15
  Retail, Restaurants and Hotels                                       22.3          25.2            2.9                                        132.1%           0.23
  Transport, Comm, Finance, Real Estate and Other                      19.7          22.2            2.5                                        110.8%           0.19
  Gov't, Public Administration                                          5.9            9.6           3.7                                        165.8%           0.29
Total change in participation rate                                     69.2          68.3          -0.9                                                         -0.09
Total change in share of working age population                        61.8          72.3          10.6                                                          1.15




                                                                              54
                                                                   Annex C
Table C1
Average Marginal Effects from Multinomial Logit regression, Employed age 15+, 2015
                                                                                                                       Formal
                                                                                Self employed Informal                                 Formal
                                       Unpaid        Farmer Employer                                                    wage
                                                                                  non farmer    wage                                 wage public
                                                                                                                       private
                                (1)        (2)      (3)           (4)                                    (5)             (6)               (7)
Age                         -0.003*** 0.002*** 0.002***        0.006***                              -0.012***        0.002***         0.004***
                              (0.000)    (0.000)  (0.000)       (0.000)                                (0.001)         (0.000)          (0.000)
Male                        -0.070*** 0.070*** 0.057***       -0.026***                               -0.031**         0.018**         -0.018***
                              (0.006)    (0.006)  (0.007)       (0.009)                                (0.012)         (0.009)          (0.006)
Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

   Primary complete          -0.025**               -0.029***      0.016**            0.023            -0.028         0.036***           0.007
                              (0.010)                (0.011)       (0.007)           (0.014)          (0.022)          (0.013)          (0.008)
  Secondary incomplete        -0.019*               -0.088***     0.033***          0.082***         -0.098***        0.080***          0.010*
                              (0.011)                (0.009)       (0.007)           (0.015)          (0.021)          (0.013)          (0.006)
  Secondary complete        -0.048***               -0.111***     0.044***          0.119***         -0.161***        0.126***         0.032***
                              (0.011)                (0.011)       (0.011)           (0.018)          (0.022)          (0.014)          (0.008)
  Tertiary incomplete       -0.056***               -0.137***     0.086***           0.052**         -0.215***        0.073***         0.198***
                              (0.013)                (0.010)       (0.017)           (0.020)          (0.023)          (0.014)          (0.014)
  Tertiary complete         -0.050***               -0.149***     0.103***          0.128***         -0.267***        0.105***         0.131***
                              (0.015)                (0.009)       (0.015)           (0.022)          (0.022)          (0.015)          (0.011)
Region (relative to Asunción)

   San Pedro                          0.129***      0.217***      -0.039***         -0.126***        -0.113*** -0.142***               0.074***
                                       (0.017)       (0.014)        (0.012)          (0.022)          (0.025)    (0.016)                (0.014)
   Caaguazú                           0.140***      0.165***        -0.019          -0.110***        -0.087*** -0.125***               0.035***
                                       (0.016)       (0.012)        (0.013)          (0.021)          (0.025)    (0.016)                (0.011)
   Itapúa                              0.031**      0.111***        -0.018          -0.067***          -0.027    -0.027                  -0.003
                                       (0.014)       (0.012)        (0.014)          (0.024)          (0.030)    (0.022)                (0.016)
   Alto Paraná                          0.004       0.046***        -0.017            -0.000            0.027   -0.034**               -0.027***
                                       (0.012)       (0.009)        (0.012)          (0.023)          (0.025)    (0.016)                (0.009)
   Central                              0.006        0.022**        -0.012            -0.022            0.029    -0.021                  -0.002
                                       (0.013)       (0.009)        (0.012)          (0.021)          (0.024)    (0.015)                (0.010)
   Rest                               0.065***      0.143***       -0.023**         -0.092***         -0.039* -0.089***                0.036***
                                       (0.011)       (0.008)        (0.010)          (0.019)          (0.021)    (0.013)                (0.009)
Large firm                            0.072***      -0.287***     0.057***          -0.590***        0.486*** 0.176***                 0.085***
                                       (0.021)       (0.070)        (0.011)          (0.073)          (0.040)    (0.008)                (0.006)
Observations                            12608         12608          12608            12608            12608      12608                  12608
Notes
Mul ti nomi a l Logi t regres s i ons . Informa l wa ge a s ba s e ca tegory. Unwei ghted obs erva ti ons wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors .
Introduci ng wei ghts or us i ng di fferent fi rm s i zes i ntroduce non-convergence i n MLE es ti ma ti on.
Incompl ete pri ma ry or l es s i f l es s tha n 6 yea rs of educa ti on; Pri ma ry compl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa ti on a nd not enrol l ed;
Seconda ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa ti on a nd enrol l ed or ha s (6-12) yea rs of educa ti on; Seconda ry compl ete i f wi th
12 yea rs of educa ti on a nd not enrol l ed; Terti a ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa ti on a nd enrol l ed or ha s (12-16) yea rs of
educa ti on; Terti a ry compl ete i f wi th more tha n 15 yea rs of educa ti on.
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buti ng to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed
workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); Informa l i f (i ) fa rmers /herders /fi s herma n (s el f-empl oyed or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no
RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge empl oyees not
La rge buti
contri fi rmng    to Soci
              i f more       Securi
                          al n
                        tha         ty.oyees
                               5 empl
Sta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Source: Own ca l cul a ti ons ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta .


                                                                         55
Table C2
Logit estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), Age 15+, 2015
                                                               Inactive (0)           Unemployed (0)              Informal (0)           Unemployed (0)
                                                              to Active (1)            to Employed (1)           to Formal (1)             to inactive (1)
                                                         Estimate         AME      Estimate       AME      Estimate         AME      Estimate            AME
                                                            (1)             (2)         (3)        (4)         (5)            (6)        (7)              (8)
Age                                                      0.325***       0.012***    0.247***    0.006***    0.239***      0.009***    -0.158**          -0.002
                                                          (0.026)        (0.001)     (0.055)     (0.001)     (0.051)       (0.001)     (0.062)         (0.001)
Age^2                                                   -0.004***                  -0.003***               -0.002***                  0.003***
                                                          (0.000)                    (0.001)                 (0.001)                   (0.001)
Male                                                     1.949***       0.269***    0.438***    0.024***    0.326***      0.038***   -1.642***       -0.164***
                                                          (0.068)        (0.009)     (0.125)     (0.007)     (0.106)       (0.012)     (0.152)         (0.014)
Attending any education level                           -1.179***      -0.163***    0.594***    0.032***     -0.296*       -0.034*    2.024***        0.202***
                                                          (0.108)        (0.015)     (0.206)     (0.011)     (0.176)       (0.020)     (0.242)         (0.022)
Language most spoken at home (relative to Spanish)

  Guaraní                                                 0.288***    0.040***     0.502***    0.026**     -0.461***    -0.054***      0.294         0.029
                                                           (0.111)     (0.015)      (0.190)     (0.011)      (0.162)      (0.019)     (0.214)       (0.021)
  Guaraní and Spanish                                      0.183*      0.026*        0.122       0.007        -0.094       -0.011      0.052         0.005
                                                           (0.094)     (0.013)      (0.172)     (0.011)      (0.124)      (0.015)     (0.186)       (0.020)
  Other                                                     0.013       0.002      1.102***    0.047***     0.716***     0.091***     0.762*        0.066**
                                                           (0.163)     (0.024)      (0.392)     (0.013)      (0.261)      (0.034)     (0.416)       (0.031)
  Does not speak

Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

  Primary complete                                        0.354***    0.057***       -0.382      -0.022    0.736***      0.061***     -0.646**     -0.051***
                                                           (0.111)     (0.018)      (0.236)     (0.014)     (0.238)       (0.019)      (0.253)       (0.020)
  Secondary incomplete                                    0.383***    0.062***       -0.263      -0.014    1.481***      0.145***     -0.605**      -0.047**
                                                           (0.120)     (0.019)      (0.212)     (0.011)     (0.236)       (0.020)      (0.255)       (0.018)
  Secondary complete                                      0.844***    0.129***       -0.039      -0.002    1.994***      0.213***    -0.707***     -0.057***
                                                           (0.131)     (0.020)      (0.229)     (0.011)     (0.240)       (0.021)      (0.270)       (0.021)
  Tertiary incomplete                                     1.372***    0.195***       -0.273      -0.015    2.789***      0.334***    -1.443***     -0.145***
                                                           (0.155)     (0.021)      (0.258)     (0.014)     (0.263)       (0.029)      (0.303)       (0.031)
  Tertiary complete                                       2.057***    0.262***       0.438       0.018     2.905***      0.353***    -1.330***     -0.129***
                                                           (0.188)     (0.021)      (0.319)     (0.013)     (0.266)       (0.030)      (0.368)       (0.042)

                                                                             56
Logit estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), Age 15+, 2015 (continued)
                                                                Inactive (0)           Unemployed (0)              Informal (0)           Unemployed (0)
                                                               to Active (1)           to Employed (1)            to Formal (1)            to inactive (1)
                                                         Estimate          AME      Estimate       AME      Estimate          AME     Estimate          AME
                                                             (1)             (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)            (6)        (7)            (8)
Household size                                             -0.025         -0.003      0.007       0.000       -0.017         -0.002     0.033          0.003
                                                          (0.031)         (0.004)    (0.054)     (0.003)     (0.046)        (0.005)    (0.060)        (0.006)
Number children younger than 13 in hh                      -0.023         -0.003      0.026       0.001       0.030          0.004      0.027          0.003
                                                          (0.047)         (0.006)    (0.084)     (0.005)     (0.071)        (0.008)    (0.092)        (0.009)
Number youth in hh                                       0.143***        0.020***     -0.032      -0.002      -0.007         -0.001   -0.187**       -0.019**
                                                          (0.045)         (0.006)    (0.077)     (0.004)     (0.070)        (0.008)    (0.081)        (0.008)
Number elder age>=60 in hh                                 -0.042         -0.006     -0.223*    -0.012*       -0.023         -0.003     -0.063         -0.006
                                                          (0.063)         (0.009)    (0.120)     (0.007)     (0.099)        (0.012)    (0.122)        (0.012)
Urban                                                      -0.030         -0.004    -0.502*** -0.027***      0.268**        0.031**   -0.387**       -0.039**
                                                          (0.078)         (0.011)    (0.145)     (0.008)     (0.134)        (0.016)    (0.153)        (0.015)
Region (relative to Asunción)

   San Pedro                                                0.182         0.025       -0.203      -0.009    -0.869***    -0.101***      -0.461       -0.041
                                                           (0.154)      (0.021)      (0.288)     (0.013)     (0.214)      (0.024)      (0.329)      (0.030)
   Caaguazú                                                 0.064         0.009      0.663**     0.021**    -0.911***    -0.106***     0.715**      0.044**
                                                           (0.141)      (0.020)      (0.333)     (0.010)     (0.190)      (0.022)      (0.347)      (0.021)
   Itapúa                                                  0.316**      0.043**       -0.286      -0.013      -0.187       -0.023      -0.648*      -0.061*
                                                           (0.160)      (0.021)      (0.303)     (0.015)     (0.213)      (0.026)      (0.332)      (0.034)
   Alto Paraná                                              0.130         0.018     -1.069***   -0.069***   -0.450***    -0.054***    -1.094***    -0.117***
                                                           (0.124)      (0.017)      (0.216)     (0.014)     (0.167)      (0.020)      (0.243)      (0.024)
   Central                                                  0.132         0.018       -0.242      -0.011     -0.293*      -0.036*      -0.415*      -0.037*
                                                           (0.120)      (0.017)      (0.215)     (0.010)     (0.154)      (0.019)      (0.242)      (0.021)
   Rest                                                     -0.031       -0.004       -0.307      -0.014    -0.525***    -0.063***      -0.286       -0.024
                                                           (0.114)      (0.016)      (0.200)     (0.009)     (0.143)      (0.018)      (0.229)      (0.019)
Secondary sector (relative to Retail)

   Agriculture, cattle and fishing                                                                          -1.284***    -0.153***
                                                                                                             (0.287)      (0.030)
   Manufacture and mining                                                                                     -0.078       -0.011
                                                                                                             (0.148)      (0.020)
   Electricity, gas and water                                                                                 0.319        0.046
                                                                                                             (0.410)      (0.060)

                                                                              57
Logit estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), Age 15+, 2015 (continued)
                                                               Inactive (0)          Unemployed (0)           Informal (0)          Unemployed (0)
                                                              to Active (1)          to Employed (1)         to Formal (1)           to inactive (1)
                                                         Estimate         AME      Estimate    AME     Estimate         AME      Estimate        AME
                                                            (1)             (2)       (3)       (4)        (5)           (6)        (7)           (8)
   Construction                                                                                        -1.043***     -0.129***
                                                                                                         (0.234)       (0.026)
   Transport and communication                                                                            0.106         0.015
                                                                                                         (0.223)       (0.032)
   Finance and real state                                                                                 0.178         0.025
                                                                                                         (0.195)       (0.028)
   Govt/public administration                                                                           1.001***      0.149***
                                                                                                         (0.201)       (0.032)
   Other services                                                                                      -0.858***     -0.108***
                                                                                                         (0.164)       (0.020)
Firm size (relative to [2-5])

   Alone                                                                                               -0.449***    -0.052***
                                                                                                         (0.148)      (0.017)
   [6-10]                                                                                               0.604***     0.080***
                                                                                                         (0.150)      (0.021)
   [11-20]                                                                                              0.945***     0.130***
                                                                                                         (0.170)      (0.025)
   [21-50]                                                                                              1.397***     0.198***
                                                                                                         (0.166)      (0.025)
   [50+]                                                                                                1.652***     0.238***
                                                                                                         (0.185)      (0.028)
Constant                                                 -5.818***                 -1.673*             -7.909***                 5.185***
                                                          (0.454)                  (0.920)               (0.906)                  (1.024)
Weighted observations                                      15893         15893      11479      11479      10248       10248        5164         5164
Pseudo R^2                                                 0.267                    0.108                 0.398                    0.191


                                                                              58
Logit estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), Age 15+, 2015 (continued)
Notes
Logi t regres s i ons wi th wei ghted obs erva tions
Incompl ete pri ma ry or l es s i f l es s tha n 6 yea rs of educa tion; Pri ma ry compl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd not enrol l ed; Seconda ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd enrol l ed or
ha s (6-12) yea rs of educa tion; Seconda ry compl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa tion a nd not enrol l ed; Tertia ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa tion a nd enrol l ed or ha s (12-16) yea rs of
educa tion; Tertia ry compl ete i f wi th more tha n 15 yea rs of educa tion.
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buting to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); Informa l i f (i )
fa rmers /herders /fi s herma n (s el f-empl oyed or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge empl oyees not
contri buting to Soci a l Securi ty.
Standa rd errors i n pa renthes es .* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Govt/publ i c a dmi ni s tra tion a nd Fi rm s i ze [21-50] not es tima bl e a s perfectly predi ct forma l i ty.
Al one ca tegory i n Fi rm s i ze i ncl udes s el f-empl oyed a nd domes tic empl oyees .
(+) Not es tima bl e a s perfectly predi cts zero.
Source: Own ca l cul a tions ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta.




                                                                                                                    59
Table C3
Mincer Regressions, OLS, Dep. variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Paid workers age 15+, 2015
                                                    (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)
Experience                                       0.043*** 0.053*** 0.047*** 0.047*** 0.039***
                                                  (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
Experience^2                                    -0.000*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.001*** -0.000***
                                                  (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
Male                                             0.425*** 0.462*** 0.417*** 0.319*** 0.395***
                                                  (0.022)     (0.022)    (0.025)    (0.023)    (0.024)
Formal                                           0.524***                          0.409*** 0.469***
                                                  (0.025)                           (0.029)    (0.028)
Public                                                       0.212***
                                                              (0.030)
Job tenure (years)                                -0.002*     -0.002    0.005***    -0.003*    0.003**
                                                  (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.002)    (0.001)    (0.001)
Language most spoken at home (relative to Spanish)

  Guaraní                                          -0.281*** -0.353*** -0.269***     -0.272*** -0.219***
                                                    (0.039)      (0.041) (0.040)       (0.040)  (0.039)
   Guaraní and Spanish                               -0.034    -0.069** -0.079***      -0.038   -0.051*
                                                    (0.027)      (0.028) (0.027)       (0.028)  (0.027)
   Other                                           0.539*** 0.536*** 0.638***        0.519*** 0.632***
                                                    (0.073)      (0.077) (0.076)       (0.073)  (0.073)
   Does not speak                                    -0.049    0.156*** 0.195***      -0.195**   0.008
                                                    (0.103)      (0.045) (0.044)       (0.082)  (0.094)
Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

  Primary complete                               0.126***    0.151***     0.098**     0.106**     0.082*
                                                  (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.043)     (0.043)     (0.042)
  Secondary incomplete                           0.272***    0.357***    0.256***    0.262***    0.192***
                                                  (0.045)     (0.046)     (0.047)     (0.045)     (0.045)
  Secondary complete                             0.461***    0.618***    0.490***    0.430***    0.371***
                                                  (0.051)     (0.052)     (0.058)     (0.052)     (0.054)
  Tertiary incomplete                            0.636***    0.858***    0.706***    0.547***    0.521***
                                                  (0.052)     (0.054)     (0.058)     (0.053)     (0.056)
  Tertiary complete                              0.927***    1.198***    1.027***    0.857***    0.802***
                                                  (0.054)     (0.056)     (0.060)     (0.055)     (0.057)
Region (relative to Asunción)

  San Pedro                                      -0.448***   -0.532***   -0.371***   -0.456***   -0.308***
                                                   (0.052)    (0.054)     (0.054)     (0.052)     (0.052)
  Caaguazú                                       -0.389***   -0.470***   -0.364***   -0.415***   -0.300***
                                                   (0.046)    (0.048)     (0.048)     (0.046)     (0.046)
  Itapúa                                         -0.199***   -0.253***   -0.193***   -0.205***   -0.154***
                                                   (0.047)    (0.049)     (0.048)     (0.047)     (0.047)
  Alto Paraná                                      -0.064*   -0.109***   -0.115***   -0.100***    -0.071*
                                                   (0.038)    (0.039)     (0.038)     (0.038)     (0.037)
  Central                                         -0.082**   -0.100***   -0.101***   -0.119***   -0.085***
                                                   (0.033)    (0.035)     (0.034)     (0.034)     (0.033)
  Rest                                           -0.330***   -0.393***   -0.310***   -0.357***   -0.262***
                                                   (0.032)    (0.034)     (0.033)     (0.033)     (0.032)


                                                  60
(continued)
Mincer Regressions, OLS, Dep. variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Paid workers age 15+, 2015
                                                    (1)         (2)       (3)         (4)        (5)
Secondary sector (relative to Retail)

    Agriculture, cattle and fishing                                                                    -0.604***                       -0.534***
                                                                                                        (0.054)                         (0.053)
    Manufacture and mining                                                                               0.009                           -0.011
                                                                                                        (0.039)                         (0.037)
    Electricity, gas and water                                                                         0.520***                        0.414***
                                                                                                        (0.087)                         (0.085)
    Construction                                                                                       0.134***                        0.202***
                                                                                                        (0.037)                         (0.036)
    Transport and communication                                                                        0.214***                        0.180***
                                                                                                        (0.043)                         (0.044)
    Finance and real state                                                                             0.119***                          0.082*
                                                                                                        (0.046)                         (0.045)
    Govt/public administration                                                                         0.168***                           0.033
                                                                                                        (0.033)                         (0.034)
    Other services                                                                                     -0.190***                       -0.115***
                                                                                                        (0.034)                         (0.034)
Firm size (relative to [2-5])

    Alone                                                                                                              -0.380***
                                                                                                                        (0.031)
    [6-10]                                                                                                             0.162***
                                                                                                                        (0.032)
    [11-20]                                                                                                            0.164***
                                                                                                                        (0.037)
    [21-50]                                                                                                             0.084**
                                                                                                                        (0.035)
    [50+]                                                                                                              0.113***
                                                                                                                        (0.039)
Constant                                                              4.735***         4.611***        4.829***        4.849***         4.901***
                                                                       (0.085)          (0.091)         (0.099)         (0.090)          (0.093)
Weighted observations                                                   11838            11845           11845           11319            11838
R sq                                                                    0.388            0.351           0.390           0.423            0.420
Notes
OLS regres s i ons wi th robus t s ta nda rd errors a nd i ncome wei ghts .
Sta nda rd errors i n pa renthes es .* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Wa ges ca l cul a ted a s a vera ge of monthl y ea rni ngs from ma i n occupa ti on tra ns formed i n 2005 USD PPP us i ng SEDLAC CPI
a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors . Incl ude moneta ry i ncome a nd a l l other i ncome rel a ted wi th the job, l i ke bonus es a nd
i mpl i ci t rent/food/uni form va l ue, recei ved regul a rl y. Tra ns formed i n 2005 USD PPP us i ng SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on
fa ctors .
Experi ence = Age - Yea rs of educa ti on + 6
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buti ng to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed
workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); Informa l i f (i ) fa rmers /herders /fi s herma n (s el f-empl oyed or empl oyer of fi rm wi th
no RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge empl oyees
not  contri
Tenure        buti
            defi   nga
                 ned  to Soci a l Securi
                       s number    of yeaty.
                                           rs i n ma i n occupa ti on.
Incompl ete pri ma ry or l es s i f l es s tha n 6 yea rs of educa ti on; Pri ma ry compl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa ti on a nd not
enrol l ed; Seconda ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa ti on a nd enrol l ed or ha s (6-12) yea rs of educa ti on; Seconda ry
compl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa ti on a nd not enrol l ed; Terti a ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa ti on a nd enrol l ed
To ha
or    s (12-15)
   expl  ore for yea  rs of
                 s el ecti  educa
                           on bi a s ti
                                      we  aTerti
                                        on;       a ry
                                            l s o es    compl
                                                     ti ma tedete i f wi th
                                                               Heckma       more tha
                                                                         n model      n 15
                                                                                 s . Res   ts ars
                                                                                         ulyea  reof  educa
                                                                                                   i denti cati
                                                                                                             l on.
                                                                                                                to OLS a nd ca n be s uppl i ed by
reques t.
Source: Own ca l cul a ti ons ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta .




                                                                        61
Table C4
Mincer Regressions, OLS, Dependent variable Log Hourly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Full-time workers age 15+, 2015
                                                             (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)
Experience                                                0.031***    0.036*** 0.033*** 0.033***         0.027***
                                                           (0.003)     (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.003)      (0.003)
Experience^2                                             -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000*** -0.000***
                                                           (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)      (0.000)
Male                                                      0.178***    0.210*** 0.195*** 0.117***         0.181***
                                                           (0.022)     (0.023)    (0.025)    (0.024)      (0.025)
Formal                                                    0.381***                          0.292***     0.326***
                                                           (0.029)                           (0.035)      (0.031)
Public                                                                0.383***
                                                                       (0.032)
Job tenure (years)                                         0.003**     0.003** 0.007***      0.003**     0.006***
                                                           (0.002)     (0.002)    (0.002)    (0.002)      (0.002)
Language most spoken at home (relative to Spanish)

  Guaraní                                                   -0.228***   -0.290*** -0.246*** -0.217***       -0.207***
                                                              (0.039)    (0.039)   (0.038)   (0.041)         (0.038)
   Guaraní and Spanish                                       -0.070**   -0.111*** -0.118*** -0.074**        -0.092***
                                                              (0.029)    (0.029)   (0.029)   (0.031)         (0.029)
   Other                                                     0.535***   0.536*** 0.601*** 0.533***          0.597***
                                                              (0.086)    (0.092)   (0.089)   (0.089)         (0.086)
   Does not speak                                             -0.144      0.021     0.103     -0.246          -0.020
                                                              (0.230)    (0.159)   (0.104)   (0.237)         (0.146)
Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

  Primary complete                                          0.078*       0.100**      0.073       0.072       0.060
                                                            (0.047)      (0.047)     (0.046)     (0.048)     (0.046)
  Secondary incomplete                                     0.207***     0.260***    0.202***    0.202***    0.159***
                                                            (0.047)      (0.048)     (0.049)     (0.048)     (0.047)
  Secondary complete                                       0.371***     0.465***    0.399***    0.354***    0.315***
                                                            (0.052)      (0.053)     (0.058)     (0.054)     (0.056)
  Tertiary incomplete                                      0.629***     0.717***    0.629***    0.569***    0.497***
                                                            (0.053)      (0.055)     (0.058)     (0.055)     (0.056)
  Tertiary complete                                        0.980***     1.090***    0.963***    0.908***    0.806***
                                                            (0.055)      (0.056)     (0.061)     (0.058)     (0.059)
Region (relative to Asunción)

  San Pedro                                                -0.397***    -0.481***   -0.373***   -0.416***   -0.325***
                                                            (0.054)      (0.055)      (0.055)     (0.055)    (0.054)
  Caaguazú                                                 -0.329***    -0.401***   -0.312***   -0.347***   -0.263***
                                                            (0.049)      (0.050)      (0.051)     (0.051)    (0.049)
  Itapúa                                                   -0.143***    -0.187***   -0.148***   -0.159***   -0.120***
                                                            (0.047)      (0.048)      (0.047)     (0.049)    (0.047)
  Alto Paraná                                               -0.075*     -0.107***    -0.085**    -0.102**     -0.051
                                                            (0.040)      (0.041)      (0.040)     (0.043)    (0.039)
  Central                                                  -0.109***    -0.131***   -0.118***   -0.155***   -0.103***
                                                            (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.038)     (0.040)    (0.037)
  Rest                                                     -0.289***    -0.353***   -0.295***   -0.326***   -0.258***
                                                            (0.035)      (0.036)      (0.036)     (0.037)    (0.035)




                                                         62
(continued)
Mincer Regressions, OLS, Dependent variable Log Hourly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Full-time workers age 15+, 2015
                                                             (1)         (2)        (3)        (4)          (5)
Secondary sector (relative to Retail)

   Agriculture, cattle and fishing                                                                    -0.244***                     -0.192***
                                                                                                       (0.054)                       (0.053)
   Manufacture and mining                                                                             0.164***                      0.148***
                                                                                                       (0.038)                       (0.038)
   Electricity, gas and water                                                                         0.673***                      0.600***
                                                                                                       (0.105)                       (0.102)
   Construction                                                                                       0.253***                      0.300***
                                                                                                       (0.044)                       (0.044)
   Transport and communication                                                                        0.328***                      0.309***
                                                                                                       (0.052)                       (0.053)
   Finance and real state                                                                             0.272***                      0.250***
                                                                                                       (0.053)                       (0.052)
   Govt/public administration                                                                         0.496***                      0.407***
                                                                                                       (0.037)                       (0.039)
   Other services                                                                                     0.142***                      0.197***
                                                                                                       (0.037)                       (0.037)
Firm size (relative to [2-5])

   Alone                                                                                                             -0.147***
                                                                                                                      (0.034)
   [6-10]                                                                                                            0.184***
                                                                                                                      (0.037)
   [11-20]                                                                                                           0.235***
                                                                                                                      (0.045)
   [21-50]                                                                                                           0.189***
                                                                                                                      (0.043)
   [50+]                                                                                                             0.198***
                                                                                                                      (0.044)
Constant                                                                   -0.051         -0.073        -0.099         -0.021         -0.058
                                                                           (0.088)        (0.093)       (0.098)       (0.093)         (0.094)
Weighted observations                                                       9883           9888          9888           9426           9883
R sq                                                                        0.327          0.315         0.339          0.337          0.356
Notes
OLS regres s ions with robus t s tanda rd errors a nd income weights .
Standa rd errors in pa renthes es .* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Wa ges ca lcula ted a s a vera ge of monthly ea rnings from ma in occupa tion tra ns formed in 2005 USD PPP us ing SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP
convers ion fa ctors . Include monetary income a nd a ll other income rela ted with the job, like bonus es a nd implicit rent/food/uniform
va lue, received regula rly. Tra ns formed in 2005 USD PPP us ing SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers ion fa ctors .
Experience = Age - Yea rs of educa tion + 6
Forma l if (i) wa ge employees contributing to Socia l Security, (ii) employers of a regis tered firm (RUC), (iii) s elf-employed workers
with a regis tered firm (RUC); Informa l if (i) fa rmers /herders /fis herma n (s elf-employed or employer of firm with no RUC), (ii) unpa id
fa mily worker, (iii) s elf-employed, employee or employer of firm with no RUC, (iv) wa ge employees not contributing to Socia l
Security.
Tenure defined a s number of yea rs in ma in occupa tion.
Incomplete prima ry or les s if les s tha n 6 yea rs of educa tion; Prima ry complete if with 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd not enrolled;
Seconda ry incomplete if with 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd enrolled or ha s (6-12) yea rs of educa tion; Seconda ry complete if with 12 yea rs
of educa tion a nd not enrolled; Tertia ry incomplete if with 12 yea rs of educa tion a nd enrolled or ha s (12-15) yea rs of educa tion;
Tertia ry complete
To explore          if withbia
            for s election  more  tha
                               s we   no
                                    a ls 15es
                                            yea rs of
                                              tima tededuca tion.
                                                       Heckma  n models . Res ults a re identica l to OLS a nd ca n be s upplied by reques t.
Source: Own ca lcula tions ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta.




                                                                      63
Table C5
OLS Mincer Regressions, Specification 1, Dependent variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Paid workers age 15+
                                                                     2008         2009        2010          2011       2012         2013       2014        2015
                                                                      (1)          (2)         (3)           (4)        (5)          (6)        (7)          (8)
Experience                                                        0.045***      0.045***    0.041***     0.043***    0.050***    0.041***    0.038***    0.043***
                                                                   (0.004)       (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.004)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Experience^2                                                      -0.001***    -0.001*** -0.000***      -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.000***   -0.000***
                                                                   (0.000)       (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Male                                                              0.476***      0.443***    0.412***     0.429***    0.474***    0.466***    0.435***    0.425***
                                                                   (0.024)       (0.029)     (0.024)      (0.024)     (0.022)     (0.023)     (0.022)     (0.022)
Formal                                                            0.545***      0.623***    0.517***     0.524***    0.570***    0.547***    0.521***    0.524***
                                                                   (0.028)       (0.033)     (0.029)      (0.029)     (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.024)     (0.025)
Job tenure (years)                                                  0.002        -0.003*   -0.007***       -0.003   -0.008***      -0.001      0.001      -0.002*
                                                                   (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)
Language most spoken at home (relative to Spanish)

  Guaraní                                                          -0.323***   -0.251***   -0.315***   -0.288***   -0.298***    -0.264***   -0.369***   -0.281***
                                                                    (0.037)     (0.044)     (0.035)      (0.038)     (0.035)      (0.038)     (0.036)     (0.039)
  Guaraní and Spanish                                              -0.101***   -0.101***     -0.040    -0.096***   -0.087***     -0.067**   -0.120***      -0.034
                                                                    (0.030)     (0.035)     (0.029)      (0.029)     (0.025)      (0.028)     (0.028)     (0.027)
  Other                                                            0.674***    0.678***    0.824***     0.861***    0.662***     0.707***    0.736***    0.539***
                                                                    (0.081)     (0.087)     (0.091)      (0.091)     (0.093)      (0.115)     (0.088)     (0.073)
  Does not speak                                                     0.563       -0.278      -0.294       0.059    -0.581***     -0.621**      0.004       -0.049
                                                                    (0.418)     (0.310)     (0.406)      (0.503)     (0.140)      (0.285)     (0.338)     (0.103)
Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

  Primary complete                                                 0.189***    0.148***    0.128***    0.129***     0.170***    0.142***    0.092**     0.126***
                                                                    (0.037)     (0.051)     (0.043)     (0.049)      (0.044)     (0.049)     (0.044)     (0.044)
  Secondary incomplete                                             0.340***    0.342***    0.204***    0.286***     0.379***    0.219***    0.183***    0.272***
                                                                    (0.037)     (0.053)     (0.044)     (0.045)      (0.042)     (0.045)     (0.043)     (0.045)
  Secondary complete                                               0.457***    0.492***    0.402***    0.450***     0.495***    0.333***    0.283***    0.461***
                                                                    (0.044)     (0.068)     (0.046)     (0.052)      (0.049)     (0.050)     (0.046)     (0.051)
  Tertiary incomplete                                              0.599***    0.633***    0.525***    0.580***     0.714***    0.458***    0.427***    0.636***
                                                                    (0.050)     (0.066)     (0.056)     (0.057)      (0.051)     (0.052)     (0.051)     (0.052)
  Tertiary complete                                                0.890***    0.888***    0.865***    0.910***     0.991***    0.856***    0.716***    0.927***
                                                                    (0.059)     (0.072)     (0.054)     (0.061)      (0.056)     (0.055)     (0.055)     (0.054)


                                                                                64
OLS Mincer Regressions, Specification 1, Dependent variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Paid workers age 15+ (continued)
                                                                    2008          2009       2010         2011         2012        2013                                                             2014              2015
                                                                     (1)           (2)        (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)                                                              (7)               (8)
Region (relative to Asunción)

   San Pedro                                                                               -0.112**          -0.136**       -0.234***         -0.290***        -0.169***        -0.220***        -0.291***         -0.448***
                                                                                            (0.049)           (0.053)        (0.050)            (0.056)          (0.051)          (0.050)          (0.053)           (0.052)
   Caaguazú                                                                               -0.243***           -0.069        -0.258***         -0.323***        -0.247***        -0.226***        -0.215***         -0.389***
                                                                                            (0.045)           (0.048)        (0.044)            (0.047)          (0.043)          (0.044)          (0.048)           (0.046)
   Itapúa                                                                                 -0.195***         -0.272***       -0.271***         -0.201***        -0.473***        -0.389***        -0.407***         -0.199***
                                                                                            (0.042)           (0.052)        (0.041)            (0.055)          (0.049)          (0.057)          (0.049)           (0.047)
   Alto Paraná                                                                              0.088**         0.124***         0.075**           0.084**            -0.006        -0.144***           -0.030           -0.064*
                                                                                            (0.035)           (0.039)        (0.034)            (0.042)          (0.036)          (0.039)          (0.040)           (0.038)
   Central                                                                                -0.094***           -0.033        -0.114***         -0.109***        -0.081***          -0.058*        -0.101***          -0.082**
                                                                                            (0.032)           (0.039)        (0.030)            (0.035)          (0.030)          (0.032)          (0.035)           (0.033)
   Rest                                                                                   -0.212***         -0.252***       -0.290***         -0.332***        -0.352***        -0.303***        -0.283***         -0.330***
                                                                                            (0.037)           (0.043)        (0.038)            (0.041)          (0.038)          (0.040)          (0.038)           (0.032)
Constant                                                                                  4.462***          4.388***        4.756***           4.715***         4.473***         4.839***         5.019***          4.735***
                                                                                            (0.082)           (0.102)        (0.077)            (0.084)          (0.076)          (0.076)          (0.077)           (0.085)
Observations                                                                                  7492             6671            7625              7470              8565            8515              8101             11838
R sq                                                                                         0.346             0.355          0.360              0.369            0.406            0.378            0.372             0.388
Notes
OLS regres s i ons wi th robus t s tanda rd errors a nd i ncome wei ghts .
Standa rd errors i n pa renthes es .* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Wa ges ca l cul a ted a s a vera ge of monthl y ea rni ngs from ma i n occupa tion tra ns formed i n 2005 USD PPP us i ng SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors . Incl ude monetary i ncome a nd a l l other
i ncome rel a ted wi th the job, l i ke bonus es a nd i mpl i ci t rent/food/uni form va l ue, recei ved regul a rl y. Tra ns formed i n 2005 USD PPP us i ng SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors .
Experi ence = Age - Yea rs of educa tion + 6
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buting to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); Informa l i f (i )
fa rmers /herders /fi s herma n (s el f-empl oyed or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge empl oyees not
Tenure defi ned a s number of yea rs i n ma i n occupa tion.
Incompl ete pri ma ry or l es s i f l es s tha n 6 yea rs of educa tion; Pri ma ry compl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd not enrol l ed; Seconda ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd enrol l ed or
ha s (6-12) yea rs of educa tion; Seconda ry compl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa tion a nd not enrol l ed; Tertia ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of educa tion a nd enrol l ed or ha s (12-16) yea rs of
educa tion; Tertia ry compl ete i f wi th more tha n 15 yea rs of educa tion.
To expl ore for s el ection bi a s we a l s o es tima ted Heckma n model s . Res ul ts a re i dentica l to OLS a nd ca n be s uppl i ed by reques t.
Source: Own ca l cul a tions ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta.



                                                                                                              65
Table C6
OLS Mincer Regressions, Specification 3, Dependent variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Employed age 15+, 2008-2015
                                                            2008         2009        2010        2011        2012         2013        2014        2015
                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)
Experience                                                0.051***    0.052***     0.047***    0.048***    0.053***     0.044***    0.044***    0.047***
                                                           (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.003)     (0.004)     (0.003)      (0.003)     (0.003)     (0.003)
Experience^2                                             -0.001***    -0.001*** -0.001***     -0.001***   -0.001***    -0.001***   -0.001***   -0.001***
                                                           (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)      (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)
Male                                                      0.482***    0.479***     0.431***    0.453***    0.479***     0.465***    0.437***    0.417***
                                                           (0.028)     (0.033)      (0.027)     (0.027)     (0.024)      (0.026)     (0.025)     (0.025)
Job tenure (years)                                        0.008***    0.007***       0.001     0.005***      0.002      0.007***    0.006***    0.005***
                                                           (0.002)     (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.001)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)
Language most spoken at home (relative to Spanish)

  Guaraní                                                  -0.301***   -0.216***   -0.281***   -0.256***   -0.231***   -0.215***   -0.350***   -0.269***
                                                             (0.038)    (0.043)     (0.035)      (0.039)     (0.034)     (0.038)     (0.036)     (0.040)
   Guaraní and Spanish                                     -0.126***   -0.103***    -0.053*    -0.130***   -0.103***   -0.098***   -0.153***   -0.079***
                                                             (0.031)    (0.037)     (0.029)      (0.030)     (0.025)     (0.028)     (0.029)     (0.027)
   Other                                                    0.791***   0.818***    0.962***     0.947***    0.838***    0.900***    0.882***    0.638***
                                                             (0.085)    (0.089)     (0.097)      (0.097)     (0.100)     (0.117)     (0.094)     (0.076)
   Does not speak                                             0.682      -0.265      -0.255       -0.064   -0.569***    -0.520**      -0.275    0.195***
                                                             (0.429)    (0.327)     (0.473)      (0.556)     (0.151)     (0.203)     (0.337)     (0.044)
Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

  Primary complete                                        0.171***       0.078      0.094**      0.076     0.121***    0.107**      0.075*     0.098**
                                                           (0.037)      (0.051)     (0.043)     (0.049)     (0.042)     (0.048)     (0.045)     (0.043)
  Secondary incomplete                                    0.335***     0.231***    0.184***    0.227***    0.286***    0.160***    0.171***    0.256***
                                                           (0.038)      (0.054)     (0.045)     (0.047)     (0.042)     (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.047)
  Secondary complete                                      0.501***     0.437***    0.429***    0.430***    0.471***    0.321***    0.332***    0.490***
                                                           (0.045)      (0.066)     (0.048)     (0.054)     (0.049)     (0.050)     (0.048)     (0.058)
  Tertiary incomplete                                     0.688***     0.646***    0.606***    0.623***    0.686***    0.451***    0.494***    0.706***
                                                           (0.053)      (0.068)     (0.058)     (0.062)     (0.052)     (0.052)     (0.053)     (0.058)
  Tertiary complete                                       1.018***     0.959***    1.008***    1.010***    1.010***    0.908***    0.849***    1.027***
                                                           (0.060)      (0.078)     (0.057)     (0.065)     (0.057)     (0.055)     (0.057)     (0.060)


                                                                            66
OLS Mincer Regressions, Specification 3, Dependent variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Employed age 15+, 2008-2015 (continued)
                                                            2008         2009        2010        2011       2012         2013         2014       2015
                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)        (8)
Region (relative to Asunción)

   San Pedro                                              -0.020       -0.013     -0.114**   -0.148***       -0.048    -0.132**    -0.200***   -0.371***
                                                          (0.051)      (0.053)     (0.051)     (0.057)      (0.051)     (0.052)      (0.055)     (0.054)
   Caaguazú                                             -0.208***      -0.059    -0.186***   -0.260***    -0.170***   -0.201***    -0.183***   -0.364***
                                                          (0.047)      (0.048)     (0.044)     (0.047)      (0.043)     (0.046)      (0.049)     (0.048)
   Itapúa                                               -0.156***    -0.152***   -0.174***    -0.121**    -0.358***   -0.346***    -0.354***   -0.193***
                                                          (0.043)      (0.051)     (0.042)     (0.054)      (0.049)     (0.052)      (0.051)     (0.048)
   Alto Paraná                                            0.067*      0.103***     0.064*       0.057        -0.041   -0.203***       -0.061   -0.115***
                                                          (0.035)      (0.038)     (0.034)     (0.042)      (0.037)     (0.039)      (0.040)     (0.038)
   Central                                              -0.107***      -0.049    -0.108***   -0.100***    -0.104***   -0.091***    -0.115***   -0.101***
                                                          (0.033)      (0.039)     (0.031)     (0.035)      (0.031)     (0.033)      (0.036)     (0.034)
   Rest                                                 -0.200***    -0.156***   -0.208***   -0.265***    -0.283***   -0.277***    -0.259***   -0.310***
                                                        (0.037)      (0.043)     (0.038)     (0.041)      (0.038)     (0.041)      (0.039)     (0.033)
Secondary sector (relative to Retail)

   Agriculture, cattle and fishing                      -0.453***    -0.780***   -0.579***   -0.640***    -0.734***   -0.704***    -0.534***   -0.604***
                                                          (0.044)      (0.052)     (0.047)     (0.052)      (0.045)     (0.051)      (0.046)     (0.054)
   Manufacture and mining                                 -0.026      -0.108**      -0.041      -0.028       -0.019     -0.056*       -0.015      0.009
                                                          (0.039)      (0.053)     (0.038)     (0.039)      (0.033)     (0.034)      (0.033)     (0.039)
   Electricity, gas and water                            0.657***      0.262**    0.533***     0.205*      0.627***    0.484***     0.385***    0.520***
                                                          (0.100)      (0.116)     (0.097)     (0.110)      (0.090)     (0.090)      (0.137)     (0.087)
   Construction                                           -0.002        0.047      0.069*       -0.048     0.193***      0.047       0.062*     0.134***
                                                          (0.039)      (0.052)     (0.041)     (0.043)      (0.037)     (0.036)      (0.033)     (0.037)
   Transport and communication                           0.243***       0.092     0.217***    0.108**      0.124***    0.265***     0.135***    0.214***
                                                          (0.050)      (0.063)     (0.053)     (0.047)      (0.047)     (0.049)      (0.041)     (0.043)
   Finance and real state                                0.196***       0.058      0.114**      0.044      0.151***      0.092*       0.002     0.119***
                                                          (0.057)      (0.057)     (0.047)     (0.050)      (0.044)     (0.050)      (0.053)     (0.046)
   Govt/public administration                           0.130***     0.158***    0.063*      0.035        0.240***    0.185***     0.175***    0.168***
                                                        (0.040)      (0.042)     (0.038)     (0.037)      (0.033)     (0.037)      (0.036)     (0.033)
   Other services                                       -0.159***    -0.197***   -0.131***   -0.175***    -0.146***   -0.213***    -0.195***   -0.190***
                                                          (0.035)      (0.045)     (0.037)     (0.038)      (0.034)     (0.036)      (0.036)     (0.034)

                                                                           67
OLS Mincer Regressions, Specification 3, Dependent variable Log Monthly real wage (2005 USD PPP), Employed age 15+, 2008-2015 (continued)
                                                            2008         2009        2010        2011       2012         2013          2014                                                               2015
                                                             (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)          (6)           (7)                                                                (8)
Constant                                                  4.483***    4.515***     4.760***    4.819***   4.625***     5.026***      5.091***                                                           4.829***
                                                           (0.088)     (0.101)      (0.082)     (0.091)    (0.080)      (0.079)       (0.081)                                                            (0.099)
Observations                                                7495         6675        7627        7471       8569         8519          8100                                                               11845
R sq                                                        0.339       0.366        0.367       0.369      0.423        0.392         0.365                                                              0.390
Notes
OLS regres s i ons wi th robus t s tanda rd errors a nd i ncome wei ghts .
Standa rd errors i n pa renthes es .* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Wa ges ca l cul a ted a s a vera ge of monthl y ea rni ngs from ma i n occupa tion tra ns formed i n 2005 USD PPP us i ng SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors . Incl ude monetary i ncome a nd a l l
other i ncome rel a ted wi th the job, l i ke bonus es a nd i mpl i ci t rent/food/uni form va l ue, recei ved regul a rl y. Tra ns formed i n 2005 USD PPP us i ng SEDLAC CPI a nd PPP convers i on fa ctors .
Experi ence = Age - Yea rs of educa tion + 6
Forma l i f (i ) wa ge empl oyees contri buting to Soci a l Securi ty, (i i ) empl oyers of a regi s tered fi rm (RUC), (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed workers wi th a regi s tered fi rm (RUC); Informa l i f (i )
fa rmers /herders /fi s herma n (s el f-empl oyed or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC), (i i ) unpa i d fa mi l y worker, (i i i ) s el f-empl oyed, empl oyee or empl oyer of fi rm wi th no RUC, (i v) wa ge
Tenure defi ned a s number of yea rs i n ma i n occupa tion.
Incompl ete pri ma ry or l es s i f l es s tha n 6 yea rs of educa tion; Pri ma ry compl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of educa tion a nd not enrol l ed; Seconda ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 6 yea rs of
educa tion
To expl ore a ndsenrol
            for        l ed bi
                 el ection  oraha
                                s wes (6-12)
                                         a l s o yea  rs ofted
                                                  es tima   educa tion; n
                                                               Heckma   Seconda
                                                                          model sry compl
                                                                                  . Res     ete
                                                                                        ul ts    i fiwi
                                                                                              a re      th 12 l
                                                                                                     dentica  yea
                                                                                                                to rs
                                                                                                                   OLSofaeduca  tion
                                                                                                                          nd ca n be a
                                                                                                                                     snd not
                                                                                                                                       uppl    enrol
                                                                                                                                            i ed     l ed; Tertia
                                                                                                                                                 by reques  t. ry i ncompl ete i f wi th 12 yea rs of
Source: Own ca l cul a tions ba s ed on SEDLAC da ta.




                                                                                                           68
Table C7
Logit regressions from Panel Data, Age 15+, Estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), quarter to quarter transitions
                                                                        2010-2014
                            Active if started as      Employed if started as     Formal if started as       Inactive if started as
                                 Inactive            Unemployed or Inactive            Informal                  Unemployed
                          Estimate         AME        Estimate       AME         Estimate      AME         Estimate         AME
Male                      0.671***       0.119***      0.926***    0.147***     -0.452*** -0.026***        -0.527*** -0.115***
                           (0.087)        (0.015)       (0.077)     (0.012)       (0.116)     (0.007)        (0.186)       (0.040)
Age group (relative to [15-19])

  [20-24]                 0.242*        0.045*        0.377***          0.057***    0.500**    0.024**      -0.180       -0.039
                         (0.125)       (0.024)         (0.111)           (0.017)    (0.231)    (0.010)      (0.208)      (0.045)
  [25-29]                0.416**       0.080**        0.760***          0.126***   0.755***   0.039***       0.058        0.013
                         (0.169)       (0.034)         (0.150)           (0.026)    (0.257)    (0.012)      (0.327)      (0.072)
  [30-34]                 0.043         0.008         0.714***          0.117***   0.820***   0.043***       0.037        0.008
                         (0.191)       (0.034)         (0.168)           (0.030)    (0.279)    (0.014)      (0.372)      (0.082)
  [35-39]                 -0.187        -0.031          0.255             0.037      0.457      0.021       -0.075       -0.016
                         (0.193)       (0.032)         (0.177)           (0.027)    (0.289)    (0.013)      (0.467)      (0.102)
  [40-44]                 -0.018        -0.003        0.708***          0.116***   0.779***   0.040***       0.482        0.107
                         (0.197)       (0.034)         (0.179)           (0.032)    (0.288)    (0.015)      (0.565)      (0.124)
  [45-49]                 -0.298       -0.049*          0.282             0.041    0.912***   0.049***      -0.203       -0.044
                         (0.185)       (0.029)         (0.175)           (0.027)    (0.290)    (0.015)      (0.569)      (0.123)
  [50-54]                 -0.433        -0.069          0.060             0.008     0.993*      0.054        0.605        0.133
                         (0.295)       (0.042)         (0.265)           (0.037)    (0.514)    (0.033)      (0.711)      (0.154)
  [55-59]

  60 or more

                         level
Attending any education -1.032***      -0.184***     -0.844***      -0.134***       0.227      0.013       0.806***     0.176***
                          (0.126)       (0.022)        (0.113)       (0.018)       (0.172)    (0.010)       (0.255)      (0.054)
Highest education level (relative to incomplete primary or less)

  Primary complete       0.021         0.004            -0.056           -0.009       0.138      0.007       -0.060        -0.013
                        (0.187)       (0.033)          (0.175)          (0.028)     (0.394)    (0.020)       (0.586)      (0.130)
   Secondary incomplete -0.179         -0.031           -0.184           -0.029       0.089      0.005       -0.022        -0.005
                        (0.172)       (0.030)          (0.161)          (0.026)     (0.384)    (0.020)       (0.521)      (0.115)
   Secondary complete -0.025           -0.004           -0.101           -0.016       0.340      0.019       -0.536        -0.120
                        (0.175)       (0.031)          (0.163)          (0.026)     (0.380)    (0.020)       (0.527)      (0.117)
   Tertiary incomplete 0.481**       0.094***           0.226            0.038        0.332      0.018      -1.169**     -0.255**
                        (0.192)       (0.036)          (0.178)          (0.030)     (0.397)    (0.021)       (0.556)      (0.120)
   Tertiary complete    0.462**       0.090**           0.322            0.056        0.311      0.017       -0.992       -0.219*
                        (0.229)       (0.045)          (0.204)          (0.035)     (0.402)    (0.021)       (0.604)      (0.131)
Household size           0.006         0.001            -0.032           -0.005     0.111*     0.006*        -0.066        -0.014
                        (0.037)       (0.007)          (0.033)          (0.005)     (0.060)    (0.004)       (0.076)      (0.017)
                         -0.023
Number children younger than  14 in hh -0.004          0.077*           0.012*     -0.180**   -0.010**        0.082         0.018
                        (0.050)       (0.009)          (0.047)          (0.007)     (0.083)    (0.005)       (0.128)      (0.028)
Number youth in hh       0.020         0.004           0.087*           0.014*       -0.048     -0.003        0.039         0.008
                        (0.055)       (0.010)          (0.049)          (0.008)     (0.090)    (0.005)       (0.113)      (0.025)
                         0.011
Number elder age>=60 in hh             0.002            -0.040           -0.006     -0.185*    -0.011*        0.188         0.041
                        (0.065)       (0.012)          (0.063)          (0.010)     (0.103)    (0.006)       (0.154)      (0.033)
Job Tenure                                                                            0.005      0.000
                                                                                    (0.010)    (0.001)




                                                                   69
(continued)
Logit regressions from Panel Data, Age 15+, Estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), quarter to quarter transitions
                                                                        2010-2014
                           Active if started as       Employed if started as     Formal if started as       Inactive if started as
                                Inactive             Unemployed or Inactive           Informal                  Unemployed
                         Estimate         AME         Estimate       AME         Estimate      AME         Estimate         AME
Secondary sector (relative to Retail)

   Agriculture, cattle and fishing                                                  -0.428    -0.026
                                                                                   (0.539)   (0.029)
   Manufacture and mining                                                            0.002     0.000
                                                                                   (0.171)   (0.011)
   Electricity, gas and water                                                        0.316     0.022
                                                                                   (0.683)   (0.051)
   Construction                                                                   -1.274*** -0.062***
                                                                                   (0.341)   (0.013)
   Transport and communication                                                      -0.125    -0.008
                                                                                   (0.232)   (0.015)
   Finance and real state                                                            0.093     0.006
                                                                                   (0.199)   (0.013)
   Govt/public administration                                                     -1.563*** -0.070***
                                                                                   (0.213)   (0.009)
   Other services                                                                    0.198     0.014
                                                                                   (0.156)   (0.011)
Firm size at time t (relative to [2-5])

   Alone                                                                          -1.784***   -0.017***
                                                                                   (0.416)     (0.003)
   [6-10]                                                                         1.308***    0.050***
                                                                                   (0.212)     (0.010)
   [11-20]                                                                        1.858***    0.094***
                                                                                   (0.224)     (0.016)
   [21-50]                                                                        2.123***    0.123***
                                                                                   (0.224)     (0.019)
   [50+]                                                                          3.575***    0.370***
                                                                                   (0.183)     (0.020)




                                                                70
(continued)
Logit regressions from Panel Data, Age 15+, Estimates and Average Marginal Effects (AME), quarter to quarter transitions
                                                                        2010-2014
                            Active if started as      Employed if started as     Formal if started as       Inactive if started as
                                 Inactive            Unemployed or Inactive           Informal                  Unemployed
                          Estimate         AME        Estimate       AME         Estimate      AME         Estimate         AME
Year-quarter (relative to 2010q2)

2010q3                      -0.249      -0.046          -0.324*      -0.057*         -0.404     -0.025         -0.226       -0.050
                           (0.184)     (0.034)          (0.169)      (0.030)        (0.268)    (0.017)        (0.471)      (0.104)
2010q4                      -0.019      -0.004           -0.098       -0.018       -0.735**   -0.042**         -0.362       -0.081
                           (0.186)     (0.036)          (0.167)      (0.031)        (0.294)    (0.017)        (0.456)      (0.102)
2011q1                      0.020       0.004         -0.473***    -0.081***         -0.095     -0.006         -0.083       -0.018
                           (0.184)     (0.036)          (0.177)      (0.030)        (0.261)    (0.017)        (0.450)      (0.098)
2011q2                      -0.132      -0.025           -0.137       -0.025         -0.293     -0.019         -0.489       -0.110
                           (0.326)     (0.061)          (0.283)      (0.051)        (0.416)    (0.026)        (0.613)      (0.139)
2011q3                     -0.335*     -0.061*        -0.579***    -0.096***       -0.689**   -0.040**       -0.973**     -0.222**
                           (0.202)     (0.037)          (0.185)      (0.031)        (0.310)    (0.018)        (0.454)      (0.100)
2011q4                      -0.162      -0.031          -0.344*      -0.060*      -0.761***   -0.043**         -0.365       -0.082
                           (0.191)     (0.036)          (0.180)      (0.031)        (0.294)    (0.017)        (0.461)      (0.103)
2012q1                      -0.246      -0.046        -0.679***    -0.110***         -0.155     -0.010      -2.090***    -0.438***
                           (0.198)     (0.037)          (0.194)      (0.031)        (0.285)    (0.019)        (0.530)      (0.095)
2012q2                      -0.165      -0.031        -0.477***    -0.081***         -0.451     -0.028        -0.826*     -0.188**
                           (0.192)     (0.036)          (0.177)      (0.030)        (0.310)    (0.019)        (0.428)      (0.095)
2012q3                      -0.412      -0.074          -0.396*      -0.069*          0.156      0.011       -1.306**     -0.295**
                           (0.265)     (0.046)          (0.234)      (0.039)        (0.393)    (0.028)        (0.652)      (0.138)
2012q4                      -0.197      -0.037         -0.427**     -0.073**         -0.113     -0.007       -0.912**     -0.208**
                           (0.198)     (0.037)          (0.183)      (0.031)        (0.311)    (0.021)        (0.453)      (0.100)
2013q1                      -0.187      -0.035        -0.499***    -0.084***         -0.309     -0.020      -1.191***    -0.270***
                           (0.201)     (0.038)          (0.188)      (0.032)        (0.308)    (0.019)        (0.451)      (0.097)
2013q2                      -0.194      -0.036           -0.189       -0.034          0.003      0.000        -0.826*      -0.188*
                           (0.197)     (0.037)          (0.177)      (0.032)        (0.278)    (0.019)        (0.451)      (0.100)
2013q3                      -0.216      -0.040         -0.368**     -0.064**        -0.545*    -0.033*       -0.878**     -0.200**
                           (0.195)     (0.036)          (0.179)      (0.031)        (0.279)    (0.017)        (0.445)      (0.099)
2013q4                     -0.409*     -0.073*        -0.587***    -0.097***         -0.318     -0.020      -1.560***    -0.346***
                           (0.229)     (0.040)          (0.202)      (0.033)        (0.298)    (0.019)        (0.543)      (0.110)
2014q1                      -0.158      -0.030         -0.466**     -0.080**         -0.405     -0.025      -1.515***    -0.337***
                           (0.202)     (0.038)          (0.184)      (0.031)        (0.305)    (0.019)        (0.495)      (0.102)
2014q2                    -0.713***   -0.119***       -0.578***    -0.096***         -0.014     -0.001      -1.352***    -0.304***
                           (0.219)     (0.036)          (0.193)      (0.032)        (0.274)    (0.019)        (0.464)      (0.098)
2014q3                      -0.242      -0.045         -0.438**     -0.075**          0.040      0.003       -0.865**     -0.197**
                           (0.207)     (0.038)          (0.191)      (0.032)        (0.291)    (0.020)        (0.423)      (0.093)
2014q4                      -0.213      -0.040           -0.248       -0.044       -0.739**   -0.042**         -0.645       -0.146
                           (0.205)     (0.038)          (0.180)      (0.032)        (0.322)    (0.018)        (0.457)      (0.102)
Year-quarter (relative to 2015q2)

2015q3

2015q4

Constant             -0.693***                        -1.208***                   -4.421***                   1.220*
                      (0.250)                          (0.234)                     (0.510)                    (0.636)
Weighted Observations 5481              5481             6989          6989          7476       7476            893         893
Pseudo R sq            0.058                            0.073                       0.300                      0.089
(continued)

                                                                  71
Notes
Weighted Logit regressions from Panel Data.
Standard errors in parentheses.* p<0.1 ** p<0.05 *** p<0.01
Incomplete primary or less if less than 6 years of education; Primary complete if with 6 years of education and not enrolled; Secondary incomplete if
with 6 years of education and enrolled or has (6-12) years of education; Secondary complete if with 12 years of education and not enrolled; Tertiary
incomplete if with 12 years of education and enrolled or has (12-16) years of education; Tertiary complete if with more than 15 years of education.
Years of education calculated by Paraguay's Statistical Department (DGEEC).
As RUC data unavailable for years 2010-2011 but pension contributions available for all years then formality definition is changed for ECE panel
dataset. Formal if (i) wage employees contributing to a pension fund, (ii) employers contributing to a pension fund, (iii) self-employed and
domestic workers contributing to a pension fund; Informal if (i) farmers/herders/fisherman (self-employed or employer not contributing to pension
fund), (ii) unpaid family worker, (iii) self-employed, employee or employer not contributing to a pension fund, (iv) wage employees not contributing
to a pension fund and (v) domestic workers not contributing to a pension fund.
Language spoken dropped for clarity of exposition. Regression sample too small. Language groups generate biased estimates.
Data description. Total observations 62957, individuals 19150, Quarters 20, Years 2010-2014. Geographically it covers Asunción and Urban areas in
the Central department, which represents about 40% of the National workforce and a little more than 60% of urban workforce. Unbalanced panel:
data not available for all quarters for all individuals.
Source: Own calculations based on Encuesta Continua de Empleo (ECE) data.




                                                                         72
