Looking Beyond
the Horizon:
A case study of PVH’s commitment to Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park


Mamo Mihretu | Gabriela Llobet

June 2017
                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 1




Looking Beyond the Horizon: A Case Study of PVH’s
 Commitment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park

          By Mamo Mihretu and Gabriela Llobet




                      A case study of PVH’s commitment to Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
 2 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors greatly appreciate the close collaboration with the Ethiopian Investment Commission
(EIC) and generous time and insights of PVH’s executives in the preparation of this case study.
The report benefited from substantial inputs from several World Bank colleagues, policy makers
and other experts. Roberto Echandi, Barbara R Kotschwar, Peter Kusek, Armando Heilbron from
the World Bank Group and Fistum Arega, Belachew Mekuria and Abebe Abebayehu from EIC
provided careful peer review comments.



The work has been carried out with the support and guidance of Anabel González, Senior Director
of the World Bank Group’s Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice who initiated the concept
for the study. We are also grateful for additional support from Klaus Tilmes (Director, Trade and
Competitiveness), Christine Qiang (Manager, Investment Climate, Trade and Competitiveness),
Catherine Masinde, (Manager, Trade and Competitiveness, East and Horn of Africa).

Any errors or omissions are the responsibility of the authors.



About the Authors
Mamo Mihretu is a Senior Private Sector Specialist at the World Bank Group (WBG). He leads
the WBG’s engagements in Investment Climate, Investment Policy, Trade Facilitation and Trade
Logistics in Ethiopia.

Gabriela Llobet was previously the Director General of Cinde, Costa Rica’s investment
promotion agency. She is currently a consultant at the Investment Climate Unit of the Trade and
Competitiveness Global Practice of the World Bank Group.
                                                                                LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 3




Contents

Preface................................................................................................... 6
Section 1. Introduction.......................................................................... 8
Section II. Background: PVH and the Textile and Apparel Industry........ 11
PVH Corp............................................................................................... 11
The Textile and Apparel Industry............................................................. 13
   2.1 Background on the Industry............................................................................ 13

   2.2 The Textile and Apparel Value Chain............................................................... 15

Section III: PVH’s Site Selection Process................................................ 17
Initial approaches: the textile and apparel industry visits Africa............... 17
Deciding on Ethiopia.............................................................................. 19
Section IV. Ethiopia’s development strategy: using textiles
and apparel to industrialize................................................................... 25
   4.1 Ethiopia’s level of readiness and strategy for attracting PVH’s investment........ 25

   4.2 Institutional Structure..................................................................................... 28

   HIP: Where in Ethiopia?....................................................................................... 31

Section V. PVH’s Decision to Invest and Its Pursuit of
Vertical Integration................................................................................ 37
Section VI. Challenges............................................................................ 39
Section VII. Key Lessons......................................................................... 44
Section VIII Conclusions........................................................................ 47
References.............................................................................................. 50
Annex 1: Fully Operational Companies in the Textile
and Garment Sector in Ethiopia, 2012-2017........................................... 52




                                                    A case study of PVH’s commitment to Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
4 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON
                            LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 5




A case study of PVH’s commitment to Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  6 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




Preface

“We have formed our vision that Ethiopia will be the manufacturing powerhouse of Africa; we will sustain rapid economic
growth and GDP will grow by an annual 11 percent, while manufacturing has to grow by 25 percent for a structural change to
happen.… We have also put aims to create two million manufacturing jobs in 10 years, [from] medium and large enterprises.
—Interview with Dr. Arkebe Oqubay, Addis Fortune Newspaper, Vol. 16 (808) Oct 29, 2015



On July 13, 2016, Ethiopian Prime Minister Haile Mariam Desalegn officially inaugurated the
Hawassa Industrial Park (HIP). In front of assorted dignitaries, including members of the diplomatic
community, investors and local residents, gathered on a warm Wednesday morning, the Prime
Minister highlighted the historic significance of the project in ushering a new chapter in Ethiopia’s
industrialization efforts. In the audience were senior executives of the PVH Corp.—the lead
apparel company in HIP—and two of the Prime Minister’s key advisors—Dr. Arkebe Oqubay, the
Prime Minister’s Special Advisor on Industrialization, and Fitsum Arega, the Commissioner of the
Ethiopian Investment Commission (EIC). “The Hawassa Industrial Park,” proclaimed the Prime
Minister, “is significant both because of the promise it holds in and of itself and the precedence it
sets—as a pilot eco-friendly, green industrial park—for a series of planned future industrial parks
across the country.”

Over the past 30 years, Ethiopia’s manufacturing sector generated only 250,000 jobs. According
to the government, HIP alone is expected to generate close to 60,000 jobs and US$1 billion in
export revenues. This will be a significant achievement for a country that has suffered chronic
foreign exchange shortages. Beyond these static gains, the Prime Minister continued, “Hawassa
Industrial Park is a strategically important inflection point that will usher in a New Frontier—
an experimental program that will ensure a shift to a productive manufacturing sector through
similar initiatives while protecting the environment.”

Mark Green, PVH’s Executive Vice President of Global Supply, emphasized HIP’s role as a
springboard for the textiles and apparel industry in Ethiopia. “You have in Hawassa some of the
best manufacturers in the world. The world is watching with huge interest and anticipation …. We
believe that it is a model that could be taken to work not in just parts of Ethiopia but throughout
Africa. In time, we are sure Ethiopia will become the major apparel hub for Africa and an exporter
of talent as well.”
                                                                                                     LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 7




HIP, a modern, ecologically sensitive industrial park is also unique in that it was constructed in
less than a year. This is an outcome of a very close partnership and shared vision by the tenant
group led by PVH and an active and engaged government. The construction of HIP started in July,
2015 and the park was inaugurated on July 13, 2016. Within a year, on March 4, 2017, one of
HIP’s tenants exported HIP’s first dress shirt.1

This study does not aim to provide a final and conclusive verdict regarding HIP’s success. This
will only be possible when the park is fully occupied and has been in operation for at least a
few years. In the Ethiopian context, industrial parks aim at promoting employment, export and
foreign investment. Additional goals, such as regional and local development, encouragement
of technology transfer, creation of linkages, and industrialization strategy development have
evolved through time. Future studies should provide a systematic analysis of the extent to which
Ethiopia’s Industrial Parks have met these objectives.

This case study describes how and why PVH, the world’s second largest apparel company,
decided to move production to Africa, and why it chose Ethiopia as the base for its new business
model. This case study is based on desk research on PVH, the textile industry and Ethiopia’s
investment strategy, testimonies and speeches of corporate executives and government officials;
and extensive interviews with the relevant actors.




1.	   “TAL Apparel Produces First Dress Shirt in Ethiopia,” East Africa Trade + Investment Hub, March 23, 2017. Accessed on March 31, 2017 at 		
	      http://www.eatradehub.org/tal_apparel_produces_first_dress_shirt_in_ethiopia.




                                                                  A case study of PVH’s commitment to Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  8 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




Section 1. Introduction


The story of how the PVH Corp. (referred to throughout this document as PVH) came to lead
a group of its top suppliers to build factories and a fabric mill in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial
Park (HIP) is the study of a strong collaboration between a private company looking to optimize
its business model and a government aiming to transform its economy through global strategic
repositioning. The success of this story hinges upon the intersection of their goals and a shared
vision of development that includes a strong commitment to social and environmental goals.

PVH was motivated to invest in Ethiopia to respond to shifts in the global apparel sector, its
growing desire to retool its business model and to address its concerns about compliance with
social and environmental standards in its traditional sourcing locations. PVH had decided to
rethink its business model and to look beyond the horizon towards a new region in which to
locate its manufacturing base. To have better oversight and enforcement, PVH moved to adopt
a fully integrated vertical supply chain, including direct investment in one of the manufacturing
facilities.

In selecting the location for its new vertically integrated and socially responsible supply chain,
PVH looked for ample suitable land on which its supply chain partners could grow cotton,
and sustainable sources of energy with competitive electricity rates for the production of yarn
and fabric. The company required the country’s government to be committed to ensuring that
relevant laws (worker rights, fire safety, building safety, etc.) would be enforced and that their
manufacturers would meet international quality and production standards. Finally, PVH wanted
to be an early-mover in this new sourcing market.

Ethiopia, which had recently identified the textile and apparel sector in its national development
plan as a key strategic sector to help transform its economy, fit the bill. Key to Ethiopia’s success
in attracting this important investor was the government’s ability and willingness to strategically
evaluate its foreign direct investment (FDI) needs and strategy and to take steps to evolve into an
attractive location for higher value-added export-oriented investment.
                                                                        LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 9




The government of Ethiopia aimed to diversify its economy in a bid to raise foreign exchange,
create jobs and enhance the country’s productivity. To this end, policymakers undertook a series
of initiatives to support the development of a solid textile and apparel industry, including steps to
attract key investors to this sector. In 2010, Ethiopia featured the apparel industry in its national
5-year development plan, the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP) and launched the Textile
Industry Development Institute to help supplement and develop the necessary human capital.

While Ethiopia had been attracting foreign investment, it wanted to bring high quality companies
with export potential into this strategic sector. Ethiopia offers preferential export access to the US
and EU markets through the EU’s Everything But Arms regime and the recently-extended African
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) with the United States but had, so far, not fully been able
to exploit these preferences.

Since 2010, FDI flows into Ethiopia have grown at an average rate of nearly 50 per cent per year,
reaching $2.2 billion in 2015 (UNCTAD 2016), as seen in Figure 1, and $3.2 billion according
to UNCTAD Investment Report of 2017. Ethiopia has attracted FDI in commercial agriculture,
manufacturing, leather, and textiles sectors. Textile and garment firms—mostly contract
manufacturers—from India, Bangladesh, China, and Turkey, seeking alternative production bases
for export to the European Union and North America, have announced investments in Ethiopia
(UNCTAD World Investment Report 2016). Annex 1 provides detailed information on FDI in
Ethiopia in the textile and garment industry.

                Figure1. FDI inflows to Ethiopia (billions $US) 2000-2015



          2.5



          2.0



          1.5



          1.0



          0.5



          0.0
                 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

        Source: UNCTAD

PVH’s decision to attract suppliers to move production to HIP was a significant game-changer for
Ethiopia. A major global player, PVH’s presence sends a strong signal to the world that Ethiopia
is ready to host leading companies. Producing in Ethiopia was also Producing in Ethiopia was




                                            A case study of PVH’s commitment to Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  10 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




also a game changer for PVH, allowing a significant shift in its business model. As William
“Bill” McRaith, PVH’s Chief Supply Chain Officer, explains, PVH is pioneering “the world´s first
example of a fully vertically integrated, from ground to finished product, socially responsible
supply chain” in the textile industry.

This case study explains a private investor’s site selection process. It assesses the elements PVH
prioritized when deciding to commit to Ethiopia, and specifically to HIP. The case study further
assesses the government of Ethiopia’s strategy, level of readiness, interest, and commitment, and
sets out some key challenges that lie ahead for this partnership. The case study is structured in
10 sections. Section II offers a brief background on the textile and apparel industry, including
an explanation of its value chain. It provides a brief corporate profile of PVH and its current
global footprint and business model. Section III describes the site selection process: PVH´s initial
explorations in Africa, its consideration of several African countries, and its initial conversations
and negotiations with Ethiopian authorities. Section IV discusses the Ethiopian government’s
strategy to attract and expand export-oriented investments, including efforts to bolster the
country’s competitiveness. This section attempts to offer some explanation why Ethiopia was the
right fit at the right time and its level of readiness to land such an investment. It provides a
brief profile of PVH’s Africa point of entry, the HIP. Section VI covers the challenges that lie
ahead for this-project---potential setbacks that will affect not only the consolidation and growth
of the textiles and apparel industry in Ethiopia, but also the government’s vision of becoming the
“manufacturing powerhouse of Africa.” Section VIII concludes with some key lessons from PVH’s
decision to invest in Ethiopia. Such lessons may be relevant to countries or regions interested in
attracting FDI and may be of particular interest to other African countries in their quest to attract
major investments in the textile and apparel sector.
                                                                                                     LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 11




Section II. Background: PVH and the Textile and Apparel
Industry


PVH Corp

PVH is the second largest apparel company in the world, with more than US $ 8 billion dollars
in annual revenue. It owns and markets a diverse portfolio of designer brands, including CALVIN
KLEIN, TOMMY HILFIGER, VAN HEUSEN, IZOD, ARROW, WARNER’S, OLGA and others. PVH
employs approximately 18,200 people around the world. Independent manufacturers produce its
goods in more than 1,450 factories in more than 50 countries worldwide.

PVH’s prevailing business model has generally been based on sourcing through contractual
arrangements with manufacturers.2 PVH often establishes long-term supplier relationships in
appropriate locations around the world and works closely with its suppliers to monitor the quality
of the goods as well as compliance with worker safety, human rights, labor, and environmental
standards. The company has in place extensive training, approval, and monitoring systems. With
more than 700,000 workers associated with its global operations, strong and consistent quality
and compliance programs are essential. The company has more than 2,000 direct suppliers and
licensee factories around the world.


Public perception of its brands is a significant component of the company’s value. This high
sensitivity to reputational risk requires PVH to be very careful when making sourcing decisions.
As global consumers become more sophisticated and aware, a company can only be deemed
sustainable if all its suppliers are equally responsible and sustainable. As Bill McRaith states,
“We want to be in places where we can install not just good factories, but codes of conduct,
values, environmental sustainability, positive worker relations, and the highest business and
ethical principles to ensure the long-term success of our commitments.… We like to be the first
into an area to help establish the workplace rules to be followed by future investors and market
participants” (McRaith, 2015).

More recently, the company has transformed itself by acquiring major apparel companies: CALVIN
KLEIN (2003), TOMMY HILFIGER (2010), and most recently, WARNACO (2013) (which had long
term licenses to produce products under the CALVIN KLEIN jeans and beneficially owned the
CALVIN KLEIN underwear trademarks.) PVH has now assumed direct control of CALVIN KLEIN’s
two largest apparel categories: jeanswear and underwear. Through these and other acquisitions,
large and small, PVH has become a large global organization, with a broad band portfolio, a
worldwide retail footprint and distribution network, and a large consumer base.



2.	   PVH currently does manufacture hand-made, hand-finished neckwear in its Los Angeles, California, facility. This accounts for less than 10 percent 	
	     of the total quantity of neckwear it sources and produces.
  12 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




   A woman worker in HIP.

A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                                                 LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 13




The Textile and Apparel Industry

    2.1 Background on the Industry

Textile and Apparel production is seen as an important catalyst for developing countries’
industrialization. It has played an important role as a springboard for economic development
and, due to its low fixed costs and labor-intensive manufacturing, is often a starter industry for
countries seeking to industrialize (Gereffi et al. 2011).

The textile and apparel industry provides employment to tens of millions of workers, mostly in
developing countries around the world (Stotz and Kane 2015). According to the World Trade
Organization (WTO 2016), the global value of textiles (SITC 65) and apparel (SITC 84) exports
totaled $291 billion and $445 billion respectively in 2015. The textile and apparel value chain
has been global since the 1970s and the geography of apparel production and trade has been
highly dynamic. The Multifibre Arrangement --a set of preferential quotas intended to regulate the
industry and protect certain economies from low-cost imports - was phased out by 2005 when the
World Trade Organization (WTO)’s Agreement on Textiles and Clothing (ATC) was implemented.
This triggered a global realignment of apparel production, and private firms had to restructure to
adjust to this new environment (Gereffi et al. 2011).

More recently, the global landscape has been shaped by the development of regional value
chains, particularly in Asia, and unilateral preference schemes and bilateral trade agreements
containing preferential arrangements for textiles and apparel. Zero tariffs and favorable rules of
origin have allowed certain countries to become competitive exporters. For example, access to
the US market through the Dominican Republic—Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA)
enabled Central American countries such as Nicaragua, to compete in segments of this value
chain. The European Union’s Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) has had a similar effect.
Several African countries, notably Lesotho, have successfully used the United States’ African
Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) to develop their textile industry. An essential element in
AGOA is the so-called third-country fabric rule of origin, which allows least-developed AGOA
beneficiaries to utilize yarn and fabric from any country, such as low-cost producers India or
China. In 2015, the AGOA was renewed for a period of 10 years.3

Production has been concentrated in a small group of countries, with Asian exporters China,
Bangladesh, Vietnam, and India as the largest source markets. China became the world’s
apparel powerhouse in 2010, overtaking the EU as the biggest textile and clothing exporter in
the world, as seen in Tables 1 and 2. China also became number one in the four industries that
constitute the sector: textiles, clothing, leather, and footwear. China accounts for 54 percent of
apparel production and 76 percent of total global apparel employment as well as 40 percent of



3.	 There are two major advantages of AGOA over other preferential trading arrangements: elimination of duty for apparel products entering the
United States and provision allowing the use of third-country fabric inputs. With most other trade arrangements, fabric must be produced in the
United States or the other partner country in order to qualify for duty-free status.
   14 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




US apparel imports. While Chinese apparel production has been falling over the last five years,
as costs increase, it is shifting its production from exports to supplying its own vast domestic
market, and looks likely to continue as the dominant apparel player for the foreseeable future
(McKinsey 2015).

The highly competitive Asian regional value chain is based on ample raw material, and
significant sewing capacity that results in high-quality textiles. In addition, many full-package
manufacturers based in locations such as China, Hong Kong, and South Korea offer design and
product development capabilities as well as logistical services. All of these factors account for
Asia’s growth in the global market and the region’s status as the preferred destination for many
companies that seek “one-stop” sourcing (Gereffi & Frederick 2010).
                                                                                          Leading exporters of textiles, 2004 and 2015 (in billions of US dollars and percentage)

                                                                                                   2004                                                                  2015
                                                                                            6b                                                                      8b
                                         Textile Highlights                              6b 3%
                                                                                         3%
                                                                                                                                                             11b 3%
                                                                                                                                                             4%
                                                                                  7b                                                                   17b
                                         2004           2015                7b
                                                                                  4%                                       Pakistan

                                                                                                                           Turkey
                                                                                                                                                 6b
                                                                                                                                                       6%
                                                                                                                                                                                  64b
                                                                                                                                                                                           Pakistan

                                                                                                                                                                                           Turkey
                                                                            4%                                                                   2%                               22%
                                                                       10b                                     71b
                                                                                                                           India             10b                                           India
                                                                       5%                                                                    3%
                                                EU             EU                                              37%         Japan                                                           Japan
  Production has been concentrated
                                          37%            22%                                                                                11b
                                                India          India                                                       Taipei           4%                                             Taipei
  in a small group of countries, with     4%             6%            11b
  Asian exporters China, Bangladesh,            US             US      6%                                                  Korea                                                           Korea
  Vietnam, and India as the largest
  source markets. China became the
                                          6%             5%                                                                                 14b
  world’s apparel powerhouse in                                                                                            United States    5%                                             United States
  2010, overtaking the EU as the
  biggest textile and clothing
                                                                        12b                                                Hong Kong                                                       Hong Kong
  exporter in the world                                                 6%
                                                                                                                           China                                                           China

                                                                                                                           EU                                                              EU
                                                                                                                                                                           109b
                                                                                          33b
                                                                                                                                                                           37%
                                                                                          17%



  Leading Exporters (Clothing) 2015                                                       Leading exporters of clothing, 2004 and 2015 (in billions of US dollars and percentage)

                                                                                                   2004                                                                  2015
                                   25%                                                 5b 4b
                                                                                             4b
                                                                                                                                                            7b 6b 6b
                                                                                                                                                        15b 2% 1% 1%

                                           6%                                   5b 2% 2%
                                                                                              2%                                                 18b 3%
                                                                                                                                                 4%
                                                                             7b 2%                                         Bangladesh                                                     United States
                                                                             3%                                                                  18b

                                                        39%
                                                                                                                           Indonesia                                                      Cambodia
                                                                            7b                                                                   5%
                                                                            3%                                             Romania                                                        Indonesia
                                                                                                               75b                         22b                                     175b
                                                                       11b                                     29%         United States   6%                                      39%    Turkey
                                                                       4%
                                                                                                                           India                                                          India

                                                                                                                           Mexico          26b                                            Hong Kong
                                                                                                                                           6%
                                                                                                                           Turkey                                                         Vietnam

                                                                                                                           HongKong                                                       Bangladesh

                                                                                                                           China                                                          EU

                                                                                                                           EU                                                             China
                                                                                   62b
                                                                                                                                                             112b
                                                                                   24%                                                                       25%




Source: WTO International Trade Statistics 2005 and World Trade Statistics 2016

An ever-changing international environment means that apparel companies must remain flexible.
The various links in the apparel value chain are in constant flux as companies continually evaluate
new locations for cost-saving opportunities. Countries must continually enhance their efficiency
edge by boosting their skills or improving their business environment-- or risk losing their position
in the value chain, as industry executives actively search for the ‘new China’.

In recent years, a rising factor in global apparel companies’ decision to shift their production
location has been the host location’s ability to offer compliance with international standards.4


4.	  The tragic 2013 industrial accident, in Rana Plaza in Bangladesh, among others, attracted significant media and consumer attention, regarding
the conditions under which garments are manufactured. Widespread reflection within the industry has led to elevating compliance with international
standards as a high priority criterion when assessing potential suppliers. Sourcing partners must commit to ensuring compliance not only in
productivity, but also with health, safety, labor and environmental standards. Companies are taking visible steps to signal their commitment: for
example, more than 150 clothing companies from more than 20 countries have signed the Accord on Fire and Building Safety in Bangladesh, which
provides for regular inspection of more than 1,700 suppliers (McKinsey 2014).




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                   LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 15




High-profile industrial incidents in several Asian countries involving violations of safety and labor
standards, coupled with rising labor costs in China has led companies to turn to Africa as a
potential production location. East African countries have received much attention in the last
three years. This is in part due to the renewal of the AGOA, which provides 39 African countries
with duty-free access to the United States.



   2.2 The Textile and Apparel Value Chain

The apparel industry is a buyer-driven global value chain (see Figure 3). Global buyers—who
in some cases also own manufacturing facilities—determine who produces what, where and at
what price. The companies that develop and sell brand-name products also exert considerable
control over how, when, and where manufacturing will take place (Gereffi et al. 2011). These
leading apparel firms - retailers and brand owners that typically have their headquarters in
the United States, Europe, or Japan - source from a global network of suppliers and contract
manufacturers, selecting those that offer the most-competitive terms (Gereffi et al. 2011).

The textile and apparel value chain can be separated into five main components:

    1.	 Raw materials to produce natural (cotton, wool, silk) or synthetic (polyester) fibers

    2.	 Component textile products manufactured from these raw materials: yarn, thread,
        synthetic fibers, fabrics

    3.	 Production networks: the garment factories and all subcontractors and contract
        manufacturers

            •	 Assembly of garments and cut, make, and trim occur in production networks.
               Apparel manufacturers cut and sew woven or knit fabric directly from yarn.
               Manufacturers arrange their businesses in diverse ways to produce ready-to-
               wear and custom apparel. Some are contractors— cutting and sewing materials
               owned by others. Others manufacture custom garments for individual clients.
               Some purchase textiles from suppliers, and others make the textile components
               in house.

    4.	 Export channels established by trade intermediaries

            •	 Apparel is distributed and sold through a network of wholesalers, agents, logistics
               firms, and global apparel companies

    5.	 Marketing networks at the retail level, including retail outlets

            •	 All activities associated with pricing, selling, branding, advertising, and distribution
               of apparel are part of the marketing network.
  16 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




Figure 3. The textile-apparel global value chain

                                    THE TEXTILE - APPAREL GLOBAL VALUE CHAIN

                                                 Textile companies                   Garment                                         Retail outlets
                                                                                   manufacturers



                                      Yarn:         Grey fabric:     Finished
                                     Spinning        Weaving,          fabric:
                                                      knitting        Dyeing,
                                                                      printing,                                                      Department stores
                                                                      finishing
                                                                                         Prime
              Natural fibers                                                                               Brand name apparel
                                                                                       contractors
                                                       Public,         Public,                                 companies
             Cotton, wool, silk     Public and                                                                                        Specialty stores
                                                     private and     private and
            (domestic supply /       private
                                                     handloom        handloom         Partly prime
                 import)             sectors
                                                       sectors         sectors
                                                                                      contractors /
                                                                                                         Overseas buying houses   Mass merchandise chains
                                                                                       partly sub-
                                                                                       contractors
            Man-made fibers          Import            Import          Import
                                                                                                                                      Discount chains
          Rayon, polyester, nylon                                                                          Trading companies
                                                                                     Sub -contractors
            (domestic supply /
                 import)                                                                                                           Off-price factory outlet,
                                                                                                                                   mail orders and others
                                                                                       Garment:
                                                                                   Designing, cutting,
                                                                                    sewing, ironing,
                                                                                      buttonholing




          Raw materials                             Component                        Production                Export                  Marketing
            network                               textile products                    network                 channels                 network
Source: ILO (2014).

Like other global industries, the apparel value chain relies on a set of international standards and
codes of conduct with respect to quality, labor and environmental practices. Leading apparel
companies are increasingly conscious of the importance of improving standards throughout
the whole value chain and the need to assure their consumers that they are able to uphold high
quality and sustainability standards.




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                                                LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 17




Section III: PVH’s Site Selection Process

Initial approaches: the textile and apparel industry visits Africa

Africa had been on PVH’s radar screen since 2012, when it started to develop its Africa
Strategy. At this time, PVH was sourcing limited products from Egypt, Kenya, Lesotho, and
Mauritius, and wanted to explore whether there was additional untapped potential in Africa
to be developed. PVH hired Roy Ashurst to become their Hub Leader for Africa and the
Middle East and asked him to assess whether PVH should be in Africa and to identify the best
possible candidate countries (Ashurst, personal communication).

Ashurst’s mission was to fully understand the different countries’ capabilities. PVH sent
Ashurst to Africa “to do nothing but to travel around Africa and identify where he believed
was the point of entry to the continent.” (Bill McRaith, personal communication). By January
2014, he had brought his bosses, Bill McRaith and Mark Green to Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania,
and Uganda - his choice of sourcing candidates.

Having worked for more than 25 years deciding where to locate and establish greenfield
manufacturing operations, Bill McRaith had extensive experience in textile and clothing
manufacturing. He wanted to locate in East Africa in order to start afresh and build a model
operation. He advocated full verticality and compliance with standard and safety regulations.

Relocating to Africa also represented a shift in its business model. PVH was assessing
the potential of reentering manufacturing itself, in addition to sourcing from others
located in Africa, and seriously considering a vertical integration supply chain vision as
a long-term strategy. In the past, contract manufacturers, not brands, took the lead on
assessing potential manufacturing destinations. However, PVH wanted to have more
control over the location of its suppliers. PVH had previously owned manufacturing
facilities, almost exclusively in the United States, but shifted around the world to a business
model oriented towards sourcing through contractual arrangements with manufacturers.5


PVH felt that East Africa provided a great pioneering opportunity: the possibility of learning from
past experiences and starting new operations on a proper basis. In April 2014, PVH organized
a trip to East Africa with Vanity Fair (VF), its main competitor, and other textile and apparel
manufacturers. This was the first such joint industry effort. PVH’s interest in spearheading
this joint mission was to influence its supplier base, particularly fabric manufacturers, many
of whom supply both PVH, VF and others, to invest in Africa. Approximately 48 companies,
mainly from Asia, with whom PVH had long-standing relationships, participated in the trip
and visited Uganda, Kenya, and Ethiopia. In this first visit to Ethiopia, McRaith was impressed


5.	 For example, in 1999, a portion of the company’s dress shirts were manufactured in the company’s domestic apparel manufacturing facility in
Alabama and in company-owned facilities in locations such as Costa Rica and Honduras (PVH SEC 10K form for the fiscal year ended January 30,
2000). Currently only a portion of its neckwear is manufactured in-house.




                                                                  A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
   18 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




with the country’s potential and started thinking about bringing others to the region.

PVH’s novel approach of organizing a joint mission with VF executives served to emphasize that
strategic decisions, such as geographic location, could best be made as an industry, rather than
an individual company effort. The trip was seen as a huge success: many companies expressed
serious interest in sourcing, investing, and establishing operations, especially in Kenya and
Ethiopia. Uganda raised less interest, and its anti-same sex relationship regulations and policies
raised concerns about global sourcing operations.6

The trip to Africa helped PVH convince many of its strategic suppliers that doing business in East
Africa could be worthwhile. “The countries we visited demonstrated that they had laid the [good
governance] foundations necessary to attract significant foreign direct investment and were
prepared to undertake the commitments necessary to secure socially responsible companies.
[Senior government officials] … spoke of adherence to the rule of law, free markets, government
stability, and transparency,” Bill McRaith testified before the Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations. McRaith’s words underscore a trend: more and more, investors seek predictability,
adherence to rule of law, and transparency – and are willing to locate elsewhere if these key
underpinnings are not in place.


“The level of professionalism, commitment, and maturity that we are seeing from some
governments in Africa reassures our interest to not only source from Africa, but to produce in
Africa.… As a result of our trip, we identified a great opportunity for the industry to invest nearly
a billion dollars to create a vertically integrated apparel supply chain in some regions of Africa. In
other words, create jobs in Africa not just in apparel, but also in the textile and even agricultural

“The apparel industry’s mistakes of the past have often been the result of near-sighted investment in lawless environments.
That model must and will change rapidly.… Countries in Africa where we invest will be the beneficiaries of a new and
more inclusive model of investment and growth in which we will be able to put in place, right from the beginning, facilities,
norms and values that will guide the work at the factories and the relationships between workers, managers, associations,
civil society groups, governments and any other stakeholders. That is why when we look at Africa we do not just look for a
place to quickly set up a sewing operation.”

William McRaith, Chief Supply Chain Officer, PVH Corp., Written Testimony, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, April
23, 2015



industry through better cotton production techniques” (McRaith, Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations 2015).

The renewal of AGOA in June 2015 reinforced the apparel industry’s burgeoning interest in Africa.



6.	  Other industries have seen similar reactions. Virgin’s Richard Branson, for example, has publicly spoken of his company’s opposition to this law
https://www.virgin.com/richard-branson/let-people-love-whoever-they-want.
                                                                               LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 19




Unlike earlier periods, this time AGOA was extended for a 10-year period, sending a strong
signal of continuity and therefore predictability to investors considering Sub-Saharan Africa. As
discussed in Section 2.1, AGOA offers two major advantages over other preferences: elimination
of duty for apparel products entering the United States and provision allowing the use of third-
country fabric inputs and still qualifying for Duty Free Status. This makes it possible factories to
use any fabric from any country with no restrictions. With most other trade arrangements, fabric
must be produced in the United States or the other partner country in order to qualify for duty-
free status. These are more expensive than fabric produced elsewhere in the world.
AGOA renewal was a critical factor in PVH’s decision to invest in Ethiopia (Roy Ashurst, personal
communication March 9, 2016).



The 10-year extension of AGOA was essential for PVH because it provided the certainty necessary for PVH and other
interested companies to commit to the large investment necessary to develop projects such as the one described for
Ethiopia. AGOA’s 10-year renewal also provides sufficient time to develop a vertical supply chain, which in turn, will
accelerate and support scalability and sustainability PVH Corp. Investment in Ethiopia, October 2015




Deciding on Ethiopia

The cost of materials, energy, and labor were rising in Asia. Coupled with persistent disregard for
the rule of law and protection of workers and the environment in certain regions of Asia, PVH
began to search for a new apparel production location. The idea of starting afresh with a new
model appealed to PVH, “drawing on the lessons learned from decades of promoting human
rights in [PVH’s] supply chain and experience in helping to lead efforts such as the [Bangladesh]
Accord.”

In deciding its new location, PVH considered five key factors: government stability, land and port
accessibility, cost of energy, and labor availability. In order to commit to investing, PVH needed
assurance of true long-term commitment by government authorities that they would satisfy these
essential conditions.

After several scoping missions and following Roy’s recommendations, PVH set out a short list
of potential locations for further analysis. These included Ethiopia, Ghana, Kenya, Tanzania,
Uganda, and Zambia. Table 3 sets out the countries’ scores on each of PVH’s key priorities.

Ethiopia scored well on most of the indicators. However, the key deciding factor was the clear
commitment of the Ethiopian government to the textile and garment sector as a strategic area
of investment. The government of Ethiopia was rapid and transparent, responding quickly to
PVH’s questions and aggressively promoting Ethiopia’s advantage in terms of labor and energy
abundance. The government underscored its commitment to attract PVH by providing industrial




                                                     A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  20 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




It is important to be an early mover in a new sourcing market in order to receive the most advantages, such as choice
factory locations and favorable labor and other input costs during production. We believe these factors are all present in
Ethiopia.

(PVH’s Investment in Ethiopia, Formal statement, October 29, 2015)



land and infrastructure as well as favorable lease terms for the development of HIP
(PVH Corp. 2015).

To select from among the shortlisted countries, PVH compared the candidates on eight key
parameters. These were local cotton availability, power cost and quality, wage cost, port
connectivity, general infrastructure, government proactivity to attract textile investment, political
stability, and law and order. Ethiopia scored better - particularly in power cost and quality and a
proactive interest of the government - than the other shortlisted countries, followed by Kenya and
Ghana (table 3).


                                      TABLE 3. ASSESSMENT OF POTENTIAL LOCATIONS: SHORT LIST
                          Rank           1               2               3              4              5               6
                    TOTAL SCORE   Ethiopia - 4.90   Kenya - 4.80   Ghana - 4.65   Uganda -4.50   Zambia - 4.35   Tanzania - 3.30
     Parameters      weight (%)

   LOCAL COTTON         10%
    AVAILABILITY




     POWER COST
                        25%
     AND QUALITY



      WAGE COST         10%



           PORT
                        10%
    CONNECTIVITY


         GENERAL
  INFRASTRUCTURE         5%



    GOVERNMENT
                        20%
    PRO-ACTIVITY


   POLITICAL STA-
           BILITY       10%



  LAW AND ORDER         10%




Source: Discussion with PVH. Scale of 1 to 6: 1= lowest and 6 = highest.



Several factors – in addition to political stability and rule of law – favored Ethiopia as PVH’s new
location. Most important, Ethiopia demonstrated its capacity and willingness to establish textile
and garment production capacity. Ethiopian officials consistently followed through on their
commitments building trust with the company and ultimately cementing PVH’s location decision.
Also important was the direct channel of communication with senior government officials.

Such follow-through helped set Ethiopia apart from its closest competitors. PVH executives held
                                                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 21




detailed discussions with authorities in Kenya, where productivity is higher than in Ethiopia, but
at least at that time, Kenyan officials were unable to follow through on certain commitments.7 “In
the case of Ethiopia, our dream was exceeded, so we focused on Ethiopia,” explained McRaith.

PVH’s main investment drivers have traditionally been access to quality materials at a reasonable
cost, a labor market with relevant skills, access to ports, and assurance that laws that apply to
investors and workers will be enforced (PVH Corp.2015). Brand owners such as PVH seek to
ensure that their suppliers follow local laws (e.g., workers’ rights, fire safety, building safety) and
that government partners ensure compliance with and enforce such laws.

In deciding to invest in Ethiopia, PVH’s first investment in Africa, and its first step

The aggregate of the factors—strong government commitment, costs, power, and potential incentives, etc.—coupled
with the Government of Ethiopia’s commitment to creating an environment that supports workers, safety and sustainable
production made Ethiopia the clear choice for PVH’s investment.

Questionnaire on PVH Corp. Investment in Ethiopia, Oct. 29, 2015



toward a comprehensive vertical integration model, additional assurances that
these key factors were present was extremely important. Government stability,
land and port accessibility, cost of energy, and labor availability were particularly
important (PVH Corp. 2015). Thus, the commitments that the government of Ethiopia
undertook in these areas and their demonstrated execution were vital to building a strong trusted
relationship with PVH, and to PVH deciding to invest in Ethiopia and influence its supplier base
to do so as well.
The following factors were key:


                 Clear national vision and interest in partnering with PVH: Supporting the manufacturing
                 sector and achieving structural transformation is at the center of Ethiopia’s growth
                 strategy, as stated in the Growth and Transformation Plan (GTP).8 This is underscored
                 by strong political will and political consensus to implement the strategy. “The number
                 one reason for [investors’ interest] was because of what they saw in the governmental
                 side and that to me, after doing this for the last 26 years all over the world, the biggest
                 difference we see is in this effort. It is not the investor group. It is not PVH. What
                 makes it attractive is that, when you come to Ethiopia, in no time in my history have I
                 ever seen any one more prepared to attract the apparel sector into its economy. There
                 are institutions established, there are rules put in place, and there are airports being
                 built,” explains Bill McGrath, PVH’s Chief Supply Chain Officer. “If we have a vision
                 of what is possible in Ethiopia, I would say the government of Ethiopia raised it to a
                 different level and has made it much larger than we anticipated. It has exceeded any
                 expectation that we had.”


7.	   PVH continues to be in contact with Kenyan authorities, and some projects might be under negotiation.
8.	   See http://www.ethiopians.com/Ethiopia_GTP_2015.pdf for further details.



                                                                   A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
      22 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




                  PVH saw Ethiopia as a pioneering opportunity to build a sustainable supply chain in
                  Africa. Ethiopia saw in PVH a basis for building its strategy of industrialization based
                  on the textile and garment sector. This led to a shared vision and the emergence of a
                  trusted partnership. Both parties wanted to make the project work. There was a meeting
                  of minds, a process of mutual discovery and openness to learning.

                  Labor Factors: The cost of labor was an important consideration in PVH’s decision-
                  making process. “In the fabric side of the business, apart from the raw material, the
                  highest cost is energy. In the garment side of the business, apart from the cost of raw
                  material, the highest cost is labor” (Ashurst, personal communication). PVH compared
                  the cost of labor in Ethiopia with other key countries, including Bangladesh, Cambodia,
                  India, Kenya, and Uganda. Ethiopia offered significant labor cost advantages. Ethiopia’s
                  demographic transition is taking place faster than in the rest of Africa- between 2005
                  and 2015, the working age population increased by 14 million people, providing a
                  large pool of labor to work in the textile and apparel sector (World Bank Group 2016).
                  One concern was the lack of skilled labor and low factory productivity. “Bringing
                  people who have never worked in industry was quite a challenge in Ethiopia” (Ashurst,
                  personal communication). Kenya, which is relatively industrialized, offered much
                  higher productivity and more skilled labor. Ultimately, however, Ethiopia’s labor costs
                  and the government of Ethiopia’s proactive steps to address this problem – including
                  the establishment of the Ethiopian Textile Industry Development Institute (ETIDI) to
                  develop the skills of local employees and enhance the competitiveness of the textile
                  and apparel sector - convinced PVH that this was a surmountable problem.

                  Electricity and Water: Another important factor in PVH’s site selection decision was
                  the availability of cost-competitive, renewable, clean energy. Ethiopia’s government
                  committed to providing adequate, reliable electricity, and to avoid unreasonable
                  power outages that could interfere with operations. Ethiopia’s current installed capacity
                  recently increased from 2,421 MW to 4,291 MW after Gibe 3 (1,870 MW) is fully
                  commissioned in December 2016. When the Grand Ethiopian Renaissance Dam is
                  completed, capacity will increase by an additional 6000 MW.9 By contrast, installed
                  capacity is 1.7 MW in Kenya, 1.8 MW in Ghana, and 1.0 MW in Tanzania.




9.	    The dam will cost nearly US$5 billion. The dam is being funded using government bonds and private donations and is slated for completion in 	
	      July 2017.
                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 23




          Figure 4. Cost of power in comparator countries (cents/kWh)


                       Cost of power (US cents / kWh)
20      18             18
18
16                                    15

14
12
10                                                      9
                                                                           8
 8
 6
                                                                                            3.5
 4
 2
 0
      Kenya        Tanzania         Ghana         Kenya low            Zambia            Ethiopia


     Source: PVH



     As seen in Figure 4, Ethiopia’s power cost, at US¢3.5/kWh, was far lower than in the
     other countries. Although the government reserved the right to revise the rate in the
     future, it agreed that PVH will at all times be provided with electricity at rates no higher
     than the then-prevailing electricity rate for all industrial parks and no lower than the
     lowest legally available rate.



     Another key decision factor was the availability of water. PVH is allowed to dig water
     wells at HIP at its cost to access water for its facility and to use the water from these
     wells free of charge.



     Infrastructure Improvement Initiatives: In addition to the construction of HIP, a
     number of other infrastructure projects helped to increase PVH’s comfort in locating
     in Hawassa. First, the government had already completed construction of a direct rail
     connection between the Port of Djibouti, Addis Ababa and Modjo. Modjo is the key
     node for the emerging Ethiopian Intermodal Logistics System and the Ethio-Djibouti
     Corridor, the main corridor that currently handles nearly all of Ethiopian trade. The
     government also made a commitment to completing the Modjo- Hawassa segment as
     part of the National Railway Network Development program. This would significantly




                                        A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  24 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




             reduce transport costs. Second, there was the commitment to constructing a freight
             depot in Modjo that will provide a direct link between the road and the Modjo–Djibouti
             railway, effectively connecting HIP to the Port of Djibouti. Ethiopian Shipping and
             Logistics currently operates a dry port and terminal at Modjo that is currently largely
             used to receive imports. This will allow for efficient cargo movement from rail to trucks
             and truck to rail. These investments will be essential to ensure the seamless processing
             of import and export goods and to ensure that the competitive advantages from low-
             cost rail transportation are not undermined by high costs and delays in the dry port.
             Third, PVH will benefit from a World Bank financed Hawassa-Modjo Expressway,
             which will provide an important and efficient link between HIP to the Modjo Dry
             Port. Finally, the government also built an international airport terminal in Hawassa,
             providing a vital direct aviation link to Hawassa for the factories and their customers,
             such as PVH.



             Tax Incentives: Tax incentives were not a critical factor in PVH’s decision to invest in
             Ethiopia- and were not one of the factors used to assess and compare candidate country
             sites. The government granted no additional incentives nor concessions. “Tax holidays
             are not what draw us as investors to Ethiopia. It could be the icing on the cake, but it
             was never a question of ‘Let’s go to Ethiopia because they are offering tax holidays.’…
             It was the other factors that really helped. Driven by the brand, a good environment,
             water and power availability, competitive wage rates, competitive power cost, just
             the people themselves, the fact that they are more built towards light manufacturing
             compared to people in Tanzania and Uganda was what influenced our decision.”



             Incentives, however, were instrumental for selecting the location within Ethiopia. The
             Government of Ethiopia provides a number of incentives to enterprises in Industrial
             Parks. These include income tax exemption from 8-10 years, exemption from duties
             and other taxes on imports of machinery equipment, construction materials, spare
             parts, raw materials and vehicles, and land lease up to 80 years with zero charge
             for factories and residential quarters. “[Incentives] certainly influenced our location
             decision within Ethiopia. The benefit in Hawassa is greater than the benefit in Addis
             and its surroundings. Investors get a longer tax incentive if you are out of Addis as
             opposed to within the city (Ashurst, personal conversation).




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                             LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 25




Section IV. Ethiopia’s development strategy: using textiles and
apparel to industrialize

   4.1 Ethiopia’s level of readiness and strategy for attracting PVH
Ethiopia’s desire to achieve structural transformation has shaped its effort in attracting and
facilitating PVH’s commitment. For the past 35 years, Ethiopia’s manufacturing share of gross
domestic product (GDP) has remained constant at 5 percent. Manufacturing only adds 0.5
percentage points to Ethiopia’s 10 percent growth rate (World Bank Group 2016). However,
Ethiopia has produced strong economic performance since 2004. As shown in Figure 5 below,
since 2010 the country’s growth rate has averaged 10.5 percent per year FDI inflows have
accelerated, reaching US$2.2 billion in 2015 (UNCTAD 2016). Public investment and a growing
services sector have largely driven Ethiopia’s rapid growth. According to the World Bank, Ethiopia
has the third-highest ratio of public investment to GDP in the world, and public investment
explained approximately two-thirds of 2011/12 growth, for example (World Bank Group 2013).

For such growth to be enduring, the authorities will need to seek a different balance between
public and private sector involvement. Development of a strong foreign and domestic private
sector will be needed to sustain high growth, as the experiences of other high-performing
countries, including in East Asia, demonstrate.



Figure 5. Average annual GDP growth and FDI inflows 2010-2015



         Percent                                                                            billions
             14                                                                                  2.5
                                                                                       789#
             12
                                                                                                 2.0
             10

              8                                                                                  1.5

              6                                                                                  1.0
              4
                                                                                                 0.5
              2

              0                                                                                  0
                   2010       2011             2012         2013           2014      2015



                               FDI inflows (billions $US)          GDP growth (%)



Source: World Bank WDI and UNCTAD WIR 2016

Growth is concentrated in the services and agriculture sectors (World Bank Group 2013), with
services accounting for approximately half of economic growth generated from 2004 to 2014
       26 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




(World Bank Group 2016). Industry accounts for approximately 14.5 percent of economic growth
and 11 percent of employment growth.10 For growth to be sustainable, labor must shift away
from low-productivity sectors to the high-productivity manufacturing sector. In other words, the
manufacturing sector must support structural transformation efforts.

As in many developing countries, youth unemployment is very high, so creating more and better
jobs is an urgent priority.11 Supporting the manufacturing sector could help absorb this rapidly
growing labor force.

Perhaps the most-urgent constraint slowing the Ethiopian economy is the lack of sufficient foreign
currency. Ethiopia has a widening structural current account deficit. Exports of goods and services
declined to 10 percent of GDP in 2014/15 while imports increased to 27 percent of GDP, of which
approximately one-third were capital goods. This resulted in an external deficit of 15 percent of
GDP. Exports are needed to help finance imports, especially of capital goods, and enable Ethiopia
to maintain a more-favorable balance of payments. “One of the things that worries me a lot is
how the growth rate of this country is inhibited due to shortage of foreign exchange earnings.
If a country cannot import machinery, capital goods and inputs for factories and for agriculture,
it cannot grow” says Dr. Arkebe Oqubay. Ethiopia’s courting of PVH can be seen as a way to
overcome this constraint: efficiency-seeking foreign investors, such as PVH, which locate in a
country with the aim of exporting to third markets, can help countries to bolster their export base
and generate foreign reserves.

Among the most-critical constraints facing Ethiopian businesses is delays in the disbursement of
foreign currency. According to several surveys, it can take from two months to a year for Ethiopian
banks to approve foreign currency requests or issue letters of credit. A newly established exporter
of leather products, for example, reported waiting a year to obtain approval for US$2,500 in
foreign currency needed to import accessories (Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce 2015). Delays
in financing imports and exports in Ethiopia’s is one the principal causes of the freight logistics
inefficiency, as all imports, exports, and outgoing foreign payments require a foreign exchange
permit. Uncertainty in foreign exchange availability and access often leads to significant delays
and longer port dwell time (Ethiopian Maritime Affairs Authority 2016).

Addressing these challenges required an ambitious but realistic national industrial park
development plan -- and necessitated organizing government agencies around the strategy. “The
government took almost a year to study the experiences of successfully industrialized countries
such as South Korea, Singapore, China, Vietnam, and Mauritius and less successful ones such as
Nigeria,” explained Dr. Arkebe Oqubay. “A key finding of this assessment is that industrial parks—
as a key instrument of industrial policy—played a significant role in structurally transforming the
manufacturing sector.”

The government decided to adopt this approach and set out the key elements of the strategy in
a white paper called “Development of Industrial Parks and Industrialization in Ethiopia.” This



10.	    The value-added growth contribution and employment contribution of agriculture are 35 percent and 73 percent, respectively.
11.	    The 2014 Urban Employment and Unemployment Survey recorded the overall youth unemployment rate at 22.8 percent.




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 27




paper was shared and discussed among the key members of Ethiopia’s government and political
leadership.

The concept of an industrial park as a defining instrument for achieving industrialization goals
was a novel concept in Ethiopia. This was also a thorny and divisive political issue for a country
that had long adopted a statist development model. Making a case for a successful industrial park
development strategy and backing it up with sufficient resources requires considerable political
capital and commitment at the highest level of government.12

Industrial parks are defined as “geographically demarcated areas, administered by a single body,
offering services, infrastructure and incentives for businesses that locate and operate within the
site. An industrial park normally operates under more liberal economic laws than those typically
prevailing in the national territory” (Farole et al. 2011). The government recognized their utility in
bringing in business: “If we want companies to start business as fast as possible, the set-up time
should be short,” says Dr. Arkebe.

Industrial parks are generally customs-free zones and export-oriented manufacturing areas.
Objectives include promoting employment increasing exports, and attracting foreign investment,
although additional goals may come into play, depending on circumstances and stage of
development. These additional goals include promotion of regional economic development,
facilitation of technological transfer, creation of linkages with domestic industries, and using
industrial parks to experiment with new development strategies.

Ethiopia’s industrial parks are aimed at attracting high-quality — particularly foreign—investment
in specific sectors that can contribute to export growth, enter global export markets and better
integrate the country with the global economy. The industrial parks offer duty-free imports of
capital goods, construction materials, and raw materials for the production of export commodities
and vehicles and certain capital goods. Industrial parks reduce set-up time by centralizing
industrial space, land, and supporting infrastructure, including a dedicated one-stop shop. Once
companies start operations, “transaction costs are reduced, the creation and flow of information
improves, local institutions respond more readily to cluster’s specialized needs, and peer pressure
and competitive pressure are more keenly felt.” (Porter 2008). Industrial parks are preferred in
Ethiopia as a gateway to foreign direct investment (FDI) because they have the advantage of
lowering entry and operational costs.

Like most developing countries, Ethiopia lacks the infrastructure and capital for large-scale,
nationwide development. Concentrating manufacturing in an industrial park helps to minimize
the cost of infrastructure, reduce industrial pollution, and to effectively make use of scarce
resources such as land. Industrial parks allow agglomeration benefits such as cost minimization
due to proximity to inputs or markets. Industrial parks often have interconnected firms, producers
of complementary products, regulatory and service-providing agencies, and vocational training



12.	 Asked about the political commitment and shared understanding of the ruling political party over the policy by Addis Fortune, Ethiopia’s weekly
newspaper, Dr. Arkebe replied: “There were sharp differences with few individuals. There can never be a policy that is agreed on 100 per cent; the
issue is not about individuals. What you need is a substantial consensus and more than 90 per cent have agreed on the white policy paper
  28 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




providers. Many of the firms in an industrial park share “many common needs and opportunities
and encounter many common constraints and obstacles to productivity”… “Viewing a group
of companies and institutions as a cluster highlights opportunities for coordination and mutual
improvements in areas of common concern without distorting competition.” (Porter 2008)
Sourcing inputs from other firms in the industrial park can result in lower transaction costs than
using distant sources. It also makes it easy for the government to provide public goods such as
specialized infrastructure, training, and educational programs that would otherwise be costly.

Again, to quote Dr. Arkebe, “Our capacity to provide utilities and infrastructure is quite limited,
and it is very expensive. We have to concentrate on how to minimize the efforts by focusing on
limited clusters; instead of, for example, attempting to distribute electricity all over the place,
it is wise to do so effectively in one place.” The underlying logic here is that industrial parks
can be operated at much lower cost than unplanned industrial growth and having many widely
disbursed small-scale industries.

In addition, the administrative cost of operating an industrial park is much lower – and the
political feasibility much higher -- than streamlining the entire antiquated national bureaucracy.
As they are separate from the rest of the economy, implementing reforms in a limited way through
industrial parks presents a smaller domestic political risk.

Small domestic companies also benefit from large industrial park participants because they often
“pick up the slack, often with the support and blessing of the larger players.” There are also major
gains, such as the potential to transform the parks into learning centers to transfer technology
from one factory to another, particularly if domestic firms are encouraged to lease factory sheds
in industrial parks.



   4.2 Institutional Structure

The Government of Ethiopia consolidated its commitment to transform the economy by bolstering
its manufacturing sector in its Growth and Transformation Plan II (GTP-II). The government aims
to make Ethiopia a manufacturing hub in Africa by 2025—with a focus on light manufacturing.
Specific industrialization goals in this regard include generating 2 million jobs in medium and
large businesses by 2025, increasing the contribution of manufacturing to overall GDP from 4
percent to 18 percent to 20 percent, and ensuring that the manufacturing sector contributes 40
percent of the export share by 2025.

Many governments set out laudable goals on paper. Few manage to achieve them. A major factor
that attracted PVH to Ethiopia was the government’s ability to follow through on its promises.

This responsiveness had to be developed, however. When PVH initially approached key
government agencies in charge of industrialization efforts, it did not get great results. Some
government agencies were not responsive. For instance, efforts to register at the Ministry of Trade
were unsuccessful due to complex entry requirements. Different government agencies provided
inconsistent and conflicting information. PVH demanded detailed and complicated information
that was not readily provided.


A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 29




The situation changed when PVH approached the Prime Minister’s office. “I remember our first
meeting with Dr. Arkebe. He listened carefully to what we had to say. He committed to us
he shared our vision and told us Hawassa is the right entry point for us,” states Mark Green,
Executive Vice President of Global Supply of PVH. The The Ethiopian Investment Commission
(EIC) was identified as PVH’s main contact within the Ethiopian government, including facilitating
negotiations for certain regulatory incentives such as tax incentives, expedited customs processing,
and work visas for foreign employees.

“Fortunately, working with Dr. Arkebe at the PM office and Fistum at EIC has really made
the difference. I spent half of my time with Dr. Arkebe and half with Ato Fistum Arega, the
Commissioner of Ethiopian Investment. Fistum was fantastic in helping things get done” (Ashurst,
personal communication). When investors visited Ethiopia, they could clearly see the commitment
of the government at senior levels, which impressed most investors.

Once PVH was able to establish a direct channel of communication with senior government
officials and to build a solid relationship, based on trust, with the authorities, it was able to
move ahead. Having the full collaboration of a knowledgeable senior authority who acted as a
champion of the project and designating EIC as PVH’s main contact point within the government
was a success.

The government has subsequently restructured and repurposed three important institutions to
drive investment promotion, strengthen competitiveness, and catalyze the transformation of
industries. This institutional structure is mapped out in Figure 6.

First is the establishment of the Ethiopian Investment Board to serve as a policy, strategy, and
oversight and approval body. The Prime Minister chairs the board, which has its members senior
ministers from key supporting agencies with direct or indirect roles in investment decision making.
The board grants incentives to investors, addresses policy and regulatory barriers to investment,
designates new Industrial parks, and opens new investment areas to FDI. The elevation of the
investment promotion agenda to the center of government represents a significant departure.
In the past, FDI promotion and retention was never a central agenda in Ethiopia and was only
considered as a technical issue of a government agency. The government has now adopted a new
strategy of targeted investment promotion focused on the manufacturing sector and informed by
a sound understanding of the sectoral landscape and dynamics. In addition, unlike in the past,
investment policy is now being led by the highest level of government—the Ethiopian Investment
Board chaired by the Prime Minister.

Second, the government restructured and strengthened the Ethiopian Investment Commission
(EIC), formerly under the Ministry of Industry, to be directly accountable to the Prime Minister
and act as one-stop shop for foreign investors. EIC’s primary objective is to attract foreign
investors to strategic sectors by surpassing their needs. EIC’s initial goals are to focus on the
light manufacturing sector, consistent with the government’s strategy. Perhaps uncommon to
other investment promotion agencies, EIC was also given the mandate to regulate industrial park
developers, operators, and enterprises.
  30 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




The third important, new institution is the Industrial Parks Development Corporation (IPDC).
Modeled after Singapore’s JTC Corporation, IPDC is a state-owned profit-making enterprise in
charge of developing and operating industrial parks. It also serves as a land bank and will make
land available for potential private developers. Its mandate is to develop industrial facilities
with shared infrastructure and services to help enterprises reduce operating costs and improve
operational efficiency. Working with private developers, IPDC is expected to develop new
industrial land and space that will fuel the growth of existing industries and catalyze new ones.

     Figure 6. Ethiopia’s investment institutions




                                            THE OFFICE
                                           OF THE PRIME
                                             MINISTER                        ETHIOPIAN
                                                                         INVESTMENT BOARD
                                                                         • EIB is chaired by the PM

                                                                         • This Board consists of senior
                                                                           government representatives from
                                                                           Foreign Affairs, Industry Finance,
                                                                           Agriculture, ERCA, National Bank
                                                                           and City of Addis and its key role is
                                                                           lead overall investment and Industrial
                                                                           Park Policy making in Ethiopia


                                            ETHIOPIAN
                                           INVESTMENT
                                           COMMISSION




               Investment                                                 Policy and
               Operations                                                Investment
                                                                           Climate



                                              Industrial Park
                                                Regulation




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                             LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 31




   HIP: Where in Ethiopia?

PVH originally intended to locate in an existing industrial park. in Ethiopia’s capital, Addis
Ababa.13 It ultimately became the anchor for the development of a new industrial park nearly 300
km away, well outside the capital. Once the decision was made, PVH significantly influenced
the planning and development of HIP and helped to attract key suppliers to build factories at the
park.



       5.1 The City of Hawassa

The city of Hawassa—the location of HIP—is a regional capital of close to 450,000 residents,
located 275 km from Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia. Located on the shore of Lake Hawassa,
the city lies on the Trans-African Highway, which stretches from Cairo to Cape Town.

Hawassa, with a population of close to 5 million within a 50-km radius, lies in one of the most
densely populated regions of Ethiopia. Hawassa’s direct access to the highway linking Addis
Ababa with Moyale in Kenya, underscores its potential as a regional trade hub for the East African
Community. A new US$667 million expressway project will connect Hawassa to Modjo in central
Ethiopia— the key node for the emerging Ethiopian intermodal trade logistics system.

The government has also finalized the construction of railway links that provide direct connections
between the port of Djibouti, Modjo, and Addis Ababa, with further plans to extend railway links
from Modjo to Hawassa, although financing for the railway link to Hawassa is yet to be secured.

At least for now Modjo is the critical node in the logistics network where shipments transfer from
one conveyance to another (for instance shipments move from rail to trucks or trucks to rail). A
new international airport in Hawassa was constructed in 2015, with limited flight service and
plans for expansion.

The combination of these recent developments makes Hawassa an important political and
economic center in Ethiopia, which will be strengthened by growth in light manufacturing and
tourism will strengthen.



       5.2 PVH’s Africa Point of Entry: HIP and Its Differentiating Features

The government of Ethiopia was interested in a lead company for HIP. Government officials were
pleased to initiate a project of this significance with an industry leader like PVH. As Roy stated:
“… Hawassa is the place that fit really nicely with their plans. [Dr. Arkebe] was a great supporter



13.	 See PVH Group lays down pre-investment conditions for Ethiopia. FIBRE2FASHION.COM. September 11, 2014. 				
	http://www.fibre2fashion.com/news/textile-news/newsdetails.aspx?news_id=167580.
  32 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




  The first dress shirt export from HIP.

A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 33
  34 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




and felt that Hawassa was the right choice and did everything to make that happen” (Ashurst,
personal communication).

One of the biggest factors that caught PVH’s attention was the government’s decision to finance
the construction of HIP. To do so, an early, quick, bold decision that the government made was
to mobilize the required financing from the international capital market through the sale of
Eurobonds.

HIP was planned and designed as a world-class eco-industrial park focused on the textile and
apparel industries. As of this writing, 18 foreign companies and approximately five domestic
enterprises, as listed in table 4. Many of these tenants are suppliers of PVH that PVH encouraged
to come and build in HIP. The government proactively recruited others, including domestic
investors. When fully operational, HIP will employ approximately 60,000 people in two shifts.



Table 4. Companies located in HIP



                                                        UK
                                       GARMENT, ACCESSORIES                   Spain
                                                     Hela Clothing Group      GARMENT                      China & Hong Kong
                                                                              Quadrant Apparel Group Plc
                                                                                                           TEXTILE MILL, GARMENT
                                                Belgium                                                    Busana Apparel (PTU)
               United States          PERSONAL HYGIENE                                                     Indochine Apparel Ltd CHINA
         GARMENT AND BUYER                   PRODUCTS                                                      TAL Apparel
                                                  Ontex Group NV                       France              EPIC Group
                          PVH
                                                                                       ACCESSORIES         MUST Garment
                                                                                       Chargeurs Fashion   Giangsu Golden Island Group
                                                                                       Technologies
                                                      India
                                  GARMENT: KNITWEAR, DENIM                                                 Indonesia
                                                                 Arvind
                                       Raymond, Silver Spark Apparel Ltd                                   GARMENT
                                                       Best Corporations                                   Busana Apparel (PTU)


                                                      Sri Lanka
                                            GARMENT: KNITWEAR
                                                Hinderamani Garement Plc
                                                                                                           Taiwan
                                     Isabella and Sarasavi Export (Pvt) Ltd
                                                                                                           TEXTILE & GARMENT
                                                                                                           Everest Textile




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 35




Manufacturers were invited to provide input to the design and construction of HIP, so that the
factory sheds were ready to use and met the latest international standards. Many of its innovative
elements, particularly those related to environmental and safety standards were inputs provided
by PVH.

The section below lists some of these elements that set HIP apart from other industrial parks.

           Zero-Liquid-Discharge Common Effluent Treatment Plant: The textile industry uses
           various dyes and chemicals to treat the textiles and thus is a water-polluting industry. At
           PVH’s encouragement, the government invested in a state-of-the-art zero-liquid-discharge
           treatment plant. With such technology, 90 percent of the water is recycled and reused, and
           the final waste is crystallized. While more costly than the government’s original plan, this
           initiative meets the government’s aim of meeting leading international standards, placing
           priority on resource conservation and differentiating HIP from other parks worldwide.

           Renewable Energy: HIP uses renewable hydroelectric energy sources. It has a dedicated
           75-MW power line and uses light-emitting diode (LED) technology that achieves energy
           savings of up to 90 percent over traditional light bulbs and reduces the carbon dioxide
           footprint. LED-based light also produces less heat, helping achieve savings on air
           conditioning.

           Compliance with Relevant Fire and Building Standards: The Rana Plaza collapse in
           Bangladesh in 2013 and a 2012 factory fire in Pakistan renewed emphasis on safe working
           environments in the textile and apparel industry. As such, compliance with fire safety
           standards was of critical importance during the design of HIP. Inspections of the finished
           sheds by an independent 3rd party have always been on the Tenants Association agenda.
           Most buyers and brands want to see valid Building Safety and Fire Safety certificates for
           the factory prior to placing orders with that facility.  In some countries this inspection is
           done by the Government but in the absence of this in Ethiopia, the government and the
           tenant association sought out an independent firm called Arup to conduct this
           inspection.14  The inspection reviewed each of the sheds against both the Ethiopian
           Building Code and International standards for Building Structural, Fire and Electrical
           Safety. 

           Compliance with the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism (C-TPAT): The C-TPAT
           is a risk-assessment program that sets specific supply chain security criteria, known as
           Minimum Security Requirements, and allows for expedited processing and a much lower
           chance of being examined by US Customs. In compliance with C-TPAT, HIP has installed
           video surveillance cameras to monitor premises and prevent unauthorized access to
           cargo handling and storage areas and perimeter fencing to enclose the areas around cargo
           handling and storage facilities.


14.	 Arup is an independent firm of designers, planners, engineers, consultants and technical specialists offering a broad range of professional
services. It was founded by Ove Arup back in 1946 and it has grown to be one of the largest structural engineering firms with offices in 92 countries
and employing over 12,000 people. They have significant experience of working on Building Structural, Fire and Electrical Safety and were one of the
leading companies behind the Bangladesh Accord standard following the tragic building collapse of Rana Plaza.
  36 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




          Creation of a Tenant’s Association: A tenant’s association was created and participation
          is part of each tenant’s lease agreement to address concerns common to the companies
          to be established in HIP. The main objective of the association is to set out a series of
          agreed rules of operation between the tenants. The association aims to foster efficient
          collective action in improving infrastructure, organizing workers’ training, and ensuring
          a safe working environment.

          The tenant’s association was a response to previous challenges. “One of the key lessons
          from the first government-supported industrial park, Bole Lemi, was labor poaching.
          There is a problem of tenants taking each other’s key workers,” says Ashurst, “so we asked
          all the tenants in Hawassa if they could form a tenant association and agree on basic
          conditions where they could work together on problems rather than fighting each other.”
          The Hawassa Tenant Association attempts to address this through a collective training and
          recruitment center and by coordinating the hiring process without unlawfully creating a
          barrier to worker job mobility.

          “The park will need 1,500 workers per month. The collective training and recruitment
          center in the park will work hand in hand with the government to make sure there is an
          adequate pool of labor.... The government will be responsible for sourcing the workers and
          pre-screening them against certain criteria of what I call a ‘ready to train workforce.’ Such
          training is designed in order to educate workers on basic life skills and about working in
          an industry, having paid wages, having bank accounts, and why it is important to come to
          work every day. After that, the workers will receive in the factories, specific skills training”
          (Ashurst, Personal Communication).

The government has encouraged collaboration between development partners and donors, the
public sector at the federal and regional level, and interested private investors to map out and
determine how to address these challenges. PVH has been actively engaged in these discussions.




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 37




Section V. PVH’s Decision to Invest and Its Pursuit of Vertical
Integration


Over the past two decades, PVH has focused largely on helping to build cut and sew operations
through partnerships with well- regarded suppliers rather than focusing on directly owning or
financing operations. PVH is largely following this model in Ethiopia, but it has also seen it is
an opportunity to embark on a new type of investment, whereby it is directly investing in the
ownership of one of the factories manufacturing its products.

A joint venture of which PVH is a 75% owner has leased a 11,000 meter square shed in HIP.

“The old model of only cutting and sewing operations that can be installed and removed with relative ease does not fit
with our vision of Africa. Africa can attract investment in other added value processes in apparel production such as cotton
growing, yarn-spinning, weaving, and logistical operations.”

William McRaith, Chief Supply Chain Officer, PVH Corp., written Testimony, Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, April
23rd, 2015



PVH intends for it to be one of the most advanced manufacturing sheds in the world. (Ashurst,
personal communication).


Moreover, PVH secured the establishment of a strategic partner – a textile mill – in HIP, by
entering into a private loan agreement with Wuxi Jinmao, a Chinese textile and apparel producer,
to guarantee a supply of fabric for PVH’s joint venture factory. This allowed PVH to advance its
objective of pursuing vertical integration by securing essential components of its supply chain.
The development of a fully integrated vertical supply chain, in which a clothing brand owner,
garment manufacturers, and a fabric mill work together under the same vision, is essential to
make the textile and garment industry scalable and sustainable, according to PVH (Ashurst,
personal communication).



Fourteen other companies have committed to lease sheds in HIP’s first phase; most are garment
manufacturers and PVH suppliers. PVH’s presence, proactivity, and strong partnership with the
government of Ethiopia have had a strong influence on HIP.




                                                        A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  38 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




“In my own
“In my own 30   years’experience,
             30 years’  experience,there
                                    thereare
                                          aremany
                                               many firsts. One
                                                      firsts. Onefirst is is
                                                                    first the  sheer
                                                                             the     scale
                                                                                 sheer        the
                                                                                           of of
                                                                                       scale      park,
                                                                                                 the    thethe
                                                                                                            bringing
                                                                                                     park,           together
                                                                                                               bringing       of all
                                                                                                                         together ofthe
                                                                                                                                     all
necessary ingredients  to make it successful right from   the  beginning.     The Ethiopian  government,   the  world’s
the necessary ingredients to make it successful right from the beginning. The Ethiopian government, the world’s donor   donor agencies,
many   of the
agencies,     world’s
           many       best
                 of the    apparel
                        world’s    and
                                 best  related and
                                      apparel  product manufacturers,
                                                   related            and companies,
                                                           product manufacturers,  andand  a buyer and
                                                                                        companies,     retailer-PVH…Ethiopia
                                                                                                     and a buyer and retailer-
is a North Star—an   example  to understand  what can be achieved by having an active and visionary
PVH…Ethiopia is a North Star—an example to understand what can be achieved by having an active and  government   engaged  from
                                                                                                                     visionary
the very beginning.
government    engaged  The  is the
                          from     first
                                 the     in beginning.
                                      very  commitment   tois
                                                       The    fullfirst
                                                            athe   valuein add,            to afrom
                                                                                fully vertical
                                                                           commitment                 growing
                                                                                                full value    of
                                                                                                           add,   the vertical
                                                                                                                fully cotton to   thegrowing
                                                                                                                               from   finished
product… to the inclusion in the park a woolen fabric mill from the very beginning—something that will normally take 5 to 10
of the cotton to the finished product… to the inclusion in the park a woolen fabric mill from the very beginning—something
years to arrive ..to the construction of industrial park that companies with international building standards to the creation of the
that will normally take 5 to 10 years to arrive ..to the construction of industrial park that companies with international
tenant associations-committed to working together to ensure consistency within the park and at its hear the investment and the
building standards to the creation of the tenant associations-committed to working together to ensure consistency within
commission of Africa’s largest Zero Liquid Discharge effluent treatment plan—an investment that will show the world there is
the park and at its hear the investment and the commission of Africa’s largest Zero Liquid Discharge effluent treatment
no conflict between companies doing well and companies doing right by the people, the community, and the environment they
plan—an investment that will show the world there is no conflict between companies doing well and companies doing
operate within. At every step, we have been sensitive to the challenges and conscious of the responsibilities of industrializing a
right by the people, the community, and the environment they operate within. At every step, we have been sensitive to
predominantly agricultural region.”
the challenges and conscious of the responsibilities of industrializing a predominantly agricultural region.”Bill McRaith,
Speech at Production Inauguration of Hawassa Industrial Park, June 20,17
Bill McRaith, Speech at Production Inauguration of Hawassa Industrial Park, June 2017


PVH determined that manufacturing in East Africa offered win–win opportunities for all parties
involved, partnership opportunities for establishing manufacturing excellence, and the chance
to leverage the latest innovation and technology. It is betting on the long term in establishing
a fully integrated vertical supply chain in Africa, from cotton to finished product, in a socially
responsible way. PVH is also betting on its leadership role in partnering with various stakeholders
in the industry to build capacity from the ground up, ensuring that best-in-class environmental,
safety, and social standards will be developed and upheld (PVH Corporation 2015).

When thinking of vertical integration and building the supply chain, PVH has not only focused
on Ethiopia, but has also advocated a regional perspective, considering the vast opportunities
that could be leveraged from the East African Community. “If you get people to work together,
if they could see there is a long-term benefit, if the Ugandan government builds an industrial
park just to spin cotton, if Kenya builds a textile park just to weave, knit, and dye fabric and then
Ethiopia could make the garment, then you would have an amazing supply chain.… If we build
that supply chain, East Africa will become so compelling that the industries will build around the
parks.… That is a project for the future” (Ashurst, personal communication).

Moreover, PVH has advocated this regional integration view to the U.S. Congress while supporting
the importance of AGOA’s renewal: “With the right set of policies, in place, Africa can also
change the model of apparel sourcing by having a fully integrated supply chain that includes
man-made fibers, cotton, yarn, textile and apparel production” (Senate Committee on Foreign
Relations 2015). As explained by McRaith in his testimony before the Senate Committee on
Foreign Relations, “there are other ways by which the US can partner with Africa to achieve a
fully vertically integrated model of production. For instance, there is cotton production in Africa
today, but it is very inefficient and of poor quality compared to the high yields and high quality
cotton produced in other areas.… Helping them to implement farming practices that use less
water, less pesticides and have higher yields per acre will leapfrog them into the 21st century.…
Instituting cotton grading practices that mimic our own system will help ensure quality product
and reliability for purchasers.”
                                                                       LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 39




Section VI. Challenges

HIP’s inauguration, on July 13, 2016, was a significant milestone for the government of Ethiopia.
Another milestone was the attraction of PVH, the world’s second largest apparel company as an
anchor for HIP, as an anchor investor for HIP. Ethiopia hopes to develop a competitive textile and
apparel industry that can be the motor of the country’s industrial growth.

PVH has taken an active role in helping to ensure HIP facilities are up to international standards
and has helped to attract top manufacturers, principally PVH’s suppliers to the industrial park. In
return, Ethiopia has offered PVH an opportunity to begin operations in a new region, with initial
conditions positioned so that its supply chain can meet the company’s sustainability goals. It is
also an opportunity for PVH to shift its business model, adopting a more vertically integrated
operation and wading back into manufacturing itself. PVH’s aim for HIP is to be the “world’s
first example of a fully vertically integrated, from ground to finished product, socially responsible
supply chain” in the textile industry.

Many hurdles remain before PVH’s project can be declared a manufacturing center of excellence.
These challenges, if not properly addressed, could prevent PVH from realizing its model as well
as keep Ethiopia from becoming the manufacturing powerhouse of Africa.



1.	Logistics:

	   The textile industry is highly sensitive to cost and lead times of imports and exports. An
    estimated 50 to 60 percent of the value of Ethiopia’s garment exports consists of imported
    raw materials and components. Previous analysis has suggested that its abundant low-cost
    labor provides Ethiopia with a comparative advantage in less-skilled, labor-intensive sectors
    such as light manufacturing. As such, its factory floor costs in products such as garments and
    other light manufacturing goods are lower than those in China and India (Dinh et al. 2012).
    Longer lead times and higher logistics costs, however, could erode this cost advantage. As
    a landlocked country, Ethiopia needs to assure investors timely connections to ports. Heavy
    reliance on the port of Djibouti poses significant risks. Ethiopia’s trade logistics constraints
    include inefficient trade finance and bank processes, long shipping times, high shipping costs,
    inefficient port operations, high freight transport cost, unregulated service under monopolistic
    practices, inadequate logistics service capacity, poor coordination, and lengthy customs and
    inland dry port clearance. Customs processes are unpredictable and that requirements and
    regulations are not clear.

    Customs clearance and other trade facilitation and border management procedures must be
    streamlined and made more efficient. If left unaddressed, logistics costs will prevent Ethiopia
    from capitalizing on an opportunity to bolster exports and diversify toward higher-value-
    added activities.




                                             A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  40 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




2.	Skills

     While affordable labor is widely available, productivity remains low. Ethiopia’s inadequate
     educational and Technical Vocational and Training (TVET) system has limited the development
     of a qualified labor supply. In addition, the high rate of employee turnover is a significant
     constraint in the industry. Ultimately, the competitiveness of the Ethiopian textile and apparel
     sector depends on how productively industry can use its human capital. Enhancing productivity
     requires going beyond preferential market access, low factor costs, and subsidies.

     The government of Ethiopia has established the Ethiopian Textile Industry Development
     Institute (TIDI) to lead and coordinate the skills development agenda. With support from UK’s
     Department for International Development (DFID), the Regional Bureau of Trade and Industry
     and Ethiopian Textile Development Institute (ETIDI) have set up sourcing and grading centers.
     Factories in HIP source from this suitable pool of work-force. This innovative collaborative
     project provide training to workers on time management, industrial norms and basic
     operational skills which are crucial for factory efficiency. In return, factories are incentivized
     to source from this suitable pool of workforce, creating employment opportunities for 30,000
     workers, mostly women. At the time of writing, close to 4,995 job seekers were screened and
     graded and about 1,000 recruited employees received soft-skill training.

     Finding skilled labor for management and technical roles is an even bigger challenge. Most of
     the tenants in HIP will have to rely on expatriate staff until a sufficiently skilled workforce is
     ready. The government is facilitating the hire of qualified expatriate managers by simplifying
     visa and work permit procedures while encouraging them to train local Ethiopians. “The idea
     of expatriates training their Ethiopian counterpart is an excellent idea” (Ashurst, personal
     communication).

     This has been a greater challenge for PVH than for other HIP tenants, because it does not have
     management experience in garment manufacturing elsewhere to draw on. PVH is thus eager
     to run training programs from which to recruit its first-line managers and supervisors. “We
     are training industrial engineers, production planners and we wanted to do it from university
     graduates, so that is part of my training role as well” (Ashurst, personal communication).



3.	 Institutional, Regulatory, and Administrative Capacity

     Had PVH only dealt with the designated investment-related institutions, it is highly likely
     that it would have located elsewhere. The ability to work directly with high level officials
     was critical to win over PVH. Ethiopia has recently created, reformed, or reorganized a
     series of investment-related institutions. A key priority for Ethiopia should be to ensure that
     these entities are able, on their own, to attract and retain the next PVH. These entities are
     strategic players in attracting FDI, key to the government’s plan to become a manufacturing
     powerhouse, and the consolidation and strengthening of their institutional capacities is
     fundamental. Guaranteeing the stability and sustainability of these institutions, enabling high



A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                  LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 41




   levels of professionalism in their staffs, avoiding corrupt practices and guaranteeing the rule
   of law in general are important challenges.

   HIP itself may provide a pilot for such reforms. Within the industrial park, customs clearance
   processes are being simplified, the visa issuance process has been streamlined, and a one-
   stop-shop service for investment licensing and permitting is operating. If successful, these
   reforms could be brought over into the broader economy. This will be necessary. In the 2017
   World Bank Doing Business Indicators, Ethiopia ranked 159 out of 190 countries reflecting
   a regulatory environment largely defined by extensive entry requirements. Streamlining and
   simplification of burdensome regulations and practices takes considerable time and political
   capital, particularly when there is a shared mandate among government agencies. Lack of
   coordination among the institutions, overlapping powers, and long delays are common.



   PVH was able to build a strong relationship of trust with the current government, which
   has responded quickly and positively to PVH’s need for high labor and environmental
   standards and adequate investment conditions. Attracting additional investment will be
   much facilitated if this trust is institutionalized through, for example, Ethiopia’s signing of the
   New York Convention. Trade policy reforms that can help reduce the cost of imports could
   be effected through WTO membership, for example, which would also open possibilities for
   international cooperation on trade facilitation and capacity building.



4.	 Local Development

   When fully operational, HIP is expected to employ “50,000 to 60,000 workers.” These
   numbers do not include the jobs that will be created indirectly as a result of the development
   of HIP; each manufacturing job tends to have a multiplier effect. This growth means significant
   new needs for infrastructure development.

   Like other Ethiopian cities, Hawassa currently has inadequate infrastructure and services for
   its population. Urban housing shortages solid waste management and access to water are
   among the pressing needs in Ethiopia’s cities. Compounding this is a serious infrastructure
   finance gap.

   Hawassa is a clear example that the industrialization agenda is closely linked to the urban
   development agenda. Collaboration from a series of development partners has been made
   available, but what is most needed is a strong coordination mechanism between local and
   national authorities to address this emerging and pressing challenge with a long-term vision.

5.	Linkages

   A main motivation for encouraging the location of investors who will inset Ethiopia into
   global value chains is to promote domestic participation. In the textile and apparel supply
  42 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




     chain, this could include the use of local inputs such as direct raw materials (particularly
     cotton and yarn); fabric, trim and accessories (e.g., buttons, zippers, thread, labels, hangers);
     packing materials (e.g., cartoons and poly bags); capital equipment and machinery parts,
     assembly or finishing activities (e.g., sewing, embroidering, screen printing), and services
     such as transportation, logistics, information, and catering (Staritz & Frederick 2014). There
     is room for local firms to participate in the new value chain, for example in accessories or
     providing services. The challenge will be to develop local firms’ capacity to enter sourcing
     networks and build supply linkages. The government must identify areas of interest to the
     investor and establish the right set of policies to foster and enhance the development of
     local linkages. In response to these challenges, the government announced a new set of
     performance based incentives to support the participation of domestic firms in HIP.

     These performance based incentives available for domestic firms are the following:

     (1)	 Access to Working and Investment Capital: For domestic businesses looking to start
          new ventures, or relocate facilities in HIP, the government will facilitate access to credit
          for working and investment capital needs through Development Bank of Ethiopia and
          Commercial Bank of Ethiopia. Domestic firms will be allowed to get credit up to 85% of
          their investment and working capital needs.



     (2)	 Access to Foreign Currency: Domestic firms will have preferential access to foreign
          currency to meet their financing needs.



     (3)	 Cost Sharing of Training and Skills Development Program. The government will cover the
          cost of training program as follows. For the 1st year, 85% of the cost of training, for the 2nd
          year, 75% of the cost of training program, for 3rd year 50% of the training program, for 4th
          year 25% of the cost of the training program.



     (4)	 Expatriate Managerial Staff Wage Subsidy: The wage subsidy program aim at putting
          specialized expatriate employee within the reach of domestic firms. The government will
          cover the cost of hiring an expatriate staff as follows. For the 1st year, 85% of the cost
          of training, for the 2nd year, 75% of the cost of training program, for 3rd year 50% of the
          training program, for 4th year 25% of the cost of the training program. Domestic firm will
          also get income tax exemption on wage payable to expatriate staff.

     To continue to receive these incentives, domestic firms should achieve a threshold of
     productivity goals. For the first year, the domestic firm should reach at least 75% of the
     productivity of a foreign firm in HIP. For the second and third year, productivity should reach
     85% and 100% of the productivity of a foreign investor respectively.

     Developing linkages is often a challenge. Firms may be reluctant to source locally if




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                              LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 43




domestically produced inputs are not assured to meet specified quality requirements or are not
priced competitively. PVH has long-established, global supplier networks that reliably meet
its needs, making it difficult for domestic firms to break in as first-tier accessory suppliers.
The company’s vertical integration supply chain vision relies, at least in its initial stages, on
bringing its approved suppliers to the region.

“Our corporate policy is to minimize our suppliers because we want to be meaningful to
our existing suppliers.… So, our actual view on supply chain management is the same as
our factories. We want to work with fewer people, and we want them to be global. We are
asking our approved label suppliers to come and open in East Africa. We are asking our trade
suppliers to come and open in East Africa. So we don’t want to buy locally produced. We
want to encourage our global supply chain people to come here. There are too many risks
when you start talking about second-tier suppliers in the supply chain, and you know the
world of compliance will restrict us from doing this. This is a major, major thing. You have just
to be so careful about who is supplying things that go into your product” (Ashurst, personal
communication).
 44 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




Section VII. Key Lessons



Analyzing the events and the context in which PVH decided to commit to and establish operations
in Ethiopia, several key lessons can be extracted. Although these lessons might seem just common
sense, they are often overlooked and difficult to accomplish. In effect, for Ethiopia to win this
investment, to convince a leading global company like PVH to produce in the country instead of
neighboring countries also being considered, it was essential to have a clear, focused vision and
strategy; the ability to follow through on commitments; a champion and adequate organizational
support; and receptiveness and openness to partnering with investors.

   1.	 A Clear, Focused Vision and Strategy

   Ethiopia understood that it needed to develop export capacity and set out a clear and
   consistent strategy to achieve this objective. This required clarity and determination. Export-
   oriented investment – often referred to as efficiency-seeking investment (see Echandi and
   Newsom 2014) is the most difficult type of investment to attract.


       Research supports the hypothesis that more-intense efforts concentrated
       on a few priority sectors are likely to lead to greater FDI inflows than
       less-intense, across-the-board attempts to attract FDI. Efforts tailored to
       the needs of investors operating in a particular sector will work better
       than attempts to target all potential investors. The magnitude of the
       estimated effect is economically meaningful.

       Studies demonstrate that targeted sectors receive more than twice
       as much FDI as nontargeted sectors. A dollar spent on investment
       promotion is found to increase FDI inflows by US$189. An additional job
       created by a foreign affiliate requires US$78 in investment promotion
       spending (Harding and Javorcik 2011). A targeted approach for investor
       outreach is thus cost effective.




   The ten-year renewal of the AGOA provided an incentive for manufacturing firms to locate in
   Africa. Ethiopia seized on this opportunity at a time that most textile production was in Asia,
   and Africa was largely invisible in this sector. Making the link between trade preferences and
   its ability to attract important companies paid off.

   The government’s decision to develop industrial parks was based on the need to quickly
   reduce set-up time for investors by creating industrial space, land, and infrastructure and thus
   reducing entry, transaction, and operational costs. The government also strategically sought a
   prominent company with high standards to serve as an anchor for this strategy.
                                                                        LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 45




    2.	 Following Through on Commitments

PVH has a long history of sourcing product around the globe – and has therefore seen many
impressive national plans. What impressed PVH about Ethiopia was the government’s willingness
and ability to deliver on its stated objectives. While neighboring countries fell through on certain
commitments, and initial attempts to consider investments did not materialize, Ethiopia worked
diligently, promptly and transparently to make sure that PVH’s needs were met.
The government of Ethiopia rapidly raised the required capital to build the industrial park and built
the facilities within nine months. The speed and quality of the establishment of the park, as well
as support for energy and transport infrastructure impressed PVH enough that it was persuaded
to establish its presence outside of Addis Ababa. To maintain this interest, the government also
expedited a number of infrastructure initiatives to ensure that HIP would be as connected as it
would were it located in the capital region.

A facilitating factor was PVH and the government of Ethiopia’s shared commitment to the
environment, safety, and sustainability. Adequate water treatment facilities, use of green
technologies, and employee safety in the park’s facilities were topics of mutual interest. Addressing
these topics implied constructing in compliance with robust international standards; adopting the
latest environmentally sound manufacturing technology; and committing to safety, security, and
environmental standards that were not necessarily initially budgeted or foreseen. Committing to
these principles and agreeing on constructing a park with these characteristics was crucial for
PVH’s strong engagement with Ethiopia. These elements are also strategic in Ethiopia’s branding
and differentiating itself from competing countries in the textile and apparel industry.

    3.	 A “Champion” and Adequate Organizational Support

Foreign investors appreciate having the right counterpart on the government side – a counterpart
who can quickly address their information needs and questions and with whom they can establish
a strong working relationship. Although PVH indicated that this was a fundamental element in
Ethiopia, differentiating it from other countries, it was not present in their first interactions with
government officials.

For PVH, a turning point in their investment location decision was meeting Dr. Arkebe in the Prime
Minister’s office. High level Ethiopian officials understood that being PVH’s direct counterparts in
the government meant dedicating their full time and attention to this potential anchor company.
A company of PVH’s size and importance – what can become a “queen bee” as Dr. Arkebe has
stated- needs a champion, a counterpart who is senior enough and knowledgeable enough to
orchestrate and deliver the necessary support from the government authorities, who can commit
and execute. The Ethiopian authorities knew this could make all the difference – and it did.




                                              A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
  46 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




4.	 Receptiveness and Openness to Partnering with Investors

Both PVH and the government of Ethiopia were open to learning and to accommodate each
other’s interests. PVH agreed to locate at a site relatively far from the one they initially identified;
the Ethiopian government changed technology and design to accommodate PVH. Instead of
engaging in this project with an adversarial approach, negotiations between the government and
the company occurred in a constructive environment. A trusted relationship between the parties
emerged.

In the context of anchor companies such as this one – with common values and principles
– establishing the right kind of rapport, genuinely engaging with the counterpart, and seeking
common ground and solutions can be enriching for both parties. “We have been fortunate since
we have a great working relationship with senior people. As I said, the project is based on trust
and a vision. So, as we say, we have now moved from planning stage to the execution stage”
(Ashurst, personal communication).



Delivery of reliable, detailed, up-to-date information on location is a core service of an investment promotion intermediary.
The objective is to bridge any information gaps or misperceptions that there might be on location, so it is strategic for an
intermediary to focus on providing the necessary information from an investor´s perspective. It needs to provide generic
information on location and sector-specific information to the investor. In addition, through the stages of the investment
lifecycle, it should be able to customize and address any type of information requests from the investor.




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                   LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 47




Section VIII Conclusions



The textile and apparel sector is going through rapid and dynamic change. A host of factors
have forced leading global apparel companies “to look beyond the horizon” and explore new
opportunities to source, manufacture, and do business in emerging countries outside their
traditional sourcing bases. Rising labour cost in Asia means a number of countries are not as
competitive sourcing a location as before. Much more importantly, securing compliance in areas
such as human rights, labour, safety, quality and the environment is a vital concern for the industry
today, and a top criterion when analyzing sourcing markets and suppliers. Today’s consumers are
both more informed and empowered and are increasingly holding companies accountable for
any alleged unethical behaviour. At the same time, it is costly for companies to retroactively
correct challenges of sustainable supply chain in their traditional sourcing location.

PVH saw Ethiopia as a great pioneering opportunity to build “a fully vertically integrated, from
ground to finished product, socially responsible supply chain” in Africa. The combined effects
of factors such as wage level, power costs, and duty free market access coupled with Ethiopia’s
commitment to creating an environment that supports workers safety, and sustainable production
made Ethiopia the clear choice for PVH. From the government of Ethiopia’s side, there was a
clear commitment to the textile and apparel sector as a priority sector in the industrialization
strategy. Ethiopia’s effort in attracting and facilitating PVH’s production was fundamentally
informed by the country’s economic strategy and desire to achieve structural transformation.
Ethiopian policy makers believed transforming the manufacturing sector is not merely a prologue
but an inalienable and integral part of the structural transformation of the Ethiopian economy.
Both parties wanted to make the project work. There was a meeting of minds and a process of
mutual discovery and learning.

With the timely conclusion of HIP and the announced commitment of PVH to the park, the
government of Ethiopia has reached two significant milestones. It has been successful in the
construction of a world-class industrial park featuring state-of-the-art, environmentally friendly
technology to attract and host companies from the textile and apparel sector, and perhaps more
importantly, it managed to attract leading companies – most notably, the second-largest apparel
company in the world - to establish manufacturing operations in HIP. The significance of a
decision like the one that PVH made when deciding to move production to Ethiopia does not go
unnoticed. Moreover, PVH is eager to convince others to come manufacture in Ethiopia, most
notably its strategic suppliers. PVH is betting on its long- term future in Ethiopia.

The Government decided that Foreign Direct Investment would be an important catalyst
for development of the textile and apparel sector and worked tirelessly to attract and retain
high quality investment. Government officials responded quickly to the needs of PVH and
the suppliers it introduced to Ethiopia and the HIP, and has since been able to deliver results
including identifying, constructing and providing industrial land and infrastructure. A notable
factor defining this case – and one that portends well for future sustainability – is that neither tax
  48 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




incentives or specific concessions were critical factors in PVH’s decision.

That FDI makes an important contribution in terms of investment, employment, and foreign
exchange is never under question. But more needs to be done to maximize its benefit and make
it stick. In this regard, the spillover effect– the diffusion of knowledge and technology from foreign
investors to local firms and workers- is an important theme for more focused action.

Ethiopia is benefitting from the effect an industry leader like PVH creates. Such an effect can
be widespread and have positive implications not only for the textiles and apparel industry, but
also for other light manufacturing sectors. With the focused vision and execution capability that
the government has demonstrated in this case, it is to be expected that the country will have the
capacity to maximize the benefits to be derived from such an effect.

Many challenges lie ahead. Bold steps need to continue to be taken. Ethiopia needs to continue
to pursue robust global integration and to craft and implement the right policies to become
a relevant regional and global player. This will provide concrete options for broader, deeper
participation in global value chains and more linkage opportunities.

The case study also demonstrated that addressing one big, complex development project reveals
other challenges that will need to be addressed concurrently. It triggers a constructive process
of learning by doing, observing, and policy making to address a host of new and emerging
problems. Big projects such as industrial parks are pressure points that create more demand for
change and spark the need for additional reforms. With high expectations – and with the delivery
of important results – came heightened needs. For instance, it is becoming increasingly evident
that there is a need to address systemic trade policy issues, such as Ethiopia’s WTO membership
negotiation and its lack of a network of FTAs and IIAs to consolidate its market access. Similarly,
the establishment of industrial parks will accelerate urbanization of the surrounding region,
implying that “beyond the fence” infrastructure issues such as housing, water, and transport issues
will become urgent development priorities.

The good news is all these imbalances and emerging challenges create opportunities for creative
problem solving and inspired actions. It seems a constructive attitude toward “pressure points”
and a subsequent dynamic process of problem solving is the real “glue and solvent” to make
progress happen.




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 49




            View of HIP.
  50 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




References

Berg, Achim and Saskia Hedrich. 2014. Perspectives on Retail and Consumer
Goods, Number 3. Summer. McKinsey & Company.
Dinh, Hinh, Vincent Palmade, Vandana Chandra, and Frances Cossar. 2012.
Light Manufacturing in Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Echandi, Roberto and Maree Newson; The Influence of International
Investment Patterns in International Economic Law Rulemaking: A
Preliminary Sketch. J Int Economic Law 2014; 17 (4): 847-866. 
Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce and Sectoral Associations. 2014. Ethiopia
National Business Agenda. Ethiopian Chamber of Commerce and Sectoral
Associations.
Ethiopian Maritime Affairs Authority. 2015. National Logistics Strategy for
Ethiopia. Ethiopian Maritime Affairs Authority.
Farole, Thomas and Gokhan Akinci. 2011. Special Economic Zones,
Progress, Emerging Challenges and Future Directions. Washington, D.C.:
the World Bank.
Fernandez-Stark, Karina, Stacey Frederick and Gary Gereffi. 2011.
The Apparel Global Value Chain: Economic Upgrading and Workforce
Development. Duke University, Center on Globalization, Governance &
Competitiveness. November 17.
Gereffi, Gary and Stacey Frederick. 2010. “The Global Apparel Value
Chain, Trade and the Crisis: Challenges and Opportunities for Developing
Countries.” In Global Value Chains in a Postcrisis World, edited by Cattaneo,
Olivier, Gary Gereffi and Cornelia Staritz. Washington, DC: World Bank,
pp.157–208.
Giorgis, Tamrat. 2015. “The Singularly Focused Man.” Addis Fortune. Vol 16
(808). October 29.
ILO. 2014. Wages and Working Hours in the Textiles, Clothing, Leather
and Footwear Industries. Issues Paper for discussion at the Global Dialogue
Forum on Wages and Working Hours in the Textiles, Clothing, Leather and
Footwear Industries. International Labor Organization, Geneva, September
23–25.
IMF. 2015. Article IV Consultation; Staff Report; and Statement by the
Executive Director for the Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia.
Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                 LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 51




McKinsey & Company, Apparel, Fashion and Luxury Group. 2015. Sourcing
in a Volatile World: The East Africa Opportunity. McKinsey & Company.
April.
McRaith, William. 2015. The African Growth and Opportunity Act. Written
Testimony to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, Africa and Global
Health Policy Subcommittee. April 23, 2015.
Porter, Michael. 2008. On Competition. Updated and Expanded Ed. Boston:
Harvard Business School.
PVH Corporation. 2016. 2015 Annual Report of PVH Corporation.
Staritz, Cornelia and Stacey Frederick. 2014. “Sector Case Study: Apparel.”
In Making Foreign Direct Investment Work for Sub-Saharan Africa: Local
Spillovers and Competitiveness in Global Value Chains, edited by Farole,
Thomas and Deborah Winkler, Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
Stotz, Lina and Gillian Kane. 2015. “Facts on the Global Garment Industry.”
Clean Clothes Campaign. https://cleanclothes.org/resources/publications/
factsheets/general-factsheet-garment-industry-february-2015.pdf
UNCTAD. 2016. World Investment Report 2016: Investor Nationality: Policy
Challenges. Geneva: United Nations, June.
World Bank Group. 2013. Ethiopian Economic Update II: Laying the
Foundation for Achieving Middle Income Status. Washington, DC: World
Bank Group.
———. 2014. Ethiopia Poverty Assessment. Washington, DC: World Bank
Group.
———. 2015a. Systematic Country Diagnostics for Ethiopia. Washington,
DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2015b. Ethiopia: Priorities for Ending Extreme Poverty and Promoting
Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
———. 2016. Ethiopia’s Great Run: The Growth Acceleration and How to
Pace It. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Report of
the World Commission on Environment and Development: Our Common
Future. Oslo, March 20, 1987.
WTO. 2015. International Trade Statistics 2015. Special Focus: World Trade
and the WTO: 1995–2014. Geneva: World Trade Organization.
     52 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




Annex 1: Fully Operational Companies in the Textile and
Garment Sector in Ethiopia, 2012-2017


                                                           Country of                                        Region of
 No     Year             Name of Investor                                       Investment Activity
                                                             Origin                                         Investment
 1      2012 Dehua                                      China             Garment Manufacturing            Addis Ababa
 2      2012 Hay Garment Manufacturing PLC              Turkey/Ethiopia   Garment Manufacturing            Addis Ababa
                                                                          GARMENT & TEXTILE MANU-
 3      2012 YIMING ZHU                                 China                                              Oromia
                                                                          FACTURING
               Isik Detergent, Chemical and Textile
 4      2012                                            Turkey            Garment Manufacturing            Addis Ababa
               Factory PLC
 5      2012 Ramphal Purnmasi                           India             Garment Manufacturing            Addis Ababa
 6      2012 Al-Mehdi Industries plc                    Pakistan          Garment Manufacturing            Oromia
               Else Addis Industrial Development                          Vertical Integrated Textile Man-
 7      2012                                            Turkey                                             Oromia
               plc                                                        ufacturing /Expansion/
               Suna Home Textile Production and
 8      2012                                            Turkey/Ethiopia   Textile Manufacturing            Addis Ababa
               Marketing plc
 9      2012 Kanoria Africa Textiles plc                India             Textile Manufacturing            Oromia
                                                                          Manufacturing of Labels, Em-
 10     2012 Nuan Song                                  China                                              Oromia
                                                                          broidery, Belt and Zipper
 11     2012 Jiadong Wang                               China             Weaving and Dyeing               Oromia
 12     2013 Bultex Production and Marketing plc        Turkey/Ethiopia   Garment Manufacturing            Oromia
                                                                          Manufacturing of Bedcover,
 13     2013 Sheng Zhou                                 China                                              Oromia
                                                                          Blanket and Curtain
               Dongfang Spinnirg Printing and                             Weaving, Finishing and Print-
 14     2013                                            China                                              Oromia
               Dyeing PLC                                                 ing of Textiles
                                                                          Manufacturing of Knitted and
 15     2013 Jie Lin                                    China                                              Oromia
                                                                          Crocheted Fabrics
               DIMA FANGWIEI SPINNING AND                                 PREPARATION AND SPINNING
 16     2013                                            China/Ethiopia                                     Oromia
               TEXTILE PLC                                                OF COTTON, WOOL, SILK
                                                                          Textile Manufacturing (expan-
 17     2013 AL-Asr Industries plc                      Pakistan                                           Oromia
                                                                          sion)
                                                                          Manufacturing of Wearing Ap-
 18     2013 Jay Jay Textiles PLC                       India                                              Addis Ababa
                                                                          parel (Including Sport Swears)
               Steve Horne Enterprise INC /Ethiopi-                       Manufacturing of Wearing
 19     2013                                            USA                                                Addis Ababa
               an Branch/                                                 Apparel (Including Sport Wear)
               New Wide Garment (Ethiopian                                Manufacturing of Wearing
 20     2013                                            China/Sri Lanka                                    Addis Ababa
               Branch)                                                    Apparel (Including Sport Wear)
                                                                          Weaving Finishing And Printing
 21     2013 Yechen Industry PLC                        China                                            Oromia
                                                                          Textiles
 22     2013 Guo and Fang Manufacturing PLC             China             Manufacturing of Blanket         Oromia
               Kei Industrial Engineering Consultan- South Korea/
 23     2013                                                              Manufacturing Of Apparel         Addis Ababa
               cy PLC                                USA




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
                                                                        LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 53




                                                                Preparation And spinning Of
                                               China/USA/
24   2013 S M N Textile PLC                                     Cotton, Wool & Silk Textile       Oromia
                                               Ethiopia
                                                                Fibers
25   2013 Chunji Su                            China            Manufacturing of umbrella         Oromia
          C & H Garments PLC(M & M Gar-                         Manufacturing of wearing
26   2013                                      China                                            Addis Ababa
          ments plc)                                            apparel (including sport wears)
                                                                Weaving Finishing And Printing
27   2013 Huahui Zhang                         China                                           Oromia
                                                                Of Textile
28   2014 Shints ETP Garment plc               South Korea      Manufacturing of Garments         Addis Ababa
                                                                Manufacturing of textile and
29   2014 Kebire Enterprises plc               Saudi Arabia                                       Tigray
                                                                garment (2nd expansion)
                                                                Manufacturing of Garments
30   2014 Ashton Apparel Manufacturing PLC     India                                              Addis Ababa
                                                                For Export
                                                                Manufacturing of Wearing
31   2014 Feng He                              China                                              Oromia
                                                                Appeal (Including Sport Wears)
                                                                Weaving, finishing and printing
32   2014 Sinoweaving technology PLC           China                                            Oromia
                                                                of textile
                                                                Weaving, Finishing and Print-
33   2014 Arbaminch Textil Share Company       China/Ethiopia                                     Oromia
                                                                ing of Textile
                                                                Manufacturing of textile article
34   2014 Fugan Zhang                          China                                             Addis Ababa
                                                                except apparel
35   2014 Linde(Ethiopia) Garment PLC          China            Manufacturing of Garment          Oromia
                                                                Manufacturing Of Textile Arti-
36   2014 R.Z.X Industrial PLC                 China/Ethiopia                                     Addis Ababa
                                                                cles Except Apparel
37   2014 Vestis Garment Production PLC        India            Manufacturing of Garment          Addis Ababa
                                                                Weaving, finishing and printing
38   2014 KEPA Textile plc                     China                                            Oromia
                                                                of textiles
                                                                Manufacturing of Wearing
39   2014 Ting Ting Garment plc                China                                              Addis Ababa
                                                                Apparel
            Dong Fang Xiong Di Textile Manufac-                 Manufacture of textile articles
40   2014                                       China                                             Oromia
            turing plc                                          except apparel
                                                                Manufacturing of textile arti-
41   2014 Onika Industries PLC                 India                                              Oromia
                                                                cles, except apparel
                                                                Manufacturing of Wearing Ap-
42   2014 Hua Xia Technology PLC               China                                            Addis Ababa
                                                                parel (Including Sport Wearing)
                                                                Weaving, Finishing and Print-
43   2014 Xuwu Textile Manufacturing PLC       China                                              Oromia
                                                                ing of Textiles
                                                                Weaving, finishing and printing
44   2014 Huaxu textile industry plc           China/Ethiopia                                   Amhara
                                                                textiles (Expansion)
                                                                Other Textile finishing activates
45   2014 Jiadong Wang                         China                                              Oromia
                                                                (Expansion)
                                                                Manufacture of knitted and
46   2015 Yuechen Industry PLC                 China                                              Oromia
                                                                crocheted fabrics
                                                                Manufacturing of textile arti-
47   2015 Yewei Dai                            China                                              Oromia
                                                                cles except apparel
                                                                Manufacturing of wearing
48   2015 Hai Bo Manufacturing PLC             China                                              Oromia
                                                                apparel
49   2015 Beconnected Printing PLC             China/Ethiopia   Other Textile finishing activities Oromia
  54 | LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON




                                                                          Manufacturing of textile arti-
 50   2015 Wuahen Miao                                  China                                               Oromia
                                                                          cles, except apparel
                                                                          Manufacturing of blankets,
 51   2015 Bangyong Yang                                China             made up of furnishing articles    Oromia
                                                                          & stuffed (Expansion)
                                                                          Manufacturing of Wearing Ap-
 52   2015 Adleer Textile PLc                           Turkey                                              Oromia
                                                                          parel (Including Sport wears)
              PVH FAR EAST LIMITED (ETHIOPIAN
 53   2015                                              China             Textile and Garment for export    Addis Ababa
              BRANCH)
                                                                          Manufacturing of Wearing
 54   2015 ITACA Textile PLC                            Italy                                               Tigray
                                                                          Apparel (Including Sport Wear)
                                                                          Manufacturing of knitted and
 55   2015 Youli Manufacturing PLC                      China                                               Addis Ababa
                                                                          crocheted apparel
                                                                          Manufacturing of wearing
 56   2015 Hirdaramani Garment PLC                      Sri Lanka                                         SNNPR
                                                                          apparel (including sport wears)
                                                                          Manufacture of Knitted &
 57   2015 Comfy Socks Manufacturing PLC                China/Ethiopia                                      Addis Ababa
                                                                          Crocheted Fabrics
                                                                          Manufacturing of Textile Arti-
 58   2015 HQ & ZA Manufacturing PLC                    China/Ethiopia                                      Oromia
                                                                          cles Except Apparels
                                                                          Manufacturing of wearing
 59   2015 CBA Garment Factory PLC                      Turkey                                              Oromia
                                                                          apparel
                                                                          Manufacturing of wearing
 60   2015 Wenjin Xu                                    China                                               Addis Ababa
                                                                          apparel including sport wears
                                                                          Manufacturing of wearing
 61   2015 TGS Textile and Garment PLC                  China/Ethiopia                                      Addis Ababa
                                                                          apparel
                                                                          Manufacture of man-made
 62   2015 Xuedi Sun                                    China                                               Addis Ababa
                                                                          fiber
                                                                          Manufacture of knitted and
 63   2015 Jore Textiles Manufacturing PLC              China                                               Oromia
                                                                          crocheted fabrics
                                                                          Manufacturing of wearing
              Angels Cotton and Textiles produc-
 64   2015                                              Turkey            apparel (including sport wear)    Oromia
              tion PLC
                                                                          (Expansion)
                                                                          Manufacturing of knitted and
 65   2016 Guanyan HE                                   China                                               Oromia
                                                                          crocheted fabrics
                                                                          Manufacturing of wearing
 66   2016 Guruji Garment PLC                           India                                             Addis Ababa
                                                                          apparel (including sport wears)
                                                                          Manufacturing of Wearing Ap-
 67   2016 Indochine Apparel PLC                        Hong Kong/UAE                                       SNNPR
                                                                          parel (including Sport Wears)
                                                                          Manufacturing of Wearing Ap-
 68   2016 Tal Garments Manufacturing PLC               Singapore                                           SNNPR
                                                                          parel (including Sport Wears)
                                                                          Weaving, finishing and printing
 69   2016 Shuajie Textile PLC                          China                                             Oromia
                                                                          of textiles
                                                        China/Hong        Manufacturing of wearing ap-
 70   2016 Epic Apparel PLC                                                                                 SNNPR
                                                        Kong              parels (including sport wears)
                                                                          Manufacturing textile articles,
 71   2016 HSN Textile PLC                              Turkey/Ethiopia                                     Addis Ababa
                                                                          except apparel
                                                                          Weaving, finishing and printing
 72   2016 Shunfa textile manufacturing PLC             China                                             Oromia
                                                                          of textiles




A case study of PVH’s investment in Ethiopia’s Hawassa Industrial Park
LOOKING BEYOND THE HORIZON | 55
