M-Money Channel Distribution Case – Afghanistan


              ROSHAN M-PAISA
                                                                       Overview


In 2006, Roshan, the leading mobile operator in Afghanistan formed a partnership with Vodafone Global
Services to offer a mobile money transfer service in Afghanistan. The companies agreed to engage in a
profit share model for the provision of service and would use Vodafone’s award winning platform that was
built for the launch of the successful M-PESA service by Safaricom in Kenya in 2007. In Afghanistan, the
product was locally renamed as M-Paisa where “M” stands for mobile and “Paisa” denotes cash in the
local languages, Dari and Pashto. In order to mitigate risk in this new line of business for Roshan and
Vodafone, the companies jointly registered a holding company known as Mobile Service Development
Afghanistan and this holding company acts as a trustee of the funds held in the M-Paisa system.

The M-Paisa pilot was launched in early 2007 and was in operation until the full commercial launch in
2008. M-Paisa was specifically targeted towards microfinance clients and Roshan also formed a
partnership with The FirstMicrofinanceBank of Afghanistan (FMFB-A) to facilitate loan repayments
through M-Paisa for their client base. Currently, over 5,000 FMFB-A customers are using M-Paisa to
make their weekly or monthly loan repayments.

Roshan provides coverage in over 230 major cities and is present in all 34 provinces of the country. The
company currently serves over 3.5 million subscribers. Since its inception January 2003, Roshan has
invested up to $390.4 million in implementing and maintaining a high quality network making it the
country’s single largest investor and tax payer with a contribution of approximately 6% of the Afghan
Government’s overall domestic revenue. Roshan is backed by an international consortium of investors,
led by the Aga Khan Fund for Economic Development (AKFED) at 51%, Monaco Telecom International
(MTI) at 36.75% and Swedish-Finnish TeliaSonera at 12.25%.

FMFB operates in 6 major cities with 8 branches and ended 2006 with 17,000 active borrowers and an
overall portfolio of USD 17 million. The network is expected to reach 21 branches in 12 of the 34
provinces of Afghanistan by late 2010 with more than 70,000 borrowers and a loan portfolio of USD 79.5
         1
million.

M-Paisa is a proven system that provides access to financial services for under-served people in a post-
conflict country where cities are facing a demographic explosion, where distances are vast, the
environment is harsh and transportation remains insecure. M-Paisa will provide much needed services to
a range of people across the nation with reduced costs for both banks and customers, using a fast, easy,
and secure wireless technology. This paper discusses the methodology used by Roshan during the
implementation of M-Paisa in Afghanistan.




1
    Company Information, 2008




                                                                                                           Page 1
                                                                      Success Factors


Anchor Product or Products
M-Paisa in Afghanistan is mainly targeted towards microfinance clients and enables loan disbursements
and repayments. Roshan has partnered with The First MicroFinanceBank in Afghanistan to offer this
service. M-Paisa also enables national remittance, salary disbursements, airtime purchase, bill payment
and merchant services.

Mobile Phone Penetration
Medium – mobile phone penetration in Afghanistan is approximately 55% as of the end of 2009 with
over 16 million subscribers. The mobile industry is highly competitive with 4 GSM operators and 2
CDMA networks.

Literacy Levels
Low – the literacy rate in Afghanistan is only 28.1% for the general population. Literacy amongst men is
                                                           2
significantly higher (42.1%) than amongst women (12.6%)

Access to Finance
Low – overall access to finance in Afghanistan is extremely low since only 3% of the population is
banked. After more than 20 years of conflict in the country, Afghanistan’s formal financial sector is
virtually non-operational. The conflict has resulted in the complete disruption of domestic and
international payments system, the virtual cessation of all lending activities within the country,
significantly reduced deposit taking activities, and a stoppage of most international banking relationships.
There are approximately 300 bank branches in the country that are owned by 17 different banks. At
present, only 350,000 people are served by MFIs in Afghanistan, yet the potential is estimated to be
                                                                               3
more than 1 million. Only 10,000 have access to voluntary savings accounts.

Demand for Services
Medium – There is a strong need for mechanisms that facilitate microfinance loan repayments due to the
difficult operating conditions in Afghanistan. Since M-Paisa is mainly targeted to microfinance clients,
the service adequately fills this demand. Other features of the service such as national remittance and bill
payment are not highly needed. Many Afghans use local hawala services to transfer money and the
country’s infrastructure is not developed enough to warrant bill payment services.

Regulatory Environment
Conducive – The Central Bank of Afghanistan has fully regulated mobile money transfer services as
payment service providers. During the M-Paisa pilot, the Central Bank passed new legislation to adjust
the existing payment service providers’ regulation to accommodate electronic fund movement. A license
has been issued to Roshan for the operation of M-Paisa and Central Bank policies are regularly revised to
keep up with developments to the service. However, although the Central Bank has taken a positive step
by regulating the service, they have also provided strict compliance guidelines and at times this serves as
a constraint to further growth of the system.




2
    CIA WorldFactbook, 2000
3
    FMFB-A, 2007




                                                                                                               Page 2
Technology Adoption
Unprepared – Mobile phone users in Afghanistan are generally hesitant to try new products and services
and require extensive consumer education before they are able to catch on to the operation of a complex
product such as M-Paisa.

Marketing Campaigns
Marketing during the M-Paisa pilot was conducted through FMFB-A and no above the line methods
were pursued for this. Upon commercial launch, both above the line and below the line tactics were used
to communicate the money transfer features of the service. The initial campaign played on the emotional
aspects of strong family relationships in Afghanistan and encouraged customers to use the product to send
money to their friends and family. Although the campaign resonated with customers, it did not present a
strong enough value proposition for the service and left many confused about how the product worked.
Six months after the launch, a new marketing campaign was designed to position M-Paisa as ‘the hawala
on your mobile’ and provided a much better explanation of how the service could be used to transfer
money nationally.

Ecosystem
Since M-Paisa is mainly targeted towards microfinance clients, much of the ecosystem development has
been focused on agents and institutions that operate in the same areas as the microfinance customers.
Roshan is pursuing relationships with large organizations (such as NGOs and the Afghan military) to
increase the uptake of M-Paisa services. Few large retail chains (including petrol stations and
supermarkets) exist in the country so building a merchant network is a time and resource intensive task
that requires signing contracts with multiple small shops.

Competitive Environment
Medium – Roshan was the first mobile operator to launch a mobile money service and is still the only
operator in the country with an operational service. Etisalat and MTN are currently pursuing the
development of competitive products. However, M-Paisa faces strong competition from the existing
                               4
Hawala networks in the country. Presently, the more than 300 registered money exchange dealers in the
country and estimates of the number of unregistered money exchange dealers in Kabul and around
                                           5
Afghanistan vary widely from 500 to 2,000.




4
  Hawala is an informal money transfer system with origins in classical Islamic Law. Money is transferred
  via a network of agents (hawaladars) that operate based on an honour code. A customer approaches a
  hawala broker in one city and gives a sum of money to be transferred to a recipient in another city. The
  hawala broker calls another hawala broker in the recipient's city, gives disposition instructions of the
  funds (usually minus a small commission), and promises to settle the debt at a later date
5
  Maimbo, Samuel, 2003. “ The Money Exchange Dealers of Kabul”. Finance and Private Sector Unit,
  World Bank




                                                                                                             Page 3
                                                                      Key Challenges


Low Levels of Trust
Trust in the formal banking system of Afghanistan is virtually non-existent. Even customers that do have
access to financial institutions will not easily place their trust in the formal system due to the country’s
turbulent history. This presents both a challenge and an opportunity for M-Paisa. Since many users have
demonstrated trust in their mobile service providers, offering M-Paisa is a good opportunity to capitalize
on their loyalty. However, most consumers are still skeptical of the service offering and a significant
investment in consumer education is required to improve upon this.

Lack of Infrastructure
Decades of war, harsh climate conditions, and neglect due to extreme poverty in Afghanistan have left the
country’s infrastructure in a dismal situation. The country still requires development in all major areas
including energy, roads, democracy and governance, banking, education and health. The lack of
infrastructure has had a huge impact on the economic development of the country and makes it very
difficult to easily reach rural areas for agent roll-out and training. The lack of stable power sources in
certain areas of the country also lead to frequent service outages and this can further erode trust in M-
Paisa.

Limited Commitment from MFSP Leadership
The telecom industry in Afghanistan is highly competitive and the major players are constantly battling
for new subscribers and maintaining customer loyalty. With limited skilled staff, Roshan is faced daily
with the challenge of prioritizing long term projects to sustain growth and short term promotions to
remain competitive. In a presentation at the MMT Africa 2009 conference by Michael Joseph, CEO of
Safaricom, he mentioned how important it is that the top management believes in the service and has a
long term commitment to it. In Kenya the growth of M-PESA is very much a result of the personal
commitment from top management and this is something that was noticeably absent in the formative
years of M-Paisa’s development in Afghanistan. As a result, the opportunity to capitalize on the big bang
of a new product launch was missed. Management commitment to the service remains a constant battle
for Roshan since other services and initiatives often get prioritized over M-Paisa and this reduces the
ability for the service to maintain its positive traction.

Strict AML / KYC Compliance
Because of the high risk of money laundering and terrorism financing in Afghanistan, the Central Bank of
Afghanistan has provided strict requirements for AML and KYC policies that need to be followed by
agents and M-Paisa back-office staff. These requirements have two negative effects. First they place an
additional burden on the back-office staff, making it difficult for them to focus on business development
and service growth. Second, the extensive work and risk on the part of the agent makes it difficult to
convince them of the value proposition of the service.

Unstable and Dangerous Environment
As a war torn country, Afghanistan is still a very insecure environment. Robberies of agent outlets are
common and Roshan regularly faces threats from the Taliban of destruction of their cell towers. Since M-
Paisa is a product involving the transfer of user’s money, it is important to be able to offer consistent and
reliable service and to protect cash stored at the agent outlets. The ]security challenges in Afghanistan are
a constant obstacle.




                                                                                                                Page 4
Adherence to Sharia Banking Laws Required
Islamic banking, a practice that indicates compliance with Sharia law, is prevalent in Afghanistan and
Roshan has to be very careful to position M-Paisa as a compliant service. Sharia law inhibits the
payment or acceptance of interest fees for lending and accepting money. Although M-Paisa does not pay
interest on funds held in the system, the transaction fees charged can sometimes be construed as an
interest payment. Roshan currently mitigates this challenge by educating agents and call center staff on
how to present the service and to answer questions about the product’s compliance with Sharia law.




                                                                                                           Page 5
                                                                     Additional Lessons


Maintaining Close Relationships with Regulators
Roshan has maintained close ties with the Central Bank of Afghanistan and this has gone a long way to
facilitating regulatory support. The Central Bank was willing to revise its legislation to accommodate the
unique aspects of electronic funds transfer and this was an important factor that enabled Roshan to launch
the service. There is still some work to be done with the regulator since the current AML requirements
are constraining the service from rapid expansion.

Being First to Market Increases Stickiness
Roshan is the first mobile operator in Afghanistan to launch a mobile payments service and this has
positively impacted their brand among Afghan consumers. It has also increased stickiness among M-
Paisa subscribers, which is one of Roshan’s key reasons for investing in the product. Roshan currently
has a significant market advantage in the mobile money space and is doing their best to leverage this in
the highly competitive telecom environment.

Easy to Use Customer Interface
Because of the high illiteracy rate in Afghanistan and the fact that the M-Paisa menu could not be
provided in the local languages (due to incompatibilities between the platform and the Dari character set)
Roshan decided to invest in the development of an interactive voice response (IVR) feature for M-Paisa.
This feature enables users to dial a short code and to select their transaction option by listening to a set of
choices in their preferred language. Users can buy airtime, send money, make a loan repayment, deposit
and withdraw funds through the IVR. The IVR feature significantly improves access to the product and
goes a long way towards helping Roshan achieve their goal of subscriber growth.

Business Model Needs to Reflect Low Transaction Volumes
Vodafone does not have any stake in Roshan but the two operators were able to establish a partnership
agreement based on a profit share model for M-Paisa in Afghanistan. This model has its strengths and
weaknesses. Since Roshan does not pay license fees to Vodafone they are able to register customers even
if they are not generating large transactions volumes. However, the model can also slow down growth of
the business since the operators sometimes have different motivations and may not immediately agree on
strategic decisions.

Market Segmentation Need to be Conducted Early and Often
Prior to launching M-Paisa, very little market segmentation was done by Roshan and as a result the
national remittance feature of the service was targeted towards all Afghan consumers. About 6 months
after the launch of the service, a detailed market segmentation analysis was performed and this revealed
that there was an unmet opportunity to target the service towards specific user needs. For example, the
analysis identified that Afghan women would highly benefit from the service. M-Paisa would provide
them with the ability to become microfinance customers and business owners and would enable them to
make their loan repayments without having to leave the privacy of their homes – a feature that is
extremely important given the culture in Afghanistan. The segmentation analysis also identified the
Afghan military and police force as excellent candidates for the salary disbursements through M-Paisa.
Roshan has now begun to adjust their marketing strategy to leverage the results of the segmentation
analysis.




                                                                                                                  Page 6
Current Cash Movement Systems are Strong Competition
Initially, Roshan underestimated the impact of Hawalas in Afghanistan and disregarded them as a true
source of competition. Hawala money transfer agents are generally well trusted and have been used for
centuries in the region. Dealers rarely fail to effect payment and there is a well-established code of
business practice where default risk is eliminated through a variety of hawala dealer selection criteria that
has been adopted by users (see Appendix A for details). Since the fall of the Taliban regime, the volume
of financial flows through the hawala system has grown significantly and there is currently no limit on the
volume of funds transfers the money exchange dealers can transfer; individually or severally. The cost of
making funds transfers into and around Afghanistan averages 1 to 2 percent, making it extremely
                            6
competitive with M-Paisa. Recent marketing campaigns for M-Paisa liken the service to a hawalas dealer
that is available on your mobile phone and can therefore be accessed from the convenience of your home.
This tactic has significantly improved the impression and understanding of M-Paisa in the eyes of the
Afghan consumer.




6
 Maimbo, Samuel, 2003. “ The Money Exchange Dealers of Kabul”. Finance and Private Sector Unit,
World Bank




                                                                                                                Page 7
                                                               Preliminary Requirements


Regulations
During the M-Paisa pilot in Afghanistan, several meetings were held with the Central Bank of
Afghanistan (also known as Da Afghanistan Bank) to address how the service would be regulated. After
extensively reviewing existing legislation available in the country, The Central Bank decided that M-
Paisa fell under the category of a money service provider and Roshan would be required to submit an
application to regulate the service under this provision. Upon further review of the regulation by
Roshan’s legal team, it was determined that certain aspects of the law were outdated and did not
accommodate electronic money transfer systems. The Central Bank agreed to update the regulation to
address the unique needs of an electronic service. Amendments included the ability for Roshan to submit
electronic reports detailing audit history and to notify the Central Bank of suspicious activity through
electronic means such as email.

Requirements for the application included the completed application form, a fully documented anti-money
laundering policy, a letter of approval from the Roshan board of directors, a letter approval from the
Roshan lenders, and the application fee. The Central Bank also stipulated that each agent outlet would
need to be approved and licensed and each employee in the agent outlet that was responsible for operating
M-Paisa would also need to be registered. Details of the application fees are summarised in Figure 1. The
terms of the license issued to agents can be found in Appendix B.

                 Figure 1: Regulatory Fees for Money Service Provider Application

        Registration Fee per Agent Outlet                                      USD 300
        Annual License Maintenance Fee for First Location                      USD 200
        Annual License Maintenance Fee for Additional Locations                USD 100
        Annual License Maintenance Fee per Shop Employee                        USD 20
        Source: Company Information, 2008

The Central Bank also stipulated that Roshan would be held liable for the actions of the dealer and
therefore required Roshan to have a contractual relationship with each agent. This regulation presents a
significant challenge for Roshan as it means that the network roll-out is constrained to dealers in the
existing airtime distribution network and places a heavy risk on the mobile operator. Roshan is currently
trying to get this rule amended but for the time being is operating under this constraint.

Roshan applied for the license in mid 2007 and the application was approved and processed by early
2008.

Market Research
Afghanistan is an extremely unique market and even though the team had access to the results of the M-
PESA launch in Kenya, they were well aware that Afghan consumers would react differently to M-Paisa.
Several market research studies were conducted during the trial period including a quantitative survey on
existing mobile phone subscribers, focus groups with existing Roshan customers, interviews with
participants of the M-Paisa pilot and mystery shop visits to agents servicing the pilot.

Key findings from the research can be summarised as follows:

•   Banks, hawalas, and direct cash payments were the most commonly used money transfer channels.
    Very few respondents used Western Union.
•   All categories of respondents thought the lack of access to bank branches and financial services in
    rural areas was an essential issue.
•   The majority of participants thought they could trust their mobile operator to carry out their financial
    transactions, especially if the operator was reputable and has significantly invested in the country.




                                                                                                               Page 8
•   Almost all participants were excited by the prospect of using M-Paisa in the near future. However,
    concerns over costs and security of transactions were raised.
•   The majority of participants thought transaction charges for sending should be no more than 1% of
    the transaction, and the receiving transaction should be free.
•   After using M-Paisa, 90% of the pilot participants were satisfied with the service and would
    recommend it to a friend
•   Overwhelming feedback from agents suggests that they were not convinced about the business case
    for offering M-Paisa services in their shops. The requirement to invest in the cash float is their major
    concern.
•   M-Paisa pilot participants trust the service since it was introduced to them by FMFB-A, an
    institution they know (see Figure 2)

                                       Figure 2: Trust in M-Paisa
                  I trust M-Paisa agents with                        I trust M-Paisa agents with
                           my money                                           my money




         Source: Company Information, 2007

Roshan continues to collect market research data on an on-going basis to help drive the strategy for
continued growth and to ensure that the service is improving over time.

Pilot Implementation
The M-Paisa pilot officially started on February 11, 2007 and ended on February 10, 2008. In order to
have access to a suitable base of customers, Roshan partnered with The FirstMicrofinanceBank of
Afghanistan (FMFB-A) and slowly began offering M-Paisa to their clients for loan repayments. The
clients were also encouraged to use the other features available in the system such as airtime purchase and
money transfer. The trial was mainly conducted in Kabul and approximately 500 users and 12 agents
were registered during the pilot. By the end of 2008, approximately USD 1 million had been transferred
through M-Paisa. Trial users were required to provide their own handsets but were given a USD 1
airtime voucher as an incentive to participate.
                                                                      7
Since FMFB-A operates using an individual microfinance model there was little risk of M-Paisa
contributing to the breakdown of the group structure as was observed with Faulu during the M-PESA
                8
pilot in Kenya . The pilot with FMFB-A allowed Roshan to test acceptance of M-Paisa among
microfinance users, to determine if the transaction fees were suitable, to prove to other MFIs the value of

7
  Typically, microfinance is associated with join liability lending where borrowers form groups and are
held liable for each other. Some MFIs have abandoned this model and are loaning to individuals instead
of groups. The rate of loan default in these cases is approximately the same as it is for group lending
8
  Vodafone partnered with Faulu Kenya during the M-PESA pilot in 2006. One of the results of the pilot
was that M-PESA enabled individuals to easily repay their loans without needing to attend the weekly
group sessions and this contributed to a breakdown of the group structure




                                                                                                               Page 9
the system and finally to provide enough data for the Central Bank to get comfortable with the reporting
of the system. Performance Indicators of the M-Paisa Pilot with FMFB-A are summarised in Figure 3.

                                    Figure 3: M-Paisa Pilot KPIs
         Key Performance Indicators as at October 15, 2007
         Total Registered Customers                                                  257
         Total Active Customers                                                      233
         Average Number of Transactions Processed Per Week                           33
         Average USD Value Processed Per Week                                        $10,627
         Average USD Loan Repayment Amount                                           $173
         Average USD Deposit Amount (per deposit transaction)                        $170
         Number of Loans Disbursed to date                                           46
         Total USD Value of Loans Disbursed                                          $62,647
         Source: Company Information, 2007

In September 2007, Roshan decided to expand the pilot to test a new feature of the platform, salary
disbursements. In Afghanistan, salaries are typically paid by companies once per month in cash and
employees often wait in lengthy queues to receive their pay. Since the process is manual, it can be
extremely cumbersome for HR and Finance staff and since large amounts of cash are paid out, this method
is also very dangerous for the companies and the employees.

Approximately 100 Roshan employees were selected for the pilot and began receiving their monthly
salary through M-Paisa. Initial feedback from the employees was extremely positive as the users were
thrilled with the fact that they no longer had to queue with their colleagues to receive their pay. However,
after 2-3 months of using the service, the trial participants began to complain about the transaction
withdrawal fee they were required to pay when they wanted to withdraw their money from M-Paisa.
Eventually, Roshan was required to compensate the users for the cost of this withdrawal fee in order to
convince them to continue using M-Paisa for salary disbursements.

Marketing Strategy
Roshan’s marketing strategy for M-Paisa was initially quite similar to that of Safaricom in Kenya for M-
PESA. The product was marketed as a money transfer service and played on the emotional aspects of
strong family ties. Above the line and below the line tactics were used to make customers aware that
they could register for the service and use it to send money to family in other parts of the country.
Leaflets were printed and distributed to all Roshan airtime dealers to help educate customers. All material
was provided in English and the local languages, Dari and Pashto.

After about 6 months, the Roshan team realized that although the campaign did stir strong emotional
reactions from customers, they were still confused about how the service worked. Roshan re-launched the
campaign as ‘The Hawala on your Mobile”. Since most people in the country are familiar with hawala
services, this positioning helped to clarify the offering and customer registrations started to pick up.

                                        Figure 4: M-Paisa Poster




                                   Source: Company Information, 2007




                                                                                                               Page 10
Initially, M-Paisa transactions were also priced similarly to M-PESA in Kenya which used a tiered
pricing model. In the tiered model, transaction values are banded into groups, with an upper and lower
limit, and a flat fee is set for each group. However, this pricing model proved to be particularly confusing
for Afghan customers and the company switched to a flat fee per transaction type. Details of the current
transaction fees for M-Paisa are provided in Figure 5.

                       Figure 5: M-Paisa Afghanistan Transaction Fees (USD)

                           Value Transaction                              Value ($)           Charge
                                                                      From          To          ($)

                              Cash Deposit                            1.00       2,000.00      Free
                  Send Money To Registered Customer                   1.00       2,000.00      1.00
                 Send Money To Unregistered Customer                  1.00       2,000.00      1.70
                Withdraw Money - Registered Customer                  1.00       2,000.00      0.50
               Withdraw Money - Unregistered Customer                 1.00       2,000.00      Free
                                          Additional Transactions
                             Balance Enquiry                              Once per day: Free
                                                                      More than once per day: 0.05
                               Change PIN                                 Once per day: Free
                                                                      More than once per day: 0.05
                            Change Language                               Once per day: Free
                                                                      More than once per day: 0.05
                          Change Secret Word                              Once per day: Free
                                                                      More than once per day: 0.05
         Source: Company Information, 2010




                                                                                                               Page 11
                                                                             Agents


Network Development
Agent network development is one of the biggest barriers to scaling the M-Paisa roll out in Afghanistan.
Convincing agents to invest in the business and to maintain a large enough float balance to support
transactions has proven extremely difficult. Even with larger commissions than were offered in Kenya and
Tanzania, Afghan agents are still skeptical of the value of offering the service. Business in Afghanistan is
still very transactional and agents have not progressed to a level where they see the future potential of a
service and are able to invest in it today.

Nonetheless, Roshan has begun implementing aggressive network development strategies and currently
has about 50 agent outlets servicing 5,000 microfinance clients across the country. Since recruiting agents
is so difficult, Roshan has been relying on its super dealer network to provide a pool of agents to recruit
from.

Another challenge to scaling the network in Afghanistan, is the fact that Roshan is not able to use the
                        9
agent aggregator model that was successfully applied in Kenya since the money service providers license
issued by the Central Bank of Afghanistan contains strict conditions stating that each agent of the service
will be the responsibility of Roshan and Roshan is therefore required to contract and manage each agent
outlet.

Selection Criteria
Since Roshan is directly responsible to the Central Bank of Afghanistan for the actions of the agents,
agents are carefully selected from Roshan’s the pool of existing airtime dealers. From this pool of agents,
Roshan looks for the following criteria:

•   Operates the business from a secure location (i.e. a kiosk or shop that has some facility to securely
    lock up the cash float)
•   Is able to deposit at least USD 500 for the initial cash float for each retail outlet
•   Is able to provide at least 2 handsets that are compatible with the service for use in each retail outlet
•   Can provide at least 2 part-time staff members to service transactions
•   Is willing to sign an agent agreement outlining their responsibilities in offering M-Paisa services
    (Appendix B)
•   Is willing to participate and to have their staff participate in product and anti money laundering
    (AML) training programs

Roles & Responsibilities
M-Paisa agents are responsible for registering new customers and facilitating cash deposits and
withdrawals. For each transaction they process, the agents are required to record the details in a paper log
book which is collected by the Roshan team each month and submitted to the Central Bank of
Afghanistan for their records.

Due to the high risk of terrorism financing and money laundering in Afghanistan, the anti money
laundering (AML) policy that has been drafted by Roshan is quite detailed and sets out strict guidelines
for appropriate agent conduct. Agents are required to attend AML training and to take an AML test that
will assess their understanding of the training. The agents are also required to directly report any
suspicious behavior to the Central Bank of Afghanistan and to avoid tipping off the end users.


9
  In the agent aggregator model, the operator signs a few deals with large master agents that are then
responsible for recruiting and managing smaller retail agent outlets. This enables rapid expansion of the
network with minimal effort on the part of the operator




                                                                                                                Page 12
Transaction limits are set at USD 2,000 per day for cash deposits, airtime purchases, transfers and
withdrawals.

Agents also play a critical role in customer education. Many new M-Paisa subscribers depend upon the
agent to explain the benefits of the system and to guide them through the first use of the M-Paisa menu.
Since the literacy rate in Afghanistan is extremely poor, Roshan relies on agents to verbally instruct
customers and to provide face-to-face support.

Value Proposition
As mentioned above, incentivizing agents is one of the biggest barriers to the development of the agent
network in Afghanistan. Although there is significant opportunity for the service to grow, agents are still
not quite convinced about their return on investment in M-Paisa. The existing value proposition is quite
weak and to compensate for this Roshan has provided a commission structure that is more attractive than
the ones offered in many other countries but Afghan agents are still more interested in airtime sales than
in offering money transfer services. The current value proposition for M-Paisa in Afghanistan consists of
the following elements:

Revenue: Agents earn commissions on every deposit, withdrawal and new customer registration that they
process. The commission for a deposit is on average about 0.54% (ranging from USD 0.04 to USD 1.36)
of the transaction value and 0.62% for a registered user withdrawal. A flat fee of USD 1 is paid for new
customer registrations and USD 0.04 is paid for each unregistered user withdrawal.

Increased Footfall: Agents also earn additional revenue since M-Paisa drives traffic into their place of
business and this serves as an opportunity for them to increase their bottom line.

Community Service: Agents are aware of the positive social and economic impact of M-Paisa in
Afghanistan and are proud to be able to offer a valuable service for the community.

Commission Structures
Incentivizing agents is a key concern for Roshan since it is so difficult to convince them of the value of
offering M-Paisa services. Agents are paid USD 1 for each new subscriber they register, but they only
receive this commission after the user has made their first transaction. This structure is in place to
discourage agents from fraudulently registering fake customers.

Agents also receive a commission for each deposit or withdrawal they process. Details of the commission
structure can be found in Figure 6. In order to give the agents some incentive to convince high value
users to register, Agents are paid more to process withdrawals for registered users as opposed to
                   10
unregistered users. When the unregistered user comes into the shop to receive their money transfer, the
agent can explain the benefits of the service and can take the customer through the registration process.
After the user is registered for M-Paisa and the withdrawal is processed, the agent will receive the
commission for registering the user as well as a higher withdrawal commission if the user has transacted
more than USD 20.




10
  An unregistered user is someone who has been sent money through M-Paisa but has not yet registered
for their own account




                                                                                                              Page 13
                                 Figure 6: M-Paisa Agent Commissions

                  Transaction type                           Transaction      range   Agent
                                                             USD                      commission
                                                                                      USD
                  VALUE                     MOVEMENT         min        max
                  TRANSACTIONS
                  Deposit Cash                                  1.00       20.00      0.04
                                                             20.01      100.00        0.18

                                                             100.01     200.00        0.34

                                                             200.01     400.00        0.68

                                                             400.01     1,000.00      1.36

                  Withdraw Cash                                 1.00       20.00      0.04

                  (registered user)                          20.01      100.00        0.18

                                                             100.01     200.00        0.54

                                                             200.01     400.00        0.68

                                                             400.01     1,000.00      1.36

                  Withdraw Cash                              1.00       1,000.00      0.04
                  (unregistered user)

                  Commission per M-PESA customer             n/a        n/a           1.00
                  registration

                  Commissions are inclusive of VAT & with-holding taxes where applicable
                  Source: Company Information, 2008


Liquidity Management
M-Paisa agents currently face severe liquidity management challenges since the product is mainly being
used by microfinance clients. Cash withdrawals and deposits are quite unbalanced with the number of
deposits by clients wishing to repay their loan far exceeding the number of withdrawals. This means that
agents need to keep a significant amount of M-Paisa funds available, requiring them to either tie up a
large amount of float in the system or to make frequent trips to the bank. In the coming months, Roshan
hopes to address this imbalance by increasing the number of users receiving their salary through M-Paisa.

Since M-Paisa was built off of the same platform as M-PESA in Kenya, similar float management tools
are available in the system including the ability to set warnings for the agent and the M-Paisa back office
when float amounts fall within dangerous levels, ability to transfer float between retail outlets and the
ability to change maximum and minimum float levels for individual retail outlets.

Another factor that contributes to the challenge of liquidity management in Afghanistan is the
underdeveloped banking infrastructure. There are only 300 bank branches throughout the country and
many of the rural regions do not have any formal bank presence at all.




                                                                                                              Page 14
                                                                                  Support


Agent Training
Unlike Safaricom, Roshan does not use an external firm to deliver training to agent outlets. Instead, they
have built a dedicated training team within the M-Paisa company to develop training material and
periodically deliver the training to new and existing agent outlets. This strategy has created a bottleneck
within the organization and has hindered the roll out of the network. However, at the time of launch it
was the only suitable option since an external agency that could meet the strict requirements of the
Central Bank and was willing to travel to the dangerous regions of the country could not be found.

A set of simple and clear training modules with screenshots and illustrations have been drafted to walk
agents through the main features of the system. Training sessions are typically 1-2 days long and are held
in small meeting rooms close to the agent outlets. Agency head office and store staff are provided with
different training material that is specific to the role they are required to fill. The first half of the training is
a workshop style session where the team presents the training material and uses a demo system to allow
the shop assistants to practice processing transactions. The second half of the training takes place at the
agent outlets where the team visits the shops to set up merchandising material, evaluate the shop
premises and make recommendations to the agent on how to organize and prepare for customer traffic in
the shop. A full agent training guide is detailed in Appendix C.

Network Management
Because of the precarious operating conditions in Afghanistan and the difficulty in hiring staff, Roshan
faces a big challenge in managing its agent network. Currently, the company relies on its internal team of
about 5 resources to monitor agent activity and organize training events. This challenge is one of the
reasons that the agent roll out has been so slow.

To help the team facilitate network management, standard procedures and templates have been prepared
and staff is sometimes borrowed on a part-time basis from the marketing firm that Roshan works with.
FMFB-A is also sometimes involved in facilitating agent training and monitoring. The M-Paisa team is
responsible for:

    •    Training Agents: Train staff in new agent outlets on how to successfully operate M-Paisa and on
         the AML procedures.
    •    Delivering Point of Sale Material: Responsible for the delivery of all resource materials
         including agent tills, transaction log books and registration forms.
    •    Branding Outlets: effectively provide and put up merchandising materials in all the shops
         including stickers indicating the agent number, notices to customers, tariff posters and signage.
    •    Monitoring Usage: Logging in to agent accounts to check that they are maintaining their float
         liquidity
    •    Quality Assurance: Following up on any customer complaints that are received about a specific
         retail outlet.

Risk
The UN has analyzed the impact of informal money transfer systems in Afghanistan and has determined
that there is an important connection between drugs and money transfer systems. In Faizabad, for example
during certain times of the year close to 100% of the liquidity of the hawala system in the province is
drug related. The southern region (Helmand and Kandahar provinces) is also a key centre for money




                                                                                                                        Page 15
laundering in Afghanistan (about 60% of the funds are drug related and 80-90% of the hawala dealers in
                                                                          11
Kandahar and Helmand are involved in money transfers related to narcotics.

For this reason, Roshan is extremely concerned about the risks of money laundering and terrorism
financing through M-Paisa and has implemented a number of policies and procedures to guard against
these risks. The company maintains a close relationship with the Central Bank of Afghanistan and
regularly reports on the money transfer activities of the high value users. Politically exposed persons
(PEPs) are required to follow a stricter registration procedure than normal customers and must be vetted
by the board of the company prior to being approved for the service. Furthermore, all M-Paisa users must
be over the age of 18 and are required to provide a copy of their national ID when registering for M-Paisa.

Roshan also follows guidelines to mitigate the internal risk of fraud. Employees that have a login to the
system (including FMFB-A staff) are required to undergo annual AML training and must pass a test
before they are allowed to transact on the system. Two or more employees are required to approve a large
back-office transaction before it can be processed by the bank. There is also a dedicated fraud department
within Roshan that monitors the system and highlights any suspicious activity to the management team.

Staff Requirements
Because of the difficult operating conditions and on-going conflict in Afghanistan, recruiting skilled
international staff is tremendously difficult and expensive. Furthermore, the availability of skilled local
staff is also limited since many people of working age are still relatively uneducated. As a result, Roshan
has faced a lot of difficulty in growing the M-Paisa company to be able to support expansion of the
service.

Currently, the team consists of about 7 full time staff that support all aspects of product management
including marketing, sales, financial reconciliation, compliance and training. In addition, there is a team
of about 10 call center representatives that man the 24/7 call center dedicated to M-Paisa enquiries.
Ideally, both the full-time team and the call center should be doubled within the next year to support
growth of the service.

Customer Training & Support
Customer education is a vital part of Roshan`s on-going strategy to increase awareness about M-Paisa
and to encourage adoption of the service. For microfinance clients, most user training is provided by their
loan officer. Loan officers are incentivized by Roshan to spend time taking the customer through the M-
Paisa menu and explaining the various features of the system.

Customer education is also provided to Roshan customers through the retail agents. When a new agent
is registered, they are trained to deliver a basic overview of the service to new users. Since the agents are
only paid their registration commission once the user has made their first transaction, this commission
also serves as an incentive for the agent to teach the user how to transact on the system.

Roshan has also tried to implement various educational campaigns through promotional material and
marketing initiatives. However, these have proven to be largely ineffective due to the high illiteracy rate
in the country. Roshan is now starting to offer short tips and instructions on the IVR system so users can
learn how to use the product even if they cannot read.

A 24/7 call center has been established to provide support to M-Paisa customers and agents.




11
  Byrd, William A.; Buddenberg, Doris, "1: Introduction and Overview", Afghanistan's Drug Industry
Book: Structure, Functioning, Dynamics and Implications for Counter-Narcotics Policy, United Nations
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC)




                                                                                                                Page 16
Appendix A
Sample Selection Criteria for Hawala Dealers12
In selecting financially sound hawalas dealers to work with, users apply a variety of selection criteria,
some of which include the following:

•    Be registered with the Central Bank, Da Afghanistan: The registration process includes making
     a deposit with the central bank and paying an annual license fee. There are no further legal and
     institutional requirements with which money exchange dealers must comply. Although the central
     bank currently does not conduct fitness and probity tests of applicants, determine the reasonableness
     of the applicants business plan or assess the adequacy of the capital proposed for the business, this is
     an important first step at ensuring the operators legitimacy.

•    Recognized by the Money Exchange Dealers Association: The market has an informal eight
     member Executive Committee that meets regularly to discuss its member’s affairs. The Committee’s
     Executive Director and his three assistants direct the activities of the Money Exchange Dealers
     Association and ensure that each member adheres to the Association’s unwritten rules of conduct and
     practices. Membership to the association is voluntary and there are no subscription fees. Membership
     is also an additional indicator the operator legitimacy

•    Maintain a physical presence at the Sari Shahzada in Kabul: The physical money exchange
     market, where the majority of Kabul’s money exchange dealers are currently located has an eighty-
     year-old history. Established alongside the Kabul River, it is situated close to the gold and silver
     bazaars and financial service to the metal traders. Kabul’s other specialized markets are all within
     walking distance of the market, from which traders conduct and conclude their financial transactions.
     Operators with a physical presence at the market are likely to have a longer operational history than
     those that do not.

•    Authorized to deal in foreign currencies: New central bank and banking laws have been drafted
     and rare expected to be passed soon. It is important that all transactions conducted through informal
     financial institutions are in compliance with these laws.

•    Be able to execute promptly a large number and volume of transactions: There is no limit on
     the volume of funds transfers the money exchange dealers of Kabul can transfer; individually or
     severally. The NGO’s alone are estimated to have channelled at least US$200 million in emergency,
     relief and development funding through the hawala system. Single transactions in excess of
     US$500,000, especially between Peshawar in Pakistan and Kabul, are not uncommon. The larger
     international organizations and NGO’s have made individual transactions of US$1,000,000. A basic
     assessment of the operator’s operational capacity needs to be done before being contracted.

•    Agree to issue promptly a detailed monthly statement of funds transfer transactions: Contrary
     to common belief, money exchange dealers maintain comprehensive records for each hawala
     transaction. The financial records the money exchange dealers maintain are detailed, and the entire
     process of remittance and settlement is very well documented. There are records of everything.
     Dealers know exactly how much cash they have, how much has been transferred and how much is
     owed to them. It is important that the accessibility of these documents for users is improved through
     an agreed financial statement review process.

•    Have established a satisfactory domestic and international correspondent funds transfer
     network: Regional money exchange dealers are generally situated located in a regional rather and


12
 Maimbo, Samuel, 2003. “ The Money Exchange Dealers of Kabul”. Finance and Private Sector Unit,
World Bank




                                                                                                                Page 17
    village or provincial town or city and service more than one province. For example, Kandahar based
    dealers may concentrate on the southern Afghan regions of Helmand, Oruzgan, and Zabol; The
    international dealers are mainly based in Kabul. They connect the domestic financial system to the
    rest of the world. Their counterparts are found in traditional trading cities on the Asian sub-
    continent: Tehran (Iran), Islamabad (Pakistan), and New Delhi (India); and in the Gulf cities and
    states of: Riyadh (Saudi Arabia), Doha (Qatar) Abu Dhabi and Dubai (United Arab Emirates), and
    Muscat (Oman). The government needs to determine which operators are able to serve its regions of
    interest.

•   Must have maintained an account in a formal commercial bank for at least five years: A
    relationship with a formal financial institution provides some measure of comfort about the probity of
    the money exchange dealer. Also, because banks are mandate to report any suspicious transactions
    involving client accounts, this measure provides additional oversight criteria. The money exchange
    dealer must provide the bank the authority to communicate with the central bank directly when
    providing the reference letter.

•   Charge reasonable fees for its services: The cost of making funds transfers into and around
    Afghanistan average 0 to 2 percent. However, as is common with every bazaar in South Asia, the
    final quotation depends on the negotiating skills of both parties and their understanding of how the
    market operates. Some money exchange dealers quote a flat fee of 2 percent on both international and
    domestic transactions. Yet, this is usually only a starting point for discussion. Discounts and
    premiums are offered and charged depending on the volume of the transaction, the financial
    relationship with the relationship, currency of exchange, security environment in Kabul and the
    destination of funds. The larger international organizations transferring US$200,000 or more per
    month pay less in fees than the local NGOs transferring US$7000 or less per month for their
    administrative expenses.




                                                                                                             Page 18
Appendix B

Money Service Provider Licensing Agreement for Agents
In accepting this license I agree to be bound by the following rules with the understanding that failure to
comply with these rules will result in the indefinite revocation of my MSP license.

1.    I will conduct only those money service businesses permitted on my license, and will conduct no
      other related money service businesses.
2.    I will conduct money service business only in those locations indicated on my license
3.    Only those people listed on my license will conduct money service business at the licensed
      locations.
4.    I will conduct my money service business using the record books issued by Da Afghanistan Bank
      (DAB) for recording customer and transaction information and will use no other media (electronic,
      paper, or other) for recording this information.
5.    I will provide the DAB’s Financial Intelligence Unit with exact and unaltered duplicate copies of
      each month’s transactions by the fifth business day of the following month using the carbonless copy
      found in my DAB-issued record books.
6.    I will transfer money and value as allowed by this license within Afghanistan only with holders of
      DAB-issued MSP licenses, or commercial bank licenses, or foreign bank branch permits and will
      record their license number in my transaction log.
7.    I will transfer money and value as allowed by this license outside of Afghanistan only with dealers
      who are properly licensed and permitted within their jurisdiction and will take steps to verify their
      legal ability to transfer money and value.
8.    I will attend all related training offered by DAB, including Anti-money laundering training.
9.    I will file Suspicious Activity Reports with the DAB’s Financial Intelligence Unit in accordance
      with training and guidelines issued by DAB.
10.   I will display my license at all times in a prominent location where it may be viewed by customers
      and potential customers
11.   I take complete and full responsibility for all those listed on my license who conduct money service
      business in my name
12.   I will not allow anyone not listed on my license to conduct money service business in my name
13.   I will abide by all other relevant rules and regulations issued by DAB




                                                                                                              Page 19
Appendix C

Agent Training Guide
Introduction

M-Paisa is a new service offered by Roshan Afghanistan with a money transfer service between all mobile
customers. This training manual will outline the method that is used to conduct a training session for M-
Paisa Agents.

Training Objectives

•   Educate Agents on how to become an M-Paisa Agent and the benefits of becoming an agent
•   Ensure that all Agents operating M-Paisa are aware of Anti-Money Laundering procedures and how
    to handle potential money laundering cases
•   Provide Agents with training on how to use the handset and registering new customers
•   Ensure Agents are aware of how to maintain their floats and their responsibilities as an M-Paisa
    Agent

Conducting Training Sessions

Pre-Training Checklist:
• Agent forms have been filled
• Agent Terms and Conditions have been signed
• Agent Floats have been deposited
• Agent is created in the system
• Agent SIMs have been setup (MSISDN to be assigned by SM)
• Place and time for the training session is confirmed and all materials are ready

Training Session - Materials required:
• Laptop with Training Module files
• Projector
• M-Paisa demonstration handsets and SIM Card Reader
• M-Paisa Customer Registration Forms and Terms and Conditions
• 2 Posters, 5 Stickers, and 100 Leaflets per shop
• M-Paisa Agent SIMs
• 500 M-Paisa SIMs per shop (250 HLR 1 and 250 HLR 2)
• Training Completion Forms

Training Preparation:
• Ensure familiarity with all M-Paisa content and transactions
• Read through presentations and be familiar with slides and process
• Read through M-Paisa Frequently Asked Questions document and familiarize yourself with potential
    questions from trainees

Presentation:
• Encourage trainees to ask questions during the training process as it is very important that they
    understand all aspects of the product and we get their perspective on M-Paisa
• If there is a question that you are not sure of the answer to, do not answer it, but document the
    question and get back to the trainee once you are sure about a response
• Questions that you do not know the answer to can be directed to the M-Paisa training team
    (abdulqadir.afridi@Roshan.af)
• Interactive training is often an effective means for trainees retaining information
     Conducting sample transactions on the handsets for agents is a good idea




                                                                                                            Page 20
•   The training process involves retaining a substantial amount of information. It is important to go
    through the content at a reasonable pace.
•   Take breaks to split up the content for groups
     Suggestion: Depending on how long each module is taking you can take a 10 minute break
        every 60 minutes

Agent Training

    Agent training can be completed over the course of two days

    •   Day 1 – module training

    •   Day 2 – assessing individual stores
         Ensure that the stores have all the needed material for offering the M-Paisa service and look
            presentable with M-Paisa marketing products
         Materials:
             Posters
             Stickers
             Leaflets
             SIM card reader
             Forms – customer registration form, terms and conditions
             M-Paisa Red SIMs

                 Agent Training
                                    Content                             Estimated Time
                 M-Paisa Overview (include demonstration)                   45 mins
                 Break                                                      15 mins
                 AML Training                                               30 mins
                 Becoming an M-Paisa Agent                                  15 mins
                 Register new M-Paisa Customer                              20 mins
                 SIM Data Transfer                                          10 mins
                 Register new Lite M-Paisa Customer                         20 mins
                 Break                                                      55 mins
                 Additional Transactions                                    45 mins
                 Agency Assistants                                          15 mins


                 Head Office Training:
                                     Content                            Estimated Time
                 Create new operator                                        15 mins
                 Balance floats through web screens                         15 mins
                 Balance floats through handset                             15 mins
                 Organization Deposit of Funds                              15 mins
                 Organization Withdraw Funds                                15 mins


Post-Training Responsibilities:
• Fill out Training Record spreadsheet specifying who gave and received M-Paisa training as well as
    the training date
• Each individual trainee should fill out a training waiver, which should be collected and completed by
    trainer at the end
• Distribute customer registration forms to agents during Day 2




                                                                                                          Page 21
