    Report No: 117432-GM
.




    The Gambia
    Fragility Risk and Resilience Assessment

.
    June 9, 2017


.
    A Joint AfDB-WB Report




.
          Acronyms
Acronym       Definition
AfDB          African Development Bank
APRC          Alliance for Patriotic Reorientation and
              Construction
CPIA          Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
ECOWAS        Economic Community of West African States
ERP           Economic Reform Program
EU            European Union
FAO           Food and Agriculture Organization of the United
              Nations
FSI           Fragile States Index
GDP           gross domestic product
IMF           International Monetary Fund
HDI           Human Development Index
MFM-GP        Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global
              Practice (World Bank)
MPI           Multidimensional Poverty Index
NGO           nongovernmental organization
PHC           primary health care
UDP           United Democratic Party
UNDP          United Nations Development Programme
UNHCR         United Nation High Commission for Refugees
UNOCHA        United Nation Office for the Coordination of
              Humanitarian Affairs
WB            World Bank




                                                                ii
                                                                 Contents
Acronyms .............................................................................................................................. ii
Contents .............................................................................................................................. iii
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................... 1
Foreword .............................................................................................................................. 2
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... 4
1.       Introduction................................................................................................................... 8
     1.1. A Brief Overview of The Gambia ........................................................................................................ 8
     1.2. Historical Context............................................................................................................................. 10
2.       Drivers of Fragility ........................................................................................................ 11
     2.1. Political Instability............................................................................................................................ 11
     2.2. Slow Growth, High Inequality, and Unsustainable Fiscal Balances ................................................. 15
     2.3. The Limited Capacity of the Public Administration .......................................................................... 16
     2.4. Structural Vulnerabilities and Exogenous Shocks ............................................................................ 18
     Source: The Gambia Population Census 2003, CIA World Factbook, 2013 ............................................ 21
     2.5. Regional Instability and External Relations ..................................................................................... 21
3.       Sources of Resilience .................................................................................................... 22
     4.1 The Diaspora ..................................................................................................................................... 23
     4.2 The Role of ECOWAS and Its Member States.................................................................................... 23
     4.3 Women and Youth ............................................................................................................................ 24
     4.4 Migration .......................................................................................................................................... 24
4.       External Assistance: Risks and Benefits......................................................................... 25
5.       Conclusions and Recommendations ............................................................................. 28
     5.1. Recommendations ........................................................................................................................... 30
Annex 1. International Indicators of Fragility ....................................................................... 34
Annex 2. The Political Situation ........................................................................................... 37
Annex 3. Lessons from The Gambia’s 1985 Fiscal Crisis ......................................................... 45
Annex 4. The Environment................................................................................................... 48
Endnotes ............................................................................................................................. 50




                                                                                                                                                             iii
                              Acknowledgements
This report was prepared jointly by staff from the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the World Bank.
Emile Kemayou (Principal Political Economist, West Africa Regional Development and Business Delivery)
and Hadja Tall (Senior Governance Officer, West Africa Development and Business Delivery) led the AfDB
team, and Patricia Geli (Economist, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice) led the
World Bank team. Giulio de Tommaso (Consultant) provided background papers, and Sean Lothrop
(Consultant) revised and edited the report.

The work was carried out under the general direction of Sibry Tapsoba (Director, AfDB), Louise Cord
(Country Director, World Bank) and Lars Christian Moller (Practice Manager, World Bank). The teams
would like to thank Yannis Arvanitis, Basil Jones and Alex Yeanay from AfDB, as well as Senait Assefa, Kevin
Carey, Annette de Kleine-Feige, Emilie Jourdan, Mary Morrison, Carolina Quintero, and Paolo Zacchia from
the World Bank for providing comments and suggestions. The teams are very grateful for the feedback
provided by development partners at the European Commission, Food and Agriculture Organization,
International Monetary Fund, the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS), the United
Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR), and World Health
Organization.

The team would like to thank the Gambian authorities for their collegial assistance in carrying out this
assessment. H.E. Amadou Sanneh (Minister of Finance), H.E. Omar Jallow (Minister of Agriculture), H.E.
Hamat Bah (Minister of Tourism and Culture), and H.E. Hassan Boubacar Jallow (Chief Justice) deserve
special acknowledgement for their valuable support, as do the Permanent Secretaries of the Ministries of
Finance, the Interior, Trade, and Youth and Sports for meeting with the teams and making their staff
available during missions.

The teams would also like to extend heartfelt thanks to the civil-society representatives that attended
mission meetings and provided critical local knowledge about the situation in the Gambia, including Mr.
Ebrima Sall (Executve Secretary of CODESRIA), Ms. Fatou Jagne (Regional Director for Article19), and Mr.
Kalifa M Fall and Mr. Salieu Tall (founders of #Gambiahasdecided).

Finally, the teams are extremely grateful to Habiba Ben Barka (former Senior Political Economist, AfDB)
who began the analysis and worked tirelessly to facilitate the development of a framework for
collaboration between the AfDB and the World Bank, and to Richard Olowo (Lead Procurement Specialist,
World Bank) who helped guide the work through the concept stage.
                                           Foreword
This report is the product of a collaboration between the World Bank Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management Global Practice (MFM-GP) and the African Development Bank (AfDB) Transition States
Coordination Office. The World Bank and AfDB have longstanding relationships with The Gambia, and like
many of the country’s development partners, both institutions are reassessing their role following the
tumultuous 2016 presidential election and subsequent landmark transfer of political power. This report
is designed to inform the development of new AfDB and World Bank engagement strategies by identifying
priority areas for policy support and by highlighting potential risks.
The report was prepared at a defining moment in The Gambia’s history, as the 22-year rule of former
President Yayah Jammeh has given way to the democratically elected administration of President Adama
Barrow. The new government is striving to address the political, social, and economic turbulence
generated by this momentous transition and to maintain a nonpartisan political consensus for reform
following the legislative elections held in April 2017. Meanwhile, the country’s beleaguered public
administration has been tasked with implementing deep structural reforms while continuing to execute
its core functions. In this difficult context, the authorities will need to maximize the strategic impact of
external assistance while mitigating the associated risks. The following report is designed to provide a
framework for engagement by AfDB and World Bank and the country’s other development partners,
leveraging their resources and experience to address the causes of fragility and reinforce resilience in a
manner that reflects The Gambia’s unique political, economic, and institutional circumstances.
In countries in fragile situations, carefully targeted engagement can have a transformational impact, and
appropriate external assistance can mark the difference between the restoration of a functional public
sector that supports economic growth and a descent into a vicious cycle of institutional failure and political
dysfunction. However, external assistance also entails risks and challenges in fragile situations that are
distinct from those involved in traditional development support. Given the pivotal importance of
formulating an effective strategy for donor engagement in The Gambia, the AfDB and the World Bank’s
MFM-GP are striving to better understand the contextual factors that contribute to the country’s fragility
and identify socioeconomic assets that can be leveraged to bolster its resilience.
Due to the dynamic and volatile nature of countries in fragile situations, fragility analysis is an ongoing
process. Political, social, and economic developments must be closely monitored, and findings that are
not regularly updated can swiftly become obsolete. In The Gambia, the recent legislative elections are
already realigning the political landscape; each week brings new revelations about the state of the public
finances in the wake of the Jammeh regime; and an ongoing process of both rural-urban migration and
large-scale emigration is altering the country’s social and economic dynamics in complex ways. While the
Barrow administration’s efforts to consolidate and restructure the Gambian public sector appear to be
gaining traction, the pace, scope, and impact of the reform process remain uncertain, and the civilian
government’s relationship with the military represents a particularly acute source of risk. Each of these
dynamics is unique to The Gambia’s current historical moment, and their evolution cannot be predicted
on the basis of past experience.
While the country’s rapidly changing circumstances require close monitoring, data constraints are
especially binding in The Gambia, as they are in many countries in fragile situations. The international
experience underscores the importance of leveraging innovative information-gathering techniques in
cases where traditional information sources are inadequate. Multi-donor collaboration is especially vital
in context where information is limited, and over the years many of The Gambia’s external development
partners have analyzed the country’s economic, social, and political dynamics, providing a crucial


                                                                                                            2
complement to the government’s limited statistics. A collaborative approach can accommodate a broader
range of perspectives, strengthen the validity of the analysis, and provide a common framework for
engagement. Despite the Jammeh regime’s repression of the domestic media, diaspora-based news
organizations have flourished over the past two decades, and press reports are a richer source of
information in The Gambia than in other fragile contexts.
This report is intended to provide the foundation for an ongoing process of fragility analysis in The Gambia.
Both the AfDB and the World Bank have allocated resources to monitor and assess the country’s transition
to democratic rule, allowing the AfDB and World Bank teams to regularly update the analysis presented
below, revising its conclusions and recommendations to reflect developments on the ground. While this
analysis attempts to encompass a broad range of political, economic, and social dynamics, a number of
important subjects, including (i) the impact of urbanization, (ii) the status of local governments, especially
in rural areas, (iii) the ongoing low-intensity conflict in Senegal’s Casamance region, (iv) the evolving role
of women in Gambian society, and (v) large-scale emigration deserve additional study. The selection of
subjects covered in this report reflects the country’s current circumstances, the teams’ analytical
resources, and the need for careful prioritization in fragile contexts. Rather than a comprehensive
exploration of all drivers of fragility and resilience in The Gambia, this report represents a starting point
for a systematic, ongoing analytical process.

Several of The Gambia’s other international development partners have expressed an interest in joining
a productive dialogue on issues of fragility and resilience. The joint AfDB-World Bank team is developing
a participatory forum to accommodate this dialogue. Additional priority areas for multi-stakeholder
collaboration include creating a database of fragility indicators, establishing a harmonized monitoring
framework, and strengthening the government’s capacity to design policies and programs that effectively
mitigate fragility. While this report strives to address a wide range of fragility-related issues, additional
analysis will be necessary to inform a robust policy dialogue, and priority areas for further study—
including those mentioned above—are identified in the report’s conclusions.




                                                                                                            3
                              Executive Summary
The Gambia is the smallest country in continental Sub-Saharan Africa, spanning just 11,300 square
kilometers, and it shares a single 749-kilometer overland border with Senegal. A small, densely
populated country with very limited natural resources, The Gambia relies heavily of its ties with the global
economy. Agriculture is the country’s largest economic sector, but underdeveloped irrigation networks
leave food production highly vulnerable to unpredictable rainfall patterns and other weather-related
shocks. The Gambia produces approximately 50 percent of its domestic food requirements, and many
small farming households do not produce a marketable surplus. Tourism exports and remittances are the
country’s main sources of foreign exchange. The Gambia’s principal tourism source markets are in Europe,
which is also the country’s primary source of remittance income.

A legacy of authoritarianism, weak public institutions, political instability, and the limited capacity of
the public administration are the most salient causes of state fragility in The Gambia. While most
countries in the West Africa region have become increasingly stable over the past decade, The Gambia’s
fragility indicators have steadily worsened. Years of authoritarian misrule under the regime of former
President Yahya Jammeh have severely undermined the capacity of the public sector to execute its core
functions, and a legacy of corruption and patronage has eroded popular confidence in the integrity of
public institutions. In an effort to consolidate his base of support, Jammeh deliberately stoked ethnic and
religious tensions, weakening the social norms that had long held them in check. Meanwhile, ancillary
factors such as large-scale rural-urban migration and deteriorating environmental quality have
destabilized an already tenuous social, political, and economic equilibrium.

The Jammeh regime held power for over two decades, and the new government elected in December
2016 has little political experience to bring to bear against a complex array of challenges. Few members
of the current administration have previously held public office, and many of those that have did so before
the 1994 coup that brought Yayha Jammeh to power. These policymakers must lead a public
administration marked by a legacy of institutional dysfunction, as the Jammeh regime systematically
weakened certain elements of the government, while warping others to suit its authoritarian purposes.
The civil-service incentive structure does not encourage performance, and years of mismanagement have
stripped public institutions of vital physical, financial, and human resources. An especially sharp
deterioration in institutional quality has been observed since 2011, and data are not yet available on the
state of the public administration in the wake of the political crisis.

The fragmentation of public-service delivery across a huge number of subvented agencies reduces
expenditure efficiency, increases the administrative complexity of the public sector, limits the
transparency of resource allocation, and obscures accountability for specific outcomes.1 These issues
are compounded by the overlapping mandates of various ministries and public agencies. Low salaries,
frequent administrative reorganizations, political purges, ethnic favoritism, and other factors have
spurred an exodus of qualified civil servants, and corruption is now endemic in the Gambian public sector
as demonstrated by the CPIA score for Transparency, Accountability and Corruption in the Public Sector
of 2.0 which is well below the Sub-Saharan Africa score of 2.7. Moreover, decades of undemocratic
governance have weakened Gambian civil society, diminishing its capacity to advocate for good
governance.

While improving the overall quality of the public administration will be essential to long-term stability
and economic growth, the new government’s most urgent priority will be to maintain public security


                                                                                                          4
while consolidating civilian control over the military. The new Government of Adama Barrow has moved
quickly to replace the leadership of the Armed Forces and the Prison System, which had been the pillars
of his predecessor’s regime. The government intends to carry out further in-depth systemic reforms in
short order. This vacuum has presented an opportunity for groups and individuals seeking to further
destabilize the country. The new government is keenly aware that a terrorist attack could have a
disastrous impact on the recovery of the tourism industry, and the authorities are taking terrorist risks
very seriously. Widespread corruption has also enabled the growth of organized crime, and international
criminal syndicates have a strong stake in further undermining The Gambia’s public institutions. ECOWAS
peacekeepers were deployed to The Gambia to assist in resolving the political crisis, but only the country’s
domestic security services will be able to address its long-term challenges. Before substantial progress
can be made, however, the government must normalize relations with the armed forces and the broader
security sector. Providing justice for the victims of human rights abuses committed by the security services
at the behest of the previous administration will be a difficult process, especially in the context of an
ongoing political transition.

In the absence of preexisting democratic norms, the political environment is inherently unpredictable.
Former President Jammeh was defeated by a seven-party coalition, which supported current President
Adama Barrow as a nonpartisan unity candidate. The coalition’s pre-election agreement called for the
Barrow government to restore fair democratic processes, reestablish legislative and judicial checks on the
authority of the executive branch, and hold new presidential elections within three years. However, the
recent legislative elections have strained relationships between coalition partners, and the commanding
victory of the United Democratic Party—the erstwhile party of President Barrow—could create a strong
incentive for the party to approve constitutional reforms that protect incumbency rather than promoting
democratic competition, or that maintain the supremacy of the executive branch rather than establishing
a robust system of checks and balances. As The Gambia has not had a functional multiparty government
since 1994, there is no basis for predicting how the political situation will evolve.

In this context of political uncertainty and institutional dysfunction, a combination of long-term
structural vulnerabilities and short-term economic shocks is exacerbating food insecurity. The Gambia
is on the verge of a nutrition emergency. Aggregate food production is far below aggregate demand, and
poor rainfall has reduced the output of smallholder farmers. Inadequate household production and rising
food prices are contributing to large-scale emigration, and the departure of tens of thousands of
Gambians, including many of the country’s most productive workers, will have complex social and
economic ramifications for years to come.

A legacy of unsustainable macro-fiscal management has increased the Gambian economy’s sensitivity
to external shocks. Agriculture and tourism are the mainstays of the Gambian economy, and recent
shocks to both sectors have underscored its vulnerability to exogenous circumstances. While adverse
weather conditions have depressed agricultural production, a combination of spillover effects from the
regional Ebola crisis and the disruptive impact of recent political instability has negatively affected the
tourism sector. After rebounding to 4.1 percent in 2015, the GDP growth rate fell to an estimated
2.5 percent in 2016 and is projected to rise only slightly to 3 percent in 2017. Restoring macroeconomic
stability, accelerating growth, and maintaining sustainable debt dynamics will require a well-calibrated
policy response combined with substantial external support.

The Gambia is highly susceptible to multiple forms of environmental damage, and environmental
degradation is a major source of fragility. Rapid population growth is intensifying environmental
pressure, and the country’s weak public institutions are incapable of enforcing environmental protections.



                                                                                                          5
In the rural sector, deforestation and desertification are severely damaging local ecosystems while in
urban Banjul and Kanifing, population pressures are straining the capacity of public institutions to manage
the urban environment.

Rapid demographic changes are destabilizing the traditional social equilibrium. While The Gambia has
long been regarded as a regional model of ethnic pluralism, ongoing demographic changes are weakening
traditional social systems. Urbanization poses an especially significant challenge, as the arrival of large
numbers of unemployed young people in Banjul and other cities further strains already inadequate urban
infrastructure and overwhelms the capacity of municipal governments, leading to rising crime, drug
abuse, and the general deterioration of the urban environment. Meanwhile, rural areas are losing
important labor resources and experiencing a profound demographic shift. Women, girls, and members
of female-headed households are especially vulnerable to crime, exploitation, and the loss of household
labor. The gender dimensions of both rural-urban migration and large-scale emigration are a priority area
for further research.

A combination of slow economic growth, limited employment prospects, political instability and food
insecurity has driven a dramatic increase in emigration. Many Gambians emigrated to Europe during the
Jammeh regime, but in recent years the country’s increasing fragility has caused emigration to escalate
so radically that Gambians are now Europe’s second-largest diaspora as a share of the home-country
population. The size of the Gambian diaspora has mixed implications for fragility and resilience. While the
loss of skilled labor through emigration has long slowed the country’s economic development, remittance
income is an increasingly crucial component of household consumption. Moreover, the recent exodus has
alleviated pressure on the labor market and eased the rising social discontent caused by the deteriorating
economic situation. These factors may have helped The Gambia avoid violent conflict despite its
increasing fragility. Going forward, the government should strive to fully leverage the potential of the
Gambian diaspora to strengthen the country’s global economic ties and rebuild its depleted social capital.

The Gambia has long had a complex and contentious relationship with neighboring Senegal. Diplomatic
and trade relations deteriorated during the Jammeh regime, but the new administration is seeking a
rapprochement. While stronger bilateral relations contribute to resilience in both countries, the ongoing
low-level conflict in Senegal’s Casamance region is a persistent driver of fragility. The Gambia’s Foni
Kanilai region, which borders on Casamance, appears to be especially vulnerable to instability and conflict.
This area has long been isolated and insecure, and many local communities were closely aligned with the
Jammeh regime. There are reports that Jammeh loyalists from the military and security forces have
relocated to the Kanilai region, and it remains a stronghold of support for the former president’s political
party2.

The political crisis that followed the presidential election in December exposed many of the factors
driving the country’s fragility, but it also underscored critical sources of resilience. While the crisis
further strained an already delicate social, political and economic equilibrium, The Gambia’s ability to
sustain the momentous shock of regime change without falling into destructive conflict reflected the
strength of the country’s stabilizing forces. Five sources of resilience played an especially important role
in avoiding a decent into conflict: the Gambian diaspora which directly supported financially, morally and
politically the population of The Gambia, neighbor governments and regional institutions, which took a
proactive role in defusing the political situation, women and youth who took a leadership position in the
organization of the political response in the aftermath of the election, and large-scale emigration which
in some ways alleviated the strong demographic, economic and political pressures confronting the




                                                                                                          6
country. Going forward, the government and its development partners can reinforce these sources of
resilience and attempt to maximize their contribution to social, political, and economic stability.
The government should integrate conflict prevention into its social and economic policies. Development
programs should include activities designed to improve the welfare of young people, promote
intercommunity dialogue, raise awareness of critical social issues, strengthen social cohesion, and build
trust in public institutions. Gender equity and social protection should be mainstreamed into economic
policy, and investment projects should be subject to rigorous environmental impact assessments. The
government should incorporate fragility indicators into strategic policy documents, including the national
development plan and the central government budget, as well as economic and social programs and
public-investment projects. Given the importance of rigorous data collection, the authorities should
consider establishing a statistical observatory dedicated to monitoring fragility.

Due to its heightened fragility, engagement in The Gambia poses important reputational risks for its
development partners, yet external assistance will be essential to consolidate political and economic
stability. The overarching objective of The Gambia’s development partners should be to reestablish
credible and impartial political institutions. Enhancing parliamentary rules and processes will be critical to
the functioning of the legislature and should be regarded as a priority area for external engagement, and
the importance of strengthening the judiciary is a matter of nonpartisan consensus among Gambian
policymakers. Moreover, creating a diverse and inclusive public administration will be essential to restore
social cohesion as the new government strives to overcome a legacy of ethnic favoritism. In light of the
government’s limited capacity for data-collection and analysis, the authorities will rely on their
development partners to provide detailed information on evolving social and demographic dynamics as
well as the distributional implications of proposed policies. Managing perceptions and expectations will
be vital to the success of the political transition, and the government will need support to develop its
capacity for communications and public outreach. The Gambia’s development partners should draw on
their extensive international experience to assist the government in constructing an analytical framework
for assessing fragility and formulating policies to enhance the country’s social, political, and economic
resilience.




                                                                                                            7
                                    1. Introduction
1. This analysis explores the causes of state fragility in The Gambia and identifies priority policy actions
to bolster macroeconomic stability and reinforce the resilience of public institutions. In countries in
fragile situations, a carefully targeted engagement strategy can have a transformative impact, and
appropriate external assistance can mark the difference between the restoration of a functional public
sector and a descent into a vicious cycle of institutional failure and conflict. Given the pivotal importance
of engagement in countries in fragile situations, the African Development Bank (AfDB) and the World
Bank’s Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice (MFM-GP) are striving to better
understand the factors driving fragility in The Gambia and formulate a strategic approach to policy
support, development programming, and project design that reflects the country’s unique political,
economic, and institutional circumstances.
2. This report is the product of a collaboration between the MFM-GP and the AfDB’s Transition Support
Department. The analysis was undertaken at a particularly critical moment in The Gambia’s history, as
the 22-year rule of former President Yahya Jammeh gives way to the democratically elected
administration of President Adama Barrow. The new government has struggled to address the political,
social, and economic turbulence generated by the transition, by a legacy of mismanagement, and by
climatic shocks.
3. The analysis was carried out over the course of six months, beginning in October 2016. The AfDB and
the World Bank independently assessed the evolving situation in The Gambia ahead of the recent
presidential election. The AfDB undertook an initial analysis of the country’s political, economic, and social
dynamics designed to identify drivers of fragility and conflict, as well as sources of stability and resilience.
Meanwhile, the World Bank carried out a preliminary Risk and Reliability Assessment in line with its
standard procedures. The AfDB also evaluated the period immediately preceding the election, and its
turbulent aftermath which is known in The Gambia as “the Impasse.”
4. The World Bank and AfDB teams conducted a joint Fragility and Resilience Mission in Banjul and
Dakar between February 24 and March 9, 2017. The mission’s objective was to evaluate the rapidly
evolving political and economic situation in the aftermath of the presidential election and to discuss with
government and civil-society stakeholders the issues identified in previous analyses. The mission findings
formed the basis for a comprehensive assessment of political, social, and economic dynamics in The
Gambia, including its external and domestic vulnerabilities, the capacity limitations of its public sector,
potential sources of conflict, and priority areas for engagement by the international development
community.

1.1. A Brief Overview of The Gambia
5. The Gambia’s small size and unusual shape are artifacts of its colonial history. Although it has access
to international markets via the Port of Banjul, The Gambia borders only one other country, Senegal. Due
to its location between the metropolitan hub of Dakar to the north and the national capitals of Bissau and
Conakry to the south, The Gambia is a part of an important overland transit corridor, and it has close
economic ties with its regional neighbors. Despite its small geographic size, The Gambia is culturally
diverse, and a patchwork of ethnic groups transcends its political borders. While transnational cultures
strengthen The Gambia’s ties to its regional neighbors, they can also transmit instability and conflict across
borders.
6. The Gambia is the smallest country in continental Sub-Saharan Africa, spanning just 11,300 square
kilometers. It winds along a narrow strip of land that spans the Gambia River, and water covers 10 percent


                                                                                                              8
of its total surface area. The river runs from east to west, dividing the country into two banks, each of
which is 25 to 50 kilometers wide and about 300 kilometers long.3
Figure 1. Map of The Gambia




Source: Maps of the World, www.mapsofworld.com.
7. The Gambia shares its entire 749-kilometer overland border with Senegal. There is no natural division
between the two countries and no physical landmark to distinguish the border. This situation presents
both challenges and opportunities. On the one hand, The Gambia is able to take advantage of the
geographic buffer that Senegal provides against regional instability, and Senegal is effectively responsible
for The Gambia’s external security. On the other hand, Gambia’s political and economic interests are
heavily intertwined with those of Senegal, and the latter exerts significant influence over the former.4
8. In addition to the challenges posed by its small size and atypical geography, The Gambia has very
limited natural resources. Agriculture is the country’s largest sector, accounting for 33 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP).5 Irrigation networks and other forms of sectoral infrastructure are
underdeveloped, and agricultural output is highly vulnerable to unpredictable rainfall patterns and
weather-related shocks. The country produces approximately 50 percent of its domestic food
requirements, and many small farming households do not produce a marketable surplus. Consequently,
rice imports are crucial to The Gambia’s food security.6
9. The Gambia relies heavily on its ties to the global economy. Tourism exports and remittances are its
main sources of foreign exchange.7 The Gambia’s diplomatic relationship with Senegal is vital to the
economic success of both countries, as they share an integrated road network. The Gambia’s principal
tourism source markets are in Europe, which increases its sensitivity to economic conditions in the
European Union (EU).
10. The Gambia is among the most densely populated countries in Africa. Its population is young and
growing rapidly. The median age is just over 20. Almost three-fifths of the population is under the age of
24, and almost 40 percent is under the age of 15. The population is growing at an average rate of
2.11 percent per year, and the total population has quadrupled over the past 30 years.8
11. Not only is The Gambia ethnically diverse, but unlike other countries in West Africa, many individual
Gambian communities are home to a wide range of ethnicities and languages.9 This is especially true in
rural areas, where different ethnic groups often coexist within the same village. The Gambia has roughly
nine distinct ethnic groups, of which the Mandinka/Jahanka are the largest, accounting for approximately
34 percent of the total population. The Fulani/Tukulur/Lorobo10 make up another 22 percent of the
population, the Wolof 12.2 percent, the Jola approximately 11 percent, and the Serahuleh 7 percent. All



                                                                                                          9
other Gambian ethnic groups compose about 8 percent of the population, and non-Gambians represent
another 6 percent.11
12. Despite its ethnic diversity, The Gambia has traditionally managed ethnic tensions peacefully within
the context of its existing social structures. Most ethnic groups share similar class hierarchies, which are
often inherited from ancient societies, and interethnic marriages are common and widely accepted.
Almost 90 percent of the population is Sunni Muslim, and close to 9 percent is Christian, predominantly
Roman Catholic. Intermarriage between Muslims and Christians is common.12 Shared social norms and
frequent intermarriage have helped to mitigate cross-cultural tensions and build a unified sense of
national identity.13,14

1.2. Historical Context
13. In the early 19th century, Great Britain established a military post on Banjul Island. In 1888, the
British seized the river and the land on both sides of it, separating The Gambia from Senegal.15 Under
British rule, a Gambian legislature was established, which gradually assumed greater political
responsibility. Political parties emerged in the 1950s, reflecting a diverse mix of ethnic and regional
interests.16 Great Britain began expanding the political autonomy of The Gambia in the early 1960s, and
the country achieved full independence in 1965. Initially, urban-focused parties based in the capital
dominated Gambian politics, but during the period of partial self-government in 1963, the balance of
power began to tilt toward rural areas. In 1970, the People’s Progressive Party successfully organized rural
voters to win a decisive victory in the legislature and then leveraged its power to pass a new constitution,
which formally integrated the country’s traditional power structures by giving tribal chiefs a voice in the
legislature. Prime Minister Dawda Jawara was elected president under the new constitution and
subsequently reelected to five successive terms.17 While Gambians enjoyed constitutionally protected
rights to free speech, freedom of religion, and freedom of the press, President Jawara and the People’s
Progressive Party remained the principal force in national politics for several decades.18
14. The Gambia emerged as a rare pluralistic society in post-independence Africa, and until 1994 it was
one of only four functioning democracies in the region. Between 1960 and 1992, The Gambia held 11
legislative and five presidential elections, all of which were deemed free and fair by international
observers. However, Gambian democracy was not immune to corruption or partisan dysfunction, and
political patronage systems gradually began to take root. In 1981, a leftist military faction attempted to
seize power, prompting President Jawara to appeal to Senegal for military assistance. Senegal deployed
troops to The Gambia, and at least 500 people died during the resulting struggle. Pro-Jawara forces
prevailed, and the coup was put down in a matter of days.19 In the wake of the coup attempt, The Gambia
and Senegal formed the Senegambia Confederation, which lasted until 1989.
15. In July 1994, President Jawara was deposed in a second, bloodless coup by junior army officers.20
The coup leaders enjoyed a measure of popular support, but the coup marked the end of democratic rule
for over two decades. The new president, Yahya Jammeh, consolidated political power, repressed dissent,
and used both state forces and paramilitary groups to quell political opposition.21 During his 22-year rule,
President Jammeh created an extensive security apparatus that permeated every aspect of Gambian
politics and society. Meanwhile, the quality of public institutions outside the security sector steadily
deteriorated.
16. Multiple elections were held during the administration of President Jammeh, but participation was
limited, and international observers consistently described these elections as neither free nor fair.22 The
Jammeh administration openly used public resources to support the president’s party, the Alliance for
Patriotic Reorientation and Construction (APRC), and it employed both the state security services and
vigilante groups to intimidate the opposition. The regime also attempted to exploit ethnic divisions to


                                                                                                         10
consolidate its political base. President Jammeh favored his own tribal group, the Jola, and attempted to
marginalize the Mandinka. The president attempted to consolidate power by pitting a coalition of ethnic
and cultural minority groups against the Mandinka plurality.23 Representatives of opposition parties have
alleged that noncitizen Jola from Senegal were illegally added to voter rolls. Ethnicity was regarded as a
key factor in determining senior appointments in both the security sector and the civil service, as the
regime appeared to systematically favor the appointment of Jolas, Manjagos, Balantas, and Karonicas to
mid-level and senior positions in the public administration.24 The regime became increasingly anti-
Mandinka in its rhetoric and its security policies, and the government attempted to limit the social,
political, and economic participation of the Mandinka. Over time, these policies began to erode the social
cohesion that the country had developed in the post-independence period.
17. The Gambia’s economic performance during the Jammeh administration was generally weak and
propped up by unsustainable macro-fiscal policies. The country’s GDP growth rate averaged a modest
3.75 percent between 1994 and 2016, and macro-fiscal management during the Jammeh administration
was consistently poor. The national poverty rate has declined slightly over time, but remains high by global
standards. And while some social indicators have improved, inequality remains a major challenge, and
The Gambia’s Gini coefficient is one of the highest among members of the Economic Community of West
African States (ECOWAS). Unemployment is widespread, and the country’s business environment is not
conducive to investment and diversification.25 The Jammeh regime left the country in an extremely
difficult fiscal position, with a large public debt burden, low public financial management capacity,
insolvent state-owned enterprises, and severely depleted international reserves.


                            2. Drivers of Fragility
2.1. Political Instability
18. The Gambia has become increasingly fragile over the past decade, even as the region has become
somewhat more stable overall. Since 2007, the country’s fragility indicators have steadily worsened.
Meanwhile, other countries in the region that have long suffered from fragility, such as Guinea, appear to
be moving toward greater stability and resilience. The presence of multiple fragile and transitional states
in its immediate vicinity presents challenges for The Gambia, just as the increased fragility of The Gambia
presents challenges for its regional neighbors.
19. While the initial crisis that followed the end of the Jammeh administration has now passed,
restoring political equilibrium will be a long-term process. President Barrow is supported by a coalition
of seven political parties. These parties were united by their common interest in wresting power from
former President Jammeh, and they are currently attempting to craft a shared political agenda. The recent
legislative elections have clarified the political landscape. The United Democratic Party (UDP), the
historical opposition to Jammeh’s APRC, has emerged as the country’s dominant political party, capturing
31 of the 53 seats in the legislature. The UDP is widely perceived as a Mandinka-dominated party, although
it has tried to shed that perception by nominating a Fulani26, Adama Barrow, as its standard-bearer in the
presidential election. While the decisiveness of the UDP’s victory has strengthened the government’s
ability to legislate, it may have also weakened the coalition’s claim to represent a broad-based, multi-
ethnic, multi-community consensus, which is important to the success of inter-ethnic dialogue and
peaceful political collaboration.27
20. Following the Jammeh regime’s decades-long rule, relatively few members of the current
administration have substantial governing experience, and many of those who do have not held office


                                                                                                         11
since before the 1994 coup. The Jammeh regime’s years of mismanagement and neglect have badly
eroded the country’s public institutions. A legacy of arbitrary and undemocratic governance, combined
with pervasive political and petty corruption and low public administrative capacity, are causing state
fragility indicators in The Gambia to deteriorate rapidly. Due to the opaque and insular nature of the
previous regime, only a handful of high-level political figures have a working knowledge of the Gambian
public administration. While this offers an opportunity to make a decisive break with the policies and
values of the previous government, it also complicates reform efforts, as many of the political figures
charged with implementing reforms have limited experience with the Gambian public sector and lack
strong working relationships with career civil servants.
The new government’s most urgent priority will be to maintain public security while consolidating civilian
control over the military
21. Following a tumultuous political transition, the Barrow administration’s most pressing challenge
will be to reestablish public security and normalize relations between the government and the armed
forces. The security services were extensively purged by the former regime, which prized personal loyalty
over professional duty. While the new government must rely on the security sector’s existing institutions,
reforms will be necessary to ensure their allegiance to the democratically elected civilian government.
President Barrow recently replaced the head of the armed forces, along with several other high-ranking
officers, but consolidating civilian control over the military will be a long-term process. The new
government has begun reorganizing the leadership of the security forces, the civil service, and key state-
owned enterprises. This process will provide an early indication of the administration’s commitment to
eliminating the influence of ethnic, ideological, and religious factors in determining political
appointments. There is a considerable risk that even an unbiased effort to rebalance the composition of
the public administration may be regarded as an attempt to replace one form of ethnic patronage with
another.28 In this context, it will be essential to maximize the transparency of the appointment process
and pursue a proactive public outreach effort.
22. The tense relationship between the new government and the security services has presented an
opportunity for groups and individuals striving to further destabilize the country. International risk
assessors have highlighted the “underlying threat of terrorism” in The Gambia following attacks targeting
tourists and tourism-related infrastructure in Mali, Burkina Faso, and Côte d’Ivoire.29
23. The new government is aware of the disastrous impact a terrorist attack could have on the recovery
of the tourism industry, and the authorities are taking terrorist risks very seriously. ECOWAS
peacekeepers were deployed to The Gambia to assist in resolving the political crisis, and the Barrow
government has requested that they remain in the country indefinitely to help maintain security while
the government reforms the security sector. The government has also agreed to a military cooperation
framework with France, which will begin training the Gambian army and special forces.30 While these
steps may be sufficient to deter terrorist incidents or other security threats in the short-term, only The
Gambia’s own revamped military and law enforcement agencies will be able to effectively address the
country’s complex security challenges in the medium-to-long term. Consequently, although it faces urgent
priorities across all sectors, the government is focusing its attention on security sector reform.
Weak governance has facilitated the rise of transnational criminal organizations
24. Endemic corruption has enabled the growth of organized crime, and international criminal
syndicates have a strong stake in undermining The Gambia’s political stability and weakening its public
institutions. The Gambia is a hub for two major forms of international crime: narcotics trafficking and
sexual exploitation. Due to its geographic position, The Gambia is a natural transshipment point for
narcotics bound from Latin America to Europe. Meanwhile, the growth of the tourism industry in a climate


                                                                                                       12
of limited and capricious law enforcement has spawned a domestic market for sexual exploitation catering
primarily to Europeans. These illicit markets have given rise to extensive, well-financed criminal networks
capable of wielding significant political influence. Unlike most national stakeholders, for whom continued
fragility is an undesirable outcome, criminal organizations have a clear incentive to corrupt the public
administration and degrade the quality of governance.
25. The Gambia is one of several West African transshipment points for narcotics traffic between Latin
America and Europe. Traffickers use multiple transport routes, including the Gambia River, the road
network, maritime shipping, and air travel. The tourism industry generates a large volume of passenger
travel between The Gambia and Europe, which enables individual drug traffickers (“mules”) to pass
undetected. During the Jammeh regime, several high-ranking government officials were identified as
facilitating arms and drug trafficking,31,32 and allegations surfaced that Jammeh was directly involved. Over
time, the government’s attitude toward the drug trade alternated between forceful prosecution and tacit
endorsement.
26. Women, girls, and boys from The Gambia and its regional neighbors, including Benin, Ghana,
Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Nigeria, Senegal, and Sierra Leone, are recruited for commercial sexual
exploitation in The Gambia’s sex-tourism market. While sexual tourism is not the core driver of tourism
in the Gambia and the previous government had made major efforts to reduce its impacts and effects,
transnational sex trafficking remains an issue. The situation is difficult to counter. Transnational sex-
trafficking networks use both European and Gambian travel agencies to promote child sex tourism. The
superficial similarities between the country’s legitimate tourism industry and its criminal counterpart
might make clearly differentiating between them difficult for law enforcement. Like drug traffickers,
organizations involved in sexual exploitation leverage their financial resources to undermine public
institutions and discourage the government from cracking down on their operations. While the sex-
tourism industry requires a minimum degree of public security to attract sex tourists from Europe and
other source markets, human trafficking is less vulnerable to instability. Gambian children have been
identified as victims of forced labor in neighboring West African countries, including Ghana and Senegal.
Gambian women and girls have also been subjected to forced labor and sex trafficking in Middle Eastern
countries, including Lebanon, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates.33
The seven-party coalition must now establish a stable democratic political equilibrium and collaborative
policy processes
27. Following decades of authoritarian rule, the government lacks both strong institutional processes
for deliberation and collaborative policymaking, as well as the shared political norms that underpin
democratic governance. The seven-party coalition united an eclectic group of ideologies, personalities,
and interest groups that share few commonalities beyond their desire to oust the previous regime. Having
achieved their joint objective, these parties must now develop arrangements for sharing political power,
including both formal political and policy institutions and informal norms, values, and expectations.
28. The coalition’s pre-election agreement called for the unity government led by President Barrow to
hold new elections within three years. While the precise terms of the pre-election agreement have not
been published, the seven coalition parties agreed to the three-year timeframe to allow the government
to establish fair electoral policies and institutions. The agreement also bars President Barrow from running
in the upcoming presidential election or holding any political office for five years thereafter. As the leader
of a unity government, President Barrow was appointed as formally independent of any political party
and his administration is expected to be largely technocratic and apolitical.34 The extent to which the pre-
election agreement will remain binding in the aftermath of the legislative election is an open question.




                                                                                                           13
29. The legislative elections have strained relationships between coalition parties. The seven parties had
originally agreed to run nonpartisan candidates for the National Assembly, but that agreement ultimately
broke down. Five parties—the UDP, the Gambia Moral Congress, the People’s Progressive Party, the
People’s Democratic Party for Independence and Socialism (PDOIS), and the National Reconciliation Party
(NRP)—established a “tactical alliance,” but the nature and purpose of that alliance were poorly
communicated to the public. The coalition is showing signs of strain. While the legislative majority leader
was selected from the UDP, the position of minority leader was contested by the Gambia Democratic
Congress, the APRC, and the NRP. Of these, the NRP is the only coalition partner, and the NRP candidate
was elected minority leader.35
30. As the UDP now has a large legislative majority, the dissolution of the seven-party coalition would
not significantly weaken the government’s ability to pass legislation. However, because the Jammeh
regime thoroughly destroyed popular confidence in the impartiality of public institutions, the unraveling
of the coalition could pave the way for populist demagogues to portray the UDP as self-interested and out
of touch with Gambian civil society. Political violence in the wake of the legislative election has been
reported in APRC strongholds such as Foni, which could deepen ethnic and political factionalism.36 Local
elections scheduled for April 2018 will effectively extend the campaign cycle for another year, further
straining the country’s nascent democratic institutions.
31. Reforming and strengthening democratic institutions in a context of shifting partisan power
dynamics will pose a major challenge for the Barrow administration. The pre-election coalition
agreement called for a fundamental overhaul of governance structures to accommodate a functioning
multiparty democracy. However, the existing system was designed to favor a hegemonic ruling party, and
there is a risk that the UDP may be tempted to assume the APRC’s former role.
32. A tense political climate could slow the implementation of the institutional reform agenda. Political
stakeholders will remain committed to the establishment of democratic processes only so long as they
perceive those processes to be effective means of pursuing their political and economic interests. Difficult
economic and social reforms require expending scarce political capital, and a loss of confidence in the
reform agenda could encourage political forces to embrace undemocratic means of securing power.
Moreover, forces that have little prospect for electoral success—including Jammeh loyalists, ambitious
military officers, or members of marginal political factions—could view a breakdown in the
democratization process as an opportunity to assert their authority.
The current constitution is designed to empower the executive branch at the expense of the legislature and
judiciary.
33. The Gambian Constitution grants broad discretionary authority to the executive branch, while
deliberately marginalizing the legislature. The current constitution was adopted in 1996, and its primary
purpose was to legitimate the autocratic rule of the Jammeh regime. Contrary to ECOWAS directives, the
constitution does not limit presidential terms, and it grants the executive branch hegemonic power over
the other branches of government. While the National Assembly is democratically elected, the president
nominates its speaker and deputy speaker, who dictate legislative activity.37 The National Assembly
cannot impose new taxes, it has no authority over the Consolidated Revenue Fund, and it cannot incur
debt on behalf of the government.38
34. The executive branch also dominates the judiciary. The president appoints the nation’s chief justice,
as well as half of all superior court judges, and both the executive and legislative branches may remove
judges effectively at will. The Jammeh administration repeatedly used its discretion over judicial hiring
and firing decisions to bend the judiciary to its political purposes.39 Rebalancing the constitutional




                                                                                                         14
authority of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches will be vital to the success of the
democratization process.

2.2. Slow Growth, High Inequality, and Unsustainable Fiscal
Balances
35. After rebounding to 4.1 percent in 2015, the GDP growth rate fell to an estimated 2.2 percent in
2016 and is projected to rise slightly to 3 percent in 2017. A weak agricultural season, the slow recovery
of the tourism sector, low rates of private investment, and a turbulent political situation have all hindered
growth (Error! Reference source not found.). Agricultural output remains dependent on favorable
weather patterns, and any further reputational shocks—either domestic or regional—could cause a
renewed drop in tourism activity.
Figure 2: Gross National Income per Capita, 1994–2015, (Current US$)40
     1800                                                                                   Fragile and
     1600                                                                                   conflict affected
                                                                                            situations
     1400                                                                                   Gambia, The
     1200
     1000                                                                                   Guinea-Bissau
      800
      600
                                                                                            Heavily indebted
      400                                                                                   poor countries
                                                                                            (HIPC)
      200
                                                                                            Low income
         0
            94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15
Source: The World Bank

36. Unequal access to public goods and productive factors narrows the distribution of returns to
growth. The Gambia is among the most economically unequal countries in the world. In 2012, its Gini
coefficient was 0.594, ranking it 128th out of the 148 countries included in the Human Development Index.
Education, healthcare, public infrastructure, and social services are heavily concentrated in Banjul and
other major urban centers. Access to land is limited by the inability of public institutions to efficiently
protect and adjudicate property rights, while shallow financial markets restrict access to capital. The
unemployment rate is high at 29.8 percent, and both unemployment and underemployment are
especially pervasive among younger workers. Though social norms regarding gender equality are slowly
changing, discriminatory cultural practices continue to restrict women’s access to land, productive
resources, healthcare and education. The uneven distribution of economic opportunity is a key source of
fragility.
37. The new government faces enormous challenges as it strives to accelerate growth, restore fiscal
stability, and maintain sustainable debt dynamics. The Barrow administration inherited an economy on
the verge of crisis. The public debt-to-GDP ratio is estimated at 119.5 percent, and interest payments
absorb almost half of domestic revenue. The preliminary results of a 2017 joint World Bank-IMF Debt
Sustainability Analysis indicate that The Gambia’s risk of external debt distress has risen from moderate
to high. The government lacks access to international financial markets and relies on costly domestic
borrowing to finance a large structural fiscal deficit. With net domestic borrowing exceeding 10 percent
of GDP, the domestic financial sector is highly exposed to sovereign risk. Several key state-owned
enterprises regularly generate large contingent liabilities and extra-budgetary spending, further


                                                                                                            15
weakening the government’s fiscal position. By end-February 2017, international reserves had fallen to
0.7 months of imports, including foreign-exchange swaps with commercial banks. In this context, the new
government must remain firmly committed to fiscal responsibility and structural reforms, as any
substantial policy slippages could severely destabilize an already volatile macroeconomic environment.41
38. Restoring macroeconomic stability will require a well-calibrated policy response combined with
substantial external support. The government has stated its commitment to fiscal consolidation and
structural reform, but the authorities are still developing their macroeconomic strategy. Several
multilateral organizations, including the AfDB, the IMF, and the World Bank, have initiated discussions
with the new administration for budget support operations designed to strengthen the fiscal position,
address the debt overhang situation and rebuild reserve buffers. A failure to engage the support of
international financial institutions would threaten the stability of the new government, as the alternative
would be a forced fiscal and external adjustment with deeply negative implications for the Gambian
economy. In this context, while the World Bank is currently preparing an emergency development policy
financing operation to support the new government as it strives to restore macroeconomic and fiscal
stability, AfDB is working at addressing, through an emergency budget support operation, the dire fiscal,
debt and balance of payment situation in the wake of the recent political transition with the aim to restore
fiscal stability and improve budget management for inclusive growth in the Gambia.

2.3. The Limited Capacity of the Public Administration
The public administration lacks the capacity to efficiently deliver essential services, and its institutional
deficiencies are a major obstacle to reform
39. The misplaced priorities of an autocratic government steadily eroded the capacity of the Gambian
public sector. The government has committed to focusing on civil-service reform in year two of the
transition period, but its expectations are largely unrealistic. The civil-service incentive structure does not
encourage performance, and years of mismanagement have stripped public institutions of vital physical,
financial, and human resources. An especially sharp deterioration in institutional quality has been
observed since 2011 (Figure 3), and data are not yet available on the state of the public administration in
the wake of the political crisis. In this difficult context, reforming the civil service and rebuilding the
government’s overall institutional capacity will require a long-term political commitment supported by
sustained external financial and technical assistance (Annex 1).




                                                                                                            16
Figure 3. World Bank Country Policy and Institutional Assessment Scores, The Gambia and Regional
Comparators, 2006–15
   4
 3.8
 3.6
 3.4
 3.2
   3
 2.8
 2.6
 2.4
 2.2
   2
         2006      2007        2008    2009       2010      2011      2012        2013       2014       2015
             Sub-Saharan, Fragile       Gambia            Senegal            Guinea Bissau          Guinea
Source: The World Bank

40. Under the current set of institutional relationships, power over the public administration is highly
centralized in the Office of the President and the Vice President. The central government consists of 18
line ministries and six ministerial offices, close to the global average. However, the Gambian government
relies on a huge number of subvented agencies to execute a wide range of functions. The resulting
fragmentation of public services reduces the financial resources available to each agency, increases the
administrative complexity of the public sector, and obscures both the transparency of resource allocation
and accountability for specific outcomes.42 These issues are compounded by the overlapping mandates of
certain ministries and other public agencies.
41. Low salaries, administrative reorganizations, political purges, governmental instability, and other
factors have spurred an exodus of qualified civil servants. Civil-service salaries in The Gambia are low by
the standards of comparable countries. While the average civil-service salary is three times the country’s
per capita income, compensation in the civil service is far below the equivalent rates for the private sector,
and professional civil servants can often increase their earnings 10 to 20 times over by leaving the
government. Remuneration rates for skilled professionals are especially inadequate, which contributes to
their high attrition rate.43 The Jammeh regime frequently and arbitrarily reshuffled staff at all levels of the
public administration to disrupt institutional relationships and maintain the absolute authority of the chief
executive. The regime also attempted to suppress dissent through periodic purges of the civil service.44
While the new government is in the process of reinstating hundreds of improperly terminated civil
servants, rebuilding the public sector’s human capital stock will require comprehensive remuneration
reform and extensive professional training.
Corruption pervades the Gambian public sector
42. Widespread corruption further erodes the already weak credibility of public institutions. Due to the
country’s deliberately complex and opaque regulatory structure, bribery is a feature of almost all
interactions between citizens and the state. Bribes are paid to obtain basic services such as water and
electric connections, as well as business permits, import licenses, land titles, and other legal documents.45
The Jammeh administration used corruption to enrich allies and placate important constituencies, and
corruption remains a core element of intragovernmental financial flows and administrative
relationships.46



                                                                                                               17
43. The new administration has made combating corruption a top priority, but a detailed anticorruption
strategy has yet to be developed. Under the previous regime, civil servants were rarely convicted of
corruption, sanctions tended to be lenient, and corrupt officials were sometimes redeployed to other
government positions.47 While the new government is striving to reestablish respect for ethical standards
and strengthen oversight mechanisms, the weak institutions it has inherited will likely undermine its
ability to combat corruption. Without credible institutions and consistent investigation and enforcement
processes, corruption prosecutions may appear politically motivated. Rebuilding confidence in the
effectiveness and impartiality of public oversight will require time, extensive capacity-building, and an
enduring political commitment to reform. In the meanwhile, however, the persistence of corruption could
weaken the new government. The risk that a failure to meaningfully combat corruption could frustrate
high public expectations for the integrity of the new government represents a source of acute political
fragility. Under similar circumstances, governments in other countries have created ad hoc courts or
anticorruption commissions outside the standard legal system. This type of intervention could be effective
in The Gambia, provided it is transparent and temporary.
Decades of undemocratic governance have weakened civil society
44. Gambian civil society was marginalized under the Jammeh administration, but is showing signs of
recovery in the wake of the recent elections. About 180 nongovernmental and community-based
organizations are registered in The Gambia, and they focus on a wide range of intervention areas.48
However, the Jammeh administration suppressed any expression of civil society that it perceived as a
challenge to the authority of the regime, and most Gambian civil society groups lack experience in
democratic political advocacy. Domestic nongovernmental and civil society organizations have limited
managerial and technical capacity and face severe resource constraints that inhibit their ability to operate
effectively.
45. Under the Jammeh administration, The Gambia’s political environment was hostile to journalists
and privately owned media. There were numerous reports of disappearances and murders of journalists
perceived as critical of the regime.49 The Information and Communications Act was amended in 2013 to
introduce a 15-year prison term and a US$70,000 fine for anyone convicted of using the internet to spread
false news, make derogatory statements, incite dissention, or instigate violence against the government
or public officials, granting the government broad discretion to crack down on independent media.
Journalists were routinely arrested and detained. Restrictive laws continue to limit freedom of
expression,50 though the new government has pledged to reverse undemocratic and coercive limitations
of freedom of the press. However, years of intimidation by the state have produced a culture of
journalistic self-censorship, and it may take time for the press to adapt to their new role in a democratic
society.51 Media coverage of the legislative elections has been encouraging, with a range of outlets
producing critical and investigative journalism. However, there have been instances of media intimidation
under the new administration, the most notable of which occurred on March 5, when a reporter for the
newspaper Foroyaa was assaulted during a press conference attended by government ministers and key
figures in the coalition.

2.4. Structural Vulnerabilities and Exogenous Shocks
A combination of long-term structural vulnerabilities and short-term economic shocks is exacerbating food
insecurity
46. The Gambia is on the verge of a nutrition emergency.52 As of August 2016, an estimated 551,000
people were food insecure, with 60,726 suffering from extreme food insecurity.53 The acute malnutrition
rate rose from 9.5 percent in 2010 to 9.9 percent in 2015. An estimated one-fourth of children under the
age of five are stunted, and one-fifth of pregnant women are undernourished.54


                                                                                                         18
47. The Gambia’s largely rain-fed agricultural sector is heavily exposed to weather-related shocks, and
aggregate food production is far below aggregate demand. The Gambia relies on imports for nearly half
of its cereal consumption, and global food prices and exchange-rate dynamics strongly influence domestic
prices. The substantial depreciation of the Gambian dalasi in recent years has increased domestic food
prices, contributing to food insecurity and malnutrition.
4. Food insecurity is contributing to large-scale emigration from The Gambia. Though relatively small in
absolute terms, the number of Gambian migrants in Europe is second only to the number of Syrians as a
share of the total home-country population. Interviews with Gambian migrants underscore the key role
of food security in driving emigration, as migrants frequently cite the need to generate remittances to
support household food consumption as a key motivation behind their decision to emigrate.55
Large-scale emigration is draining the country of its most educated and productive workers
48. The combination of poverty, unemployment, food insecurity, and political instability has driven tens
of thousands of Gambians out of the country. The overwhelming majority of Gambian migrants are
bound for Europe. Despite the country’s small size, Gambians represent the second-largest number of
African migrants arriving in Italy by sea. In recent months, as the political situation became increasingly
volatile outmigration exponentially increased.56 The Italian government claims that 8,454 migrants from
The Gambia arrived in Italy in 2015 alone. However, high levels of emigration are not a recent
phenomenon. Between 2000 and 2010 the number of Gambians residing abroad roughly doubled to
between 65,000 and 90,000, or over 4 percent of the country’s total population.57 By 2013, The Gambia
had the tenth-highest net migration rate in Africa, at 2.34 migrants per thousand people.58 An estimated
135,000 Gambians, or 7 percent of the country’s total population, currently reside abroad.59
49. Weak economic growth and widespread unemployment have driven recent migration flows, but
political instability is also a major factor. More than 11,000 Gambian migrants sought asylum in Europe
in 2015.60 Moreover, the emigration rate among skilled workers from The Gambia is far higher than those
of comparable countries in the subregion. Almost 65 percent of Gambians who complete higher education
eventually emigrate, compared to just 24 percent in Senegal, 43 percent in Ghana, 41 percent in Sierra
Leone, and 3.3 percent in Burkina Faso (Figure 4).61 In 2000, the emigration rate of skilled workers from
The Gambia was among the 15 highest worldwide, with deeply negative implications for the local
economy. For example, 53 percent of all physicians and 66 percent of all professional nurses born in The
Gambia were practicing outside the country.62 Moreover, total remittances rose from an average of 19
percent of GDP in the 1980s to over 21 percent in 2014.
Figure 4. Emigration Rates among Workers with Higher Education, Gambia and Comparators


            65%



                                                             43%       41%


                                   24%

                                                                                           3%

          Gambia                 Senegal                 Ghana     Sierra Leone        Burkina Faso

Source: Kebbeh (2013) and Docquier and Marfouk (2006)63,64



                                                                                                        19
50. Agriculture and tourism are the mainstays of the Gambian economy, and in recent years exogenous
shocks to both sectors have underscored the country’s persistent economic vulnerability.65 Agriculture
employs approximately 70 percent of the labor force.66 The Sahelian drought of 2011–12 inflicted massive
crop losses, causing GDP to contract by 4.1 percent in 2011 alone. Moreover, in 2014 and 2015, the Ebola
crisis severely weakened the tourism sector. Although The Gambia has had no recorded cases of Ebola,
the number of visitors dropped by 60 percent, year-on-year, in 2014 and remained depressed through
2015.67 The threat of Islamist terrorism, and the rise of regional militant groups such as Boko Haram, have
also negatively affected the Gambian tourism sector.68 Shocks to agriculture and tourism have steadily
undermined food security. In 2014, one-third of the country was food insecure, and many households
resorted to negative coping mechanisms such as selling productive assets or withdrawing children from
school to contribute to household labor.69 Food insecurity is also intensifying pressure on the country’s
environmental resources.
Environmental degradation is a major source of fragility
51. The Gambia is highly vulnerable to multiple forms of environmental damage. A combination of
short-term weather-related shocks and long-term climate change is reducing agricultural output.
Agriculture in turn is putting considerable strain on forests and water resources, as the sector struggles to
meet the demands of a growing urban economy. The Gambia is the most densely populated country in
the subregion. Rapid population growth is intensifying environmental pressure, and the country’s weak
public institutions are incapable of enforcing environmental protections.
Figure 5. Population Density per Square Kilometer, Gambia and Regional Comparators, 2014/15




Source: The World Bank World Development Indicators

52. In the rural sector, deforestation and desertification are severely damaging local ecosystems. A
combination of slash-and-burn agriculture and the harvesting of wood for fuel has decimated the
country’s forests. Cleared areas quickly turn barren, depriving local communities of forest products and
ecosystem services. Unsustainable agricultural practices are exacerbating economic vulnerability and food
insecurity among rural communities, with negative implications for overall fragility (see Annex 4).
53. In urban Banjul and Kanifing, population pressures are straining the capacity of public institutions
to manage the urban environment. The municipal government is struggling to control pollution, dispose
of solid waste, and provide sanitation services to a burgeoning urban population. Poor infrastructure,
inadequate financial and administrative resources, and inefficient public investment management


                                                                                                          20
compound Banjul’s natural vulnerability as a low-lying island.70 Without adequate solid waste disposal,
the population has resorted to open burning and indiscriminate dumping, which are contaminating the
soil and groundwater and increasing the risk of flooding.71 Environmental damage contributes to an
already tense urban environment, increasing the risk of popular unrest.
Rapid demographic changes are destabilizing the traditional social equilibrium
54. While The Gambia has long been regarded as a model of ethnic pluralism, ongoing demographic
changes may lead to social instability. The Mandinka and associated ethnicities continue to constitute
the largest ethnic group, but their share in the total population is declining. Meanwhile, the population
share of the second-largest group, the Fulani and related ethnicities, is rising (Figure 6). The urbanization
process has made the social impact of demographic change increasingly uncertain, as the Gambian model
of ethnic pluralism is based around small traditional villages rather than densely packed urban centers.
Rapid urbanization and uneven economic growth have also increased rural-urban wealth inequality, with
potentially negative social consequences.
Figure 6. The Ethnic Composition of the Gambian Population, 2003–2013 (%)

           Non African

                Other

            Serahuleh

        Jola/Karoninka

               Wollof

 Fulani/Tukulur/Lorobo

    Mandinka/Jahanka

                         0      5        10        15       20        25     30       35       40        45

                                                   2013    2003

Source: The Gambia Population Census 2003, CIA World Factbook, 2013


2.5. Regional Instability and External Relations
55. The Gambia’s colonial history continues to influence its relationship with Senegal. Since
independence, Senegal has remained aligned with the community of Francophone West African nations,
and it uses the CFA franc as its currency. Like many former British colonies, The Gambia became a
Commonwealth country after independence, until former President Jammeh eschewed the country’s ties
to the UK and attempted to develop a new framework of international relations. However, the regime’s
erratic foreign policies ultimately deepened The Gambia’s economic and diplomatic isolation, and its
relationship with Senegal became increasingly strained, especially during the final years of the Jammeh
administration.
56. Over the years, The Gambia and Senegal have had a complex and contentious relationship. Even
during periods when The Gambia sought closer economic, political, and military ties with Senegal, both
countries remained competitive and occasionally antagonistic, even resorting to hostile policy actions
designed to thwart each other’s interests. The Gambia has refused to allow Senegal to build a bridge
across Gambian territory to link Senegal’s northern and southern coastal regions.72 Bypassing The Gambia


                                                                                                          21
through inland Senegal is a significant hardship, transforming a journey of 40 miles into a 750-mile trip.73
In 2014, the AfDB approved a US$ 96 M (equivalent to UA 67.36 million) to build a trans-Gambia bridge.
However, the Gambian government objected to the bridge’s design, which it claimed would prevent the
navigation of the river. The bridge is perceived to increase the Senegalese government’s negotiating
leverage by facilitating a potential embargo. The previous Minister of Foreign Affairs raised these
objections in 2016, after the Jammeh administration had closed the border with Senegal and just as work
on the bridge was slated to commence. This was the latest in a series of bridge-project postponements
and work stoppages by the Jammeh government.
57. During Yahya Jammeh’s term, relations between the two countries were marred by recurring
tensions over cross-border traffic. Between 1994 and 2016, the border between The Gambia and Senegal
was closed at least 10 times, sometimes for extended periods, hampering regional trade in Senegal and
inflicting significant economic hardship in The Gambia. However, the new government has taken steps to
rebuild relations with Senegal, and the Senegalese government has expressed its openness to a
rapprochement.
58. More than 5,000 Senegalese refugees, primarily from the Casamance region, have entered The
Gambia since mid-August 2016.74 Aid agencies in Ziguinchor estimate there may be an additional 10,000
internally displaced persons in Casamance.75 The Gambia also hosts a relatively small refugee population,
numbering just under 10,000 in 2013, from Liberia, Senegal, and Sierra Leone. Senegalese refugees are
concentrated in villages along the Senegal-Gambia border, while Liberians and Sierra Leoneans tend to
live in Banjul and other urban areas. While the Gambian government allows Casamance refugees to live
and work in the country, they and their host families often suffer from food insecurity, poor health, and
inadequate housing.

59. The Gambian region of Foni, which borders on Casamance, appears to be especially vulnerable to
instability and conflict. This area has long been isolated and insecure, and many local communities were
closely aligned with the previous regime. There are reports that Jammeh loyalists from the military and
security forces have relocated to the Kanilai region, and it remains a stronghold of support for the APRC.
For these reasons, the Kanilai region should be a priority for public outreach and engagement by both the
government and its development partners.


                         3. Sources of Resilience
60. The political crisis that followed the presidential election in December exposed many of the factors
driving the country’s fragility, but it also underscored critical sources of resilience. While the crisis
further strained an already delicate social, political and economic equilibrium, The Gambia’s ability to
sustain the momentous shock of regime change without falling into destructive conflict reflected the
strength of the country’s stabilizing forces. Five sources of resilience played an especially important role
in avoiding a decent into conflict: the Gambian diaspora, neighbor governments and regional institutions,
women and youth, and large-scale emigration. Going forward, the government and its development
partners can reinforce these sources of resilience and attempt to maximize their contribution to social,
political, and economic stability.




                                                                                                         22
4.1 The Diaspora
61. Decades of slow economic growth, political repression, and ethnic favoritism have encouraged the
formation of a large Gambian diaspora, which has swelled in recent years as socioeconomic conditions
have deteriorated.76 In 2010, an estimated 4 percent of the country’s population resided abroad. Many
Gambian emigrants are skilled workers seeking better wages elsewhere in the sub-region, in Europe, or
in the United States.
62. In recent years, remittances from the diaspora have become an increasingly important component
of household consumption. Remittance income has averaged 12.5 percent of GDP since 2003, and by
2015 it had risen to 19.24 percent, or US$181.7 million.77 This level of remittance income is over 20 times
the global average of 0.62 percent of GDP. Remittances sustained many households through the
protracted economic downturn that followed the 2008 global financial crisis, and they bolstered
consumption during subsequent economic shocks such as the regional Ebola crisis and multiple poor
agricultural seasons.
63. Throughout the Jammeh administration, the Gambian diaspora remained engaged in the country’s
economic, political and social life. Diaspora organizations assumed many of the functions of a
beleaguered domestic civil society. Diaspora-based charities and nongovernmental organizations
implemented development programs, while diaspora-based news sources provided a counterpoint to the
state-run domestic media. Members of the diaspora also financed opposition parties, and their support
played a key role in facilitating the country’s transition to democracy. The diaspora also leveraged social
media platforms to organize political activities without interference from the state. Social media
connectivity allowed information to flow both ways, and the diaspora served as a link to international
media outlets, offering vital insight into events on%the
                                                       GDPground in The Gambia.
  25
Figure 7: Remittances as a Share of GDP, 2003-2013 (%)

 20




 15




 10




  5




  0
       2003    2004    2005    2006    2007    2008      2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014    2015



4.2 The Role of ECOWAS and Its Member States
64. While regional conflict and instability contribute to fragility in The Gambia, neighboring
governments and multilateral institutions have exerted a vital stabilizing force. Most countries in the
region are now led by democratically elected governments, several of which have experienced peaceful
transfers of power in recent election cycles. Nigeria completed its first successful transfer of power from
an incumbent to an opposition candidate in 2015, while Cape Verde has a well-established track record



                                                                                                        23
of democratic transitions. Senegal has never suffered a coup or other violent political transition, and its
public institutions are becoming increasingly democratic. In 2016, Freedom House ranked Nigeria, Liberia
and Côte d’Ivoire among the countries that had made the greatest improvements in securing political
rights and civil liberties.78
65. The policies and activities of ECOWAS increasingly reflect the expression of democratic values
common among member governments.79 West African leaders worked through ECOWAS institutions to
support a peaceful resolution to The Gambia’s recent political crisis. ECOWAS enabled regional
governments to swiftly organize a united response. Within days of the election, an ECOWAS mission
comprising the heads of state of Liberia, Nigeria, and Ghana conveyed its support for a peaceful political
transition that respected the election results. A few days later, in Abuja, the ECOWAS member stated
declared that they would take all measures necessary to enforce the results of the election. ECOWAS
sustained its engagement throughout the transition period, issuing press statements congratulating
President Barrow and reaffirming its support for democratic processes. Another 10 heads of state from
elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa also supported the mediation of the crisis.
66. ECOWAS peacekeepers continue to bolster public security in the wake of the political transition. As
the political crisis unfolded, the ECOWAS Security Council unanimously expressed its “commitment to
ensure, by political means first, the respect of the will of the people” and deployed a military force on the
Senegalese border to intervene in the event of a violent conflict. This peacekeeping force remains a key
component of public security as the new administration strives to normalize relations with the security
services and begin a long-term process of security-sector reform, reorganization, and reconciliation with
the victims of the previous regime.

4.3 Women and Youth
67. As Gambian men have moved to the cities or emigrated abroad in ever-larger numbers, women and
youth have assumed a more prominent social and economic role, especially in rural areas. Although
they face considerable challenges in accessing land and capital, women have traditionally participated in
economic activity in rural areas. In recent years, as demographic shifts have reduced the male population
in rural areas, women have taken on more responsibilities in agricultural and livestock production, as well
as local decision-making. Greater economic participation by women has been shown to increase
community resilience. Moreover, women’s organizations are involved in civic education and outreach
activities, and they serve as local partners for international development agencies.
68. Young people and youth organizations played an important role in the recent political transition.
Whereas 18- to 24-year-olds had previously eschewed political participation, large numbers of young
people voted in the presidential election and organized peaceful demonstrations in support of the
democratic transfer of power. Youth organizations constructively channeled the political activism of
young people,80 enabling them to express their ambitions and ideals without resorting to conflict. Social
media posts tagged with “#GambiaHasDecided” encouraged young people to participate in the elections
and helped thwart voter-suppression efforts by the previous regime.81 Youth organizations continue to
strengthen civil society and create space for productive political debate.

4.4 Migration
69. While the exodus of skilled workers presents a challenge to The Gambia’s long-term growth and
development, emigration is also a major source of social, political and economic resilience. Emigration
mitigates the social and economic impact of high population growth rates. It eases pressure on land and
other resources, as well as the domestic labor market. Emigration can also diffuse political tensions by
providing an alternative to the status quo.


                                                                                                          24
70. The Gambia’s net migration rate stands at 2 emigrants per thousand people. The Gambia has the
57th highest net emigration rate of the 222 countries and territories included in the CIA World Factbook.82
For decades, The Gambia’s high net emigration rate has helped alleviate social tensions. While emigration
may have reduced opposition to the Jammeh regime in the short term, it also reduced the likelihood of
violent unrest, and over the long term, emigration contributed to the development of a large and
politically engaged diaspora.
Figure 8: Population Growth and Emigration, Actual and Projected, 1985-2050




Source: UNICEF Migration Profiles, the Gambia 2015

71. Net emigration is expected continue over the next ten years, but the scale of emigration is expected
to diminish over time. Meanwhile, population growth is expected to slow substantially over the next few
decades (Figure 8). These trends should continue to ease demographic pressures.


      4. External Assistance: Risks and Benefits
72. International cooperation plays a crucial role in The Gambia’s development. As in most countries in
fragile situations, the government’s capacity for domestic resource mobilization is limited, and the country
relies heavily on external assistance to finance essential public spending. Historically, support from The
Gambia’s development partners has covered about two-thirds of total spending.83 The volume of external
assistance received by The Gambia remained broadly stable until the past five years, when aid inflows
have significantly exceeded their historical average (Figure 9).84
                                      ODA.Assistance.by.Recipient.Coutry,. USD.Million,.
Figure 9: Official Development Assistance to The Gambia, US$ Millions, 1970-2015
                                           2014.prices.and.exchange.rates
180

160

140

120

100

 80

 60

 40

 20

  0
             1970)79                1980)89                  1990)99                2000)2009   2010)2015

Source: OECD




                                                                                                            25
73. The bulk of this assistance comes from a relatively small group of donors. These include the African
Development Bank, the European Union, Islamic Development Bank, the UN agencies, and the World
Bank. Numerous international NGOs work in the Gambia, and the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis
and Malaria has an especially important presence. Several major bilateral aid agencies, especially from
Gulf Countries, such as the Kuwait Fund, and to a lesser extent the United Kingdom’s Department for
International Development and the US Agency for International Development also are active in the
Gambia. Finally, the country hosts a number of international faith-based organizations, most of which
provide humanitarian assistance and social services, especially in rural areas (Figure 10).
        Figure 10: NGOs in The Gambia by Type                     Figure 11: Official Development Assistance by Sector
                    ONG IN THE GAMBIA
                Faith Based   Humanitarian    Development
                                                                                                        SOCIAL


                                                                                                        ECONOMIC


                                                                                                        PRODUCTION
                                                                                   1%
                                                                                 9%1%
                                                            37%
                                                                           10%           34%            MULTISECTOR
      48%                                                                 11%
                                                                                                        GEN
                                                                                                        PRODUCTION
                                                                                  34%                   AID
                                                                                                        HUMANITARIAN


                                                                                                        OTHERS

                                             15%




 Source: OECD                                                     Source: OECD

74. In 2015, aid to the Gambia focused on emergency social and economic support due to the country's
deteriorating fragility indicators. Several donors are supporting enhanced public financial management
and stronger judicial capacity. However, few donors have been willing to address the political drivers of
fragility, due in part to the reputational risks associated with reforming political systems.85 However, many
donors were willing to work with the Jammeh regime despite serious concerns regarding its legitimacy
and human-rights record. Relations between the Jammeh regime and its development partners
deteriorated between 2013 and 2016, prompting some donors to reduce or curtail their support.
Following the inauguration of the new government, the international community swiftly reengaged with
The Gambia, and many development partners have pledged substantial support.86
75. While many donors regard domestic political systems as outside their purview, those systems are
vital determinants of both fragility and resilience. The new government has pledged to pursue an
extensive program of constitutional reforms, including measures to secure the independence of the
judiciary and empower the legislature. However, most Gambian policymakers have limited governing
experience and face numerous competing demands on their attention. The authorities are striving to
restore fiscal stability, reform the security sector, and reestablish an effective public administration.
Meanwhile, successive election cycles continue to realign political relationships and shift partisan
incentives. Without robust technical assistance from the donor community, it is unlikely that the new
government will be able to accomplish its goal of creating a fully functioning democratic government
supported by appropriate checks and balances.



                                                                                                                       26
76. Electoral support is a priority area for donor engagement. A strong international presence can help
ensure the integrity of the electoral system. Donors can cover election-related costs, support independent
electoral commissions, and provide technical input to policymakers drafting election laws. In the Gambia,
where democratic norms are not yet entrenched, electoral transparency is vital to the government’s
credibility. Donors must pay special attention to the threat of ethnic balkanization and assist the
government in designing campaign-finance regulations and election laws that mitigate the potential for
political parties to cultivate constituencies based on ethnicity or religious affiliation.
77. Press freedom is vital to democracy, and the donor community can assist The Gambia in overcoming
the biased and repressive media environment created by the previous regime. The Jammeh
administration attempted to entrench its power by using the state-run media as a propaganda tool while
persecuting journalists deemed friendly to the opposition. While the new government has stated its
commitment to press freedom, dismantling the apparatus that spread propaganda and facilitated
persecution will be a long-term process. Fostering a culture of open information is essential to civil
political debate and effective popular oversight of government power, and The Gambia’s development
partners can provide valuable technical assistance to design a legal framework for protecting press
freedom.
78. Although donors are often reluctant to involve themselves in matters of constitutional law, the
international community is well-position to assist the government in reestablishing the legislature’s
power to act as a check on the executive branch. The Jammeh regime systematically marginalized the
legislature, and restoring its independent authority will require amending the constitution. In addition,
the legislative process itself must be reformed to establish fair and transparent parliamentary processes.
Both the constitutional separation of powers and the reform of legislative procedures should be included
in the policy dialogue that underpins external budget support.
79. Decentralized decision-making can bolster the government’s popular legitimacy at the local level.
Leveraging community knowledge of local socioeconomic conditions and political stakeholders can help
prevent elite capture and promote a more inclusive approach to public policy. Donors and NGOs can assist
the government by creating mechanisms to promote community outreach, engagement, and feedback.
80. NGOs can play a vital role in promoting transparency and accountability among both the
government and donor agencies. NGOs can draw on their local networks to observe the implementation
of public policies and donor-financed programs and draw attention to cases of corruption, patronage or
other forms of mismanagement. NGOs can also help sustain a healthy dialogue on political and economic
issues and mitigate tensions between and among communities.
81. To further minimize the risk that donor support will exacerbate fragility, external assistance should
reflect principles of equity, vulnerability, and conflict-mitigation. A focus on equity implies that benefits
should be distributed based on clear programmatic objectives and without undue bias toward any region,
polity, social class, or ethnic group. A focus on vulnerability implies that development policies should
target the poorest households and groups with special needs, such as people with disabilities,
unemployed youth, the elderly, displaced persons, and women and children who head households.
Finally, a focus on conflict mitigation implies that development programs and policies should actively
strive to reduce the risk of social unrest. While the application of these principles will reflect the specifics
of each policy and program, in all cases a participatory approach to beneficiary selection that engages
community leaders and local civil society can help ensure that external assistance effectively reinforces
social and economic resilience.
82. Donors can monitor public perceptions to identify emerging drivers of fragility. Donor can evaluate
changing attitudes toward the government, the reform process, and pressing social, economic or political


                                                                                                             27
issues, highlighting areas of frustration or potential conflict. This type of monitoring should be based on
participatory principles where possible, with communities designing feedback mechanisms themselves.
However, donors can also draw on the international experience to design surveys and other assessment
tools. Efforts to gauge public option must account for the trauma inflicted by the previous regime and the
potential reluctance of survey participants to express honest opinions.
83. Donor coordination is especially complicated in fragile environments, and the large influx of
international support in the wake of the political transition will increase both the complexity and the
importance of harmonizing external assistance. While donor support will be crucial to strengthen the
country’s resilience, the Gambian government has neither the experience nor the administrative
resources to manage numerous donor relationships. In this context, there is a high risk that uncoordinated
external assistance will overwhelm the government’s limited capacity to comply with donor conditions or
implement supported reforms. Creating a forum for donor collaboration, in line with the Busan New Deal
for Engagement in Fragile States, could enable the international community to develop a unified
engagement strategy backed by a coherent outreach effort.


        5. Conclusions and Recommendations
84. In the aftermath of its momentous political transition, The Gambia remains critically fragile due to
the extreme weakness of its public institutions. Like many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, The Gambia
struggled to build a strong public sector in the early years of its independence, and the limited progress
achieved by the Jawara administration was systematically dismantled by the Jammeh regime, which
undermined the integrity of the public administration, exacerbated social cleavages, and used force and
intimidation to maintain political control. Following the transformative 2016 election, the ruling coalition’s
delicate political equilibrium and limited governing experience will likely compound the capacity
limitations of the public sector, inhibiting the new government’s ability to execute a diverse array of
critical reforms. While the recent elections have secured the UDP’s legislative majority, rising tensions
within the seven-party coalition underscore the importance of building a broad-based national political
consensus.
85. The dire macroeconomic situation will require the government to carefully manage expectations.
Policymakers face numerous conflicting demands for political and economic action, both by the public
and by the country’s external development partners. The government’s ability to satisfy these demands
and amicably resolve competition between interest groups will greatly influence its perceived legitimacy
and effectiveness. The Gambia’s development partners expect the government to implement sound
macro-fiscal policies, which will require expenditure consolidation, improved revenue administration and
public sector reform. Meanwhile, the public is calling for economic relief after years of hardship, which
would entail both greater social spending and increased public investment. The government will be unable
to fully satisfy both demands simultaneously. While elements of the public may recognize that the
government will need time to adjust, the new administration will need to swiftly generate broad
improvements in living standards. In this context, managing expectations will be among the most crucial
challenges facing the new government.

86. Public administrative capacity is limited, and enhancing the quality of public institutions will require
careful, well-coordinated engagement by development partners. The final ministerial appointments in
late February 2017 completed the formation of the central government. However, the quality and
quantity of the public sector’s physical, financial, and human resources have been depleted by years of
mismanagement and neglect. The government’s limited capacity underscores the importance of donor


                                                                                                           28
coordination, as competing donor requests have overwhelmed the authorities’ ability to manage external
assistance.

87. To ensure s continuous process of institutional strengthening, the government and its cooperating
partners must foster the development of a competent technocratic cadre tasked with implementing
administrative and policy reforms while sustaining core departmental functions. Technocratic officials
operating below the ministerial level should be isolated from partisan political interference. Since the
previous government had a history of moving key personnel quickly and sometimes erratically, the new
government must demonstrate its willingness to employ key technical staff in fixed positions according to
reasonable terms of service and to remove them only for cause. The establishment of a human-resources
policy that reflects these principles should be a key element of the policy dialogue between the
government and its cooperating partners. It will be especially important to limit political appointments to
a small number of advisors with no ministerial line responsibilities.

88. Strengthening the legitimacy of public institutions will require both substantive reform and a
concerted effort to rebuild the image of the public sector. During the previous administration,
widespread corruption, patronage, and ethnic favoritism badly degraded the reputation of government
agencies and institutions. Consequently, the new government now faces the dual challenge of both
comprehensively reforming the public sector and reestablishing popular confidence in its efficacy,
impartiality, and alignment with the national interest.

89. Over the next three years, a near-perpetual electoral cycle will present a pivotal test of the Gambia’s
fledgling democracy. Following the recent presidential and legislative elections, local council elections are
slated for April 12, 2018. Gambian political parties are expected to further differentiate their unique
ideological identities and assert their influence among various constituencies. This process may inhibit
compromise, and it will likely intensify pressure on the already strained coalition.

90. Now that it has achieved its objective of ousting former President Jammeh, the seven-party
coalition will become increasingly susceptible to ideological conflicts and personal rivalries. The
Gambian diaspora financed and supported the coalition parties during the elections, and it remains a
major force for multiparty cohesion and cooperation. Continuing to foster an environment of pragmatic
collaboration will be the new government’s most important cross-cutting political objective over the
medium term.

91. The political transition is far from over. The end of the Jammeh administration has ushered in a new
set of complex political challenges. The UDP’s large majority in the National Assembly will enable it to pass
legislation without the support of minority parties. While the dominant position of the UDP could allow
for the expedient passage of urgent reforms, it also creates a substantial risk that the UDP will come to
rely on party-line votes to pass legislation unilaterally, potentially alienating minority parties rather than
governing by consensus. The perception of an inclusive legislative process will be vital to rebuild public
trust in political institutions. Only 42 percent of eligible voters cast a vote in the most recent legislative
elections, the lowest rate in The Gambia’s history. Low voter turnout may be an early indication of
disillusionment with the political process.

92. The government must normalize relations with the armed forces and the broader security sector.
The military and security agencies have an ambiguous role in Gambian politics. While the security sector
was critical to the authority of the Jammeh regime, both the military and police now appear broadly
supportive of the new democratic government. However, the security sector has had difficulty



                                                                                                           29
surmounting its institutional legacy as an instrument of repression. Recent reports have suggested that
military and law enforcement agencies have harassed and even incarcerated critics of the current
president. Although there is no evidence that these actions were taken at the president’s behest, the
security sector’s culture of authoritarianism and minimal respect for civil rights threaten to undermine
the popular legitimacy of the new administration. Allegations of predatory and corrupt police behavior
remain common despite changes in the leadership of key security-sector agencies.

93. Providing justice for the victims of human rights abuses committed by the previous administration
will be challenging, especially in the context of an ongoing political transition. The seven-party coalition
has stated its intention to establish a truth and reconciliation process to address the numerous murders
and disappearances that occurred under the Jammeh regime. However, it is unlikely that any individual
party would be able to manage this process without appearing to further its own interests. Multiparty
collaboration and external support—including technical assistance from African countries that have
undertaken similar processes—will be essential to the success of truth and reconciliation in The Gambia.

94. The Gambian diaspora continues to play a pivotal role in the country’s political, economic, and social
stability. The Gambian government and its cooperating partners should actively engage with the diaspora
to strengthen civil society, rebuild public institutions, and expand economic opportunities. Remittances
are a critical component of household income, and the diaspora finances many nongovernmental and
community-based organizations in key sectors such as health, education, and poverty alleviation. The
diaspora is also a major force for democratization and the advancement of human rights, including
women’s rights. During the Jammeh administration, the diaspora acted as a key source of news for the
Gambian public. Online newspapers, blogs, and streaming video provided an antidote to the systematic
bias of the state-run media. Recognizing the diaspora’s importance to The Gambia’s future, the new
government has prioritized the return of prominent exiles.

5.1. Recommendations
95. While external assistance will play an important role in supporting the government’s efforts to
reduce fragility, active engagement poses significant reputational risks for international institutions.
The country’s fragility greatly complicates its relationship with its development partners, whose optimism
regarding the country’s nascent democracy is tempered by the risk that external efforts will inadvertently
promote—or be publicly linked to—a future political, economic, or security crisis. An effective strategy
for external assistance must reflect a keen awareness of the internal complexity of the Gambian
government, and the pace and sequencing of actions must recognize that decisions by the multiparty
coalition will be subject to lengthy and potentially contentious internal negotiations. In this context, the
country’s development partners must focus their support on policies that enjoy a broad-based consensus
and that have been subjected to a credible and transparent impact analysis. Even then, compensatory
measures to offset the cost of policy changes may be necessary to secure the necessary political and
popular consent.
96. Reforming the security sector is among the government’s most urgent priorities. The Jammeh
administration’s use of the country’s military, intelligence, and law-enforcement agencies as instruments
of repression alienated much of the population from the national security sector. Rebuilding public trust
will require both a comprehensive reorganization of the security sector’s administrative structure and a
fundamental reorientation of its institutional culture. Under the Jammeh regime, the security sector
expanded to an unsustainable size, and the World Bank is currently conducting a security sector
expenditure review designed to underpin the administrative reform process. However, rebuilding public
trust in the military and security services, and normalizing relations between the security sector and the


                                                                                                         30
civilian government, will be long-term processes that extend beyond the scope of the World Bank’s
engagement.
97. The new government has inherited an unsustainable macro-fiscal policy framework that threatens
to derail the economic recovery. During the final years of its rule, the Jammeh regime pursued
increasingly dysfunctional macroeconomic policies, which resulted in a wide structural deficit, a large and
costly debt burden, and depleted international reserves. Moreover, the extent of the damage to the
Gambian public finances is not yet fully understood, as the chaotic final weeks of the administration
created numerous opportunities for corruption and theft. Recognizing the dire state of the public finances,
the government has prepared an Accelerated National Response Plan (ANRP) for the second half of 2017,
and the authorities are currently finalizing a Second Program for Accelerated Growth and Employment
(PAGE II) for 2017-2020. Both the African Development Bank and World Bank are preparing a budget-
support operation designed to support the implementation ANRP and PAGE II.
98. Reestablishing a sustainable fiscal stance will enable the government to address longstanding
constraints on the growth of the private sector, which will be vital to expanding economic opportunity
and attenuating the risks posed by high rates of unemployment. Expansionary fiscal policies and
burgeoning state-owned enterprises crowd out private investment. Rationalizing public expenditures and
reforming state-owned enterprises will help restore fiscal sustainability while also expanding the scope
for private-sector activity. With support from the World Bank, the government is currently implementing
a set of reforms designed to improve public financial management and enhance the efficiency of state-
owned enterprises. Complementary measures to improve the business climate would accelerate growth,
while efforts to facilitate access to land and capital would expand the distribution of returns.
99. Encouraging the development of effective and impartial public-sector institutions should be the
priority objective of external development assistance. The Gambia’s political transformation is occurring
in a context of rapid social and demographic change, including an ongoing urbanization process.
Meanwhile, regional integration, renewed openness to trade and investment, and denser ties with the
diaspora are driving the evolution of the Gambian economy. Managing these volatile dynamics will require
strong and sophisticated public institutions, and the first step in building a competent and resilient public
sector will be to restore the equilibrium between the different branches of government. The dominance
of the executive branch over the other branches of government encourages the arbitrary and capricious
exercise of political power. Development partners are ready to support institutional change. For example,
The African Development Bank has approved an Institutional Support Project to assist the Government
carry out fundamental reforms. But unless political reforms to allow a stronger role for the legislature
and the judiciary are carried out, it will be hard to balance the authority of the executive and promote
collaborative democratic governance grounded in the rule of law.
100. Enhancing parliamentary rules and processes will be critical to the functioning of the legislature.
Following the recent legislative elections, the National Assembly has struggled to resume operations due
to a lack of procedural norms. The Gambia’s other development partners can draw on a wealth of
international experience to assist the legislature in establishing a sound procedural framework and
building its capacity for policy analysis and implementation. The former will require a combination of
technical assistance and sufficient resources to facilitate the legislature’s core operations, while the latter
will require the development of professional nonpartisan technical staff capable of carrying out
independent research and providing objective policy advice.
101. The importance of strengthening the judiciary is a matter of widespread nonpartisan consensus
among Gambian policymakers. In recent years, for reasons of expediency and political convenience, the
Gambian government has relied on foreign judges to staff its judiciary. Although The Gambia’s
reintegration into the Commonwealth will expand its access to foreign judges, strengthening the judiciary


                                                                                                            31
will require bolstering the supply of domestic judges. Key external partners, including the EU and the AfDB,
have demonstrated their willingness to support the professional development of Gambian judges.
102. The government and its development partners must commit to promoting a diverse and inclusive
state. Inclusiveness will be essential to the legitimacy of the new government. If the Barrow
administration is perceived to represent the interests of a specific ethnic, social, religious, or geographic
constituency at the expense of other groups, Gambian democracy will become increasingly vulnerable to
zero-sum factionalism. Moreover, the perception that the political process is not equally receptive to the
input of all citizens, or that public institutions are not designed to serve the national interest, could lead
to renewed instability or even conflict. By contrast, a diverse and inclusive public sector would strengthen
social cohesiveness, promote the equitable treatment of individuals and interest groups, reinforce the
impartiality of the public administration, and encourage political participation.
103. As the new government strives to overcome a legacy of ethnic favoritism, the authorities will
require detailed information on evolving social and demographic dynamics as well as the distributional
implications of proposed policies. The Jammeh administration not only attempted to support the
interests of the Jola and other ethnic minorities at the expense of the Mandinka, it also favored rural areas
over urban areas and portrayed itself as a champion of less-educated youth. Policies that disrupt this
political pattern—especially if they appear retributive—could lead to political strife. To engage effectively,
The Gambia’s development partners must thoroughly understand the social and cultural dimensions of
Gambian political economy. Even seemingly mundane government functions, such as defining a
methodology for estimating poverty or establishing a system for evaluating public investment projects,
are susceptible to actual political interference or to the mere perception of favoritism if they ultimately
influence the distribution of economic resources.
104. Public employment should be regarded as a priority area for promoting inclusiveness and building
confidence in government institutions. The Jammeh administration used high-level administrative
appointments as part of its system of ethnic patronage. Fostering the development of a civil service that
reflects the diversity of Gambian society will provide a strong and highly visible indication of the new
government’s commitment to inclusiveness. However, inclusiveness is not merely a matter or
proportional representation. Whenever possible, decentralized institutions should be staffed by members
of the local community, both to take advantage of local knowledge and to convey a sense of community
ownership over the public administration.
105. As managing perceptions and expectations will be vital to the success of the transition, the
government will need support to develop its capacity for communications and public outreach. From
the earliest stages of the policy process, the government must clearly convey the purpose, objective, and
expected impact of each action—effectively utilizing official communications channels while also
cultivating strong relationships with an independent media. At the central level, the government must
maintain a coherent and consistent policy message, while at the community level, the authorities must
explain the benefits and tradeoffs that each measure entails to promote local ownership and diffuse
potential opposition. Development partners also have a duty to ensure that the nature, objectives, and
expected results of their engagement is understood by the general public. An effective communications
strategy also requires mechanisms to gather feedback and incorporate it into public policy. Finally,
credible monitoring and evaluation systems are necessary to hold the government and its development
partners accountable for results.

106. Building conflict-prevention components into public policies could reinforce resilience.
Complementing development programs with activities designed to improve the welfare of young people,
promote intercommunity dialogue, raise awareness of critical social issues, strengthen social cohesion,


                                                                                                           32
and build trust in public institutions would help restore social cohesion. Mainstreaming gender equity and
social protection into economic policies could shield vulnerable groups from the negative impacts of
socioeconomic change, and subjecting investment projects to rigorous environmental-impact
assessments could ease pressure on the country’s fragile ecosystems.

107. The government’s development partners should carefully analyze evolving demographic trends,
especially the ongoing urbanization process, and advise policymakers on their political and economic
implications. Urbanization is transforming Gambian society. The country’s village-based social structures,
while allowing for a remarkable degree of ethnic harmony, tend to be rigidly hierarchical, and an informal
caste system inhibits social mobility. While urbanization offers an expanded range of economic
opportunities, it also disrupts traditional norms and social arrangements. A dynamic urban environment
can be a positive force for economic development, but the uncontrolled expansion of cities can strain
both their physical and social infrastructure, potentially leading to social instability. Urbanization has
especially complex political implications in The Gambia, where rural-urban power dynamics have long
played a key role in the national political economy.

108. The government should fully leverage the potential of the Gambian diaspora. The diaspora
represents a critical source of social capital. Encouraging closer ties with diaspora communities in Africa,
Europe, and elsewhere could catalyze the reconstruction of Gambian civil society. The government should
actively collaborate with diaspora-based media and community organizations to strengthen public trust
and augment its limited capacity to implement social and economic development programs. The
authorities should also strive to rebuild the country’s human-capital stock by encouraging the return of
investors, entrepreneurs, and skilled professionals.

109. The government should incorporate fragility indicators into the policy process. Indicators of
fragility and resilience should inform the national development plan, the central government budget,
economic and social programs, and public investment projects. The government should systematically
collect information on fragility, potentially through a dedicated statistical observatory, and it should
establish a forum for multi-stakeholder collaboration on a national fragility-reduction strategy. The
Gambia’s development partners should draw on their extensive international experience to assist the
government in constructing an analytical framework for assessing fragility and formulating policies to
enhance the country’s social, political, and economic resilience.




                                                                                                         33
Annex 1. International Indicators of Fragility
Statistical indicators are no substitute for in-depth analysis, but they can help to identify trends and situate
the experience of individual countries within a broader international context.87 The following annex
reviews three commonly used fragility indicators: the Fragile States Index (FSI) prepared by the US-based
Fund for Peace; the Human Development Index (HDI) prepared by the United Nations Development
Programme (UNDP); and the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA).

The Gambia’s Fragility Indicators Are Worsening

Although the HD, FSI, and CPIA differ in their emphasis, methodology, and data sources, The Gambia’s
fragility indicators have clearly deteriorated over the past several years. Other regional countries such as
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone, which had long been sources of regional instability, appear to have
become less fragile over time, while fragility indicators have worsened substantially in Senegal and
Guinea-Bissau. While much of the region is becoming more resilient, the worsening trend in Senegal
magnifies the risk posed by increasing fragility in The Gambia.
The Fragile States Index (FSI)
The FSI comprises 12 indicators reflecting different dimensions of fragility.88 Based on these indicators,
states are scored on a scale from 0 (fully sustainable) to 120 (very high alert). The Gambia’s FSI score has
deteriorated substantially over the past seven years, and it is now considered a state on high alert. Year-
on-year trends show almost all indicators worsening steadily, led by indicators of human-capital depletion
and followed by public security, economic development, human rights, and state legitimacy.
In 2016, The Gambia, along with Djibouti, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, Mozambique, and Senegal, registered
the largest increase in fragility in Sub-Saharan Africa. In 2015, it experienced the tenth most significant
deterioration among all countries surveyed, including African countries such as Liberia, Libya, and Nigeria
as well as increasingly countries in fragile situations in other regions such as Iraq, Syria, Ukraine, and
Yemen. Most countries with FSI scores similar to those of The Gambia have experienced violent conflicts.
While The Gambia has performed somewhat better than Senegal, the unique relationship between the
two counties intensifies spillover risks.
The Human Development Index and Multidimensional Poverty Index
The HDI is an aggregate of health, education and quality-of-life indicators.89 The Gambia’s HDI score has
remained broadly unchanged since 2010, while all other countries in the subregion have experienced a
general improvement.90 The Gambia’s 2014 HDI score was 0.441, which puts the country in the low-
human-development category. It ranked 175 out of 188 countries and territories included in the survey.
The Gambia’s score is below the average of 0.505 for countries in the low-human-development group and
below the average of 0.518 for countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Within Sub-Saharan Africa, one of The
Gambia’s most comparable peer countries in terms of population size and geography is Lesotho, which
has an HDIs rank of 161.91




                                                                                                             34
Figure A1.1. Human Development Index

 0.490

 0.470

 0.450

 0.430

 0.410

 0.390

 0.370

 0.350
              2005            2010            2011            2012            2013            2014

            The Gambia        Liberia      Senegal      Sierra Leone      Guinea-Bissau      Guinea


The Gambia’s most recent Multidimensional Poverty Index (MPI)92 data date from 2013. They show that
57.2 percent of the population (1,058,000 people) experience multiple dimensions of poverty, while an
additional 21.3 percent (394,000 people) are near multidimensional poverty. The intensity of
multidimensional poverty in The Gambia, estimated as the average of the deprivation scores experienced
by people in multidimensional poverty, is high at 50.5 percent. The Gambia’s intensity-adjusted MPI score
is 0.289, compared to 0.227 for Lesotho.93
The Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
The CPIA estimates the quality of a country’s and institutional arrangements and policy framework, which
determines the government’s ability to effectively leverage development assistance to support
sustainable growth and poverty reduction.94 The CPIA consists of 16 criteria grouped into four equally
weighed clusters: economic management, structural policies, policies for social inclusion and equity, and
public sector management and institutions.
The Gambia’s CPIA score has deteriorated sharply over the past five years, even as many other countries
in the region improved the quality of their public policies and institutional arrangements.95 Human capital
flight and weak public institution have persistently undermined The Gambia’s ability to implement
effective development policies. During the Jammeh administration, the absence of appropriate checks
and balances and the entrenched nature of the regime severely weakened the public administration, and
it remains to be seen whether the new government will be able to reverse the decline in institutional
quality.

Demographic Change and Divisive Politics Threaten Social Stability

The Gambia is small but ethnically diverse. Like neighboring Senegal, it is populated by multiple ethnic
groups, primarily the Mandinka, Jola, and Manjago.96 While The Gambia has long enjoyed a reputation for
ethnic pluralism, there are signs that tensions are beginning to rise. Demographic pressure and
competition for land are compounding rural-urban migration, the immigration of people from outside the



                                                                                                        35
region, and the emigration of educated Gambians. The Jammeh administration suppressed the expression
of grievances and deliberately deepened ethnic divisions in an effort to retain power. While the former
government publicly declared its intention to secure freedom of association and worship, promote gender
parity, and strengthen the protection of children and other vulnerable groups, in reality it continually
repressed the population, employing disappearances, arbitrary detentions, and torture to maintain
control. The Jammeh government routinely targeted journalists, political opponents, and anyone
perceived as critical of the regime.97

Weak Human Development Indicators Contribute to Fragility

While the country has made some progress toward the Millennium Development Goals, living standards
for most Gambians remain very low. Malnutrition is a major problem, and the quality and availability of
basic health services are very limited, especially in poor and remote rural areas. Chronic malnutrition rates
range from 13.9 percent to 30.7 percent, with the North Bank region and the Central River region
surpassing the “critical” threshold of 30 percent. As of June 2016, approximately 59,000 Gambian children
were malnourished, and 10,000 were severely malnourished. Dire humanitarian conditions exacerbate
other dimensions of fragility.
The Gambian population is highly vulnerable to epidemic disease. Outbreaks of meningitis and cholera
continue to occur regularly, though they have been largely contained. The entire population of The
Gambia is exposed to meningitis, while approximately 65 percent is at risk of cholera. Malaria is endemic,
and 90 percent of infections occur during the rainy season. Access to safe drinking water is inadequate
across much of the country.
Poor and vulnerable households have very limited access to basic health services. Some villages lack a
functioning primary health center, while others lack adequately trained staff. Vital medical supplies are
scarce nationwide. Many rural areas are far from health centers, and some lose access entirely during the
rainy season from June to October. An estimated 143,000 people (or 7 percent of the population) are
currently in need of medical care. Uneven access to healthcare deepens ethnic and class divisions.
Despite significant investment in health and education, the country’s human capital stock remains
limited. Average life expectancy nearly doubled between 1960 and 1995, but little progress has been
made since then. Life expectancy in The Gambia is comparable to the regional average, but well below
the average for Sub-Saharan Africa. The adult literacy rate is just 52 percent and only 24.3 percent of
Gambians over the age of 25 have any amount of secondary education. High rates of emigration among
educated adults is further eroding the human capital stock.
The Gambia suffers from severe gender inequality. Although women play an important role in Gambian
society, their access to land, productive resources, healthcare, and education remains very limited.

Regional fragility compounds The Gambia’s internal challenges

During the 1990s and 2000s, instability and conflict in neighboring countries caused an influx of
immigrants into The Gambia.98 In 2014, the regional Ebola crisis drastically reduced tourism, which cut the
GDP growth rate significantly, even though no cases of Ebola were reported in the country.99 Moreover,
like many West African countries, The Gambia has been targeted by international criminal organizations,
including drug cartels, arms dealers, and human traffickers. Organized crime further erodes national
institutions and inhibits The Gambia’s development.




                                                                                                          36
                 Annex 2. The Political Situation
The Gambia’s legacy of undemocratic rule has severely undermined the credibility of the state, and
restoring confidence in public institutions will be a major challenge for the new administration. The
Jammeh regime consolidated power in the executive branch, stocked the legislature with political allies,
and curbed the independence of the judiciary. The public administration was often capricious, even
predatory, and the allocation of public services was distorted by patronage and the placation of favored
constituencies.
The December 2016 presidential election broke a decades-long cycle of pro forma democracy. Although
the Jammeh regime regularly held national elections, international observers and internal opposition
groups described them as neither free nor fair.100 The Jammeh administration used both the national
security agencies and paramilitary groups to suppress dissent. Crackdowns on opposition parties, media
outlets, and groups deemed critical of the administration steadily undermined Gambian civil society.
The Jammeh regime attempted to retain a measure of popular support by pitting ethnic groups against
one another. The increasing prominence of ethnicity-based politics in The Gambia, a country formerly
known for inter-ethnic harmony, became a source of resentment against the administration. Moreover,
a growing share of the population felt excluded from the political process.
Between 2011 and 2016, the regime grew more authoritarian and violent, and its policies became
increasingly erratic. There were persistent, credible reports of widespread human-rights abuses. The
international community forcefully condemned these abuses, but calls for the regime to desist were met
with defiance. The government became more insular, relying on a shrinking pool of domestic allies and
isolating itself from the rest of the world. President Jammeh broke off relations with the Commonwealth
in 2013 and with the European Union in 2014. The Gambia also withdrew from the International Criminal
Court, which the Jammeh regime accused of racism even though the High Judge herself was from The
Gambia.101
In its two final years, the Jammeh regime resorted to increasingly repressive measures, which ultimately
backfired. Although the December elections occurred in a climate of widespread fear, with low
expectations for fairness. Adama Barrow’s victory, and Yahya Jammeh’s initial acceptance of the result,
caught stakeholders by surprise. Both the incumbent regime and the incoming regime faced new and
unpredictable circumstances, further complicating a difficult transition.
The six-week period between the announcement of the election result and the inauguration of the new
government have come to be known as “the Impasse,” as former President Jammeh reversed his earlier
decision to accept the result and instead refused to step down. The events of this brief by consequential
period continue to affect The Gambia’s public finances and institutions. The Impasse placed enormous
strain on an already fragile political and economic situation.

Under the Jammeh Regime, a Strong Executive Branch Manipulated the Public Administration
to Enforce Political Control

The Gambian executive branch continues to dominate the institutional landscape, but 22 years of
erratic policies and unpredictable implementation has undermined both its domestic and external
credibility. Despite exercising effectively autocratic control over the functions of government, the
Jammeh administration was not able to maintain a predictable policy stance. Overcoming this legacy will
present a particularly formidable challenge for the new government, as it strives to maintain the political



                                                                                                        37
coherence of its multi-party coalition. The new government contains diverse ideologies and personalities,
and it remains to be seen whether the new president will be able to maintain policy discipline. This is
especially important in the face of the daunting economic and social situation that the new regime has
inherited.
The civil service and government institutions were repeatedly purged of individuals perceived to be
sympathetic to the opposition.102 Loyalty to the Jammeh regime was treated as a “prerequisite for
professional good standing or advancement.”103 Promotions, demotions, and were firings were
determined by each individual’s perceived loyalty to the ruling government. The regime strove to ensure
that the military and the civil service remained in a constant state of uncertainty—particularly the military,
in which punishments for perceived disloyalty included torture and execution.104
The security apparatus, including the National Intelligence Agency and the state police, were used to
restrict political activity. Arbitrary arrests, detentions, and the deaths of key opposition figures became
especially common in the latter years of the regime. On April 14, 2016, a handful of opposition activists,
including United Democratic Party (UDP) national organizing secretary Solo Sandeng, marched in
Serrekunda, a suburb of Banjul, to call for electoral reform. Gambian police officers broke up the protest
and arrested Sandeng and several bystanders. Sandeng died in police custody. On April 16, UDP leader
Ousainou Darboe was also arrested, and over the next two months, more than 90 largely peaceful
protesters were detained by police and security forces. Forty-two opposition leaders were convicted of
crimes and sentenced to inordinately long prison terms; their trials did not meet international standards
of jurisprudence.105 Protesters who were not arrested were harassed by the security services at their
homes, along with their families, prompting some to flee the country. Throughout 2016, President
Jammeh threatened opposition groups with retribution for protesting his government, rhetoric which
emboldened the security forces to take aggressive action against opposition leaders.
The Jammeh government severely limited freedom of expression and the freedom of the press.
Freedom House has ranked The Gambia among the worst countries in the world in terms of freedom of
the press.106 Gambian authorities stifle media freedom through a combination of criminal prosecutions,
physical intimidation, censorship, and the promotion of government views in state-run or regime-friendly
private outlets. The government has ignored regional court decisions ordering it to end impunity for past
crimes against journalists.107 In addition, the 2013 Information and Communications Act was amended to
introduce a 15-year jail term and a fine of 3 million dalasi (US$77,000) for “anyone using the internet to
spread false news or make derogatory statements, incite dissatisfaction, or instigate violence against the
government or public officials.”108
The government restricted the ability of opposition parties to participate in elections. The UDP, the
largest opposition party, was the most restricted in terms of its financing, organization, and activities.
However, several smaller parties were not threatened by security forces and were not refused permits
for public events, indicating either government favoritism or efforts to divide the opposition. The regime
limited the ability of most opposition parties to organize, conduct outreach operations, and raise
resources. Financial and residency requirements became especially stringent in recent elections. In July
2015, the National Assembly amended the country’s election laws to require that parties register with the
Independent Electoral Commission, pay a deposit of 500,000 dalasi (approximately $11,830), be led by
executive members that reside in The Gambia, and maintain a secretariat in each of The Gambia’s five
regions. The commission had registered nine parties by May 2016.109 The authorized campaign period
before the election was reduced to 11 days, and during the campaign, opposition political party members
were harassed, beaten, arrested, and even killed by the authorities or vigilante groups. Political organizers
were frequently denied permits, and political rallies were held under heavy police supervision.




                                                                                                           38
However, two key factors favored the opposition: the popularity of the unity candidate and the integrity
of the Independent Electoral Commission. The opposition successfully organized a united front around
Adama Barrow’s candidacy, enabling them to mobilize an electorate that was predisposed to vote against
the incumbent. Meanwhile, the government barred most international scrutiny of the elections, leading
to a widespread belief by both international observers and the Gambian public that the election results
would be rigged. However, the institutions responsible for managing the election were apparently allowed
to exercise appropriate oversight an ensure an accurate result.

The Government’s Increasingly Divisive Rhetoric and Violent Political Repression Galvanized
the Opposition

President Jammeh’s strategy of anti-Mandinka propaganda and the bloody repression of peaceful
opposition groups may have backfired. During the campaign, Jammeh repeatedly argued that members
of the Mandinka ethnic group were not Gambians,110 referring to them as “enemies” and “foreigners,”
blaming them for the country’s political and economic troubles,111 and threatening violence against
them.112 His remarks were condemned by the United Nations special adviser on the prevention of
genocide.113 The Mandinka constitute about 30 percent of the Gambian population, and Jammeh’s anti-
Mandinka rhetoric alienated a powerful voting bloc.114 Meanwhile, there was evidence of a general
backlash against the violent repression of peaceful protests, including the death of Solo Sandeng and the
imprisonment Ousainou Darboe, a Mandinka opposition figure.
The violent repression of peaceful protests motivated the opposition parties to form a coalition.
Previous coalition attempts had been limited to a small number of minor parties.115 However, faced with
an increasingly hostile government and sensing a groundswell of popular support, the major opposition
parties began to organize into a unified front.
In November 2016, seven opposition parties signed a memorandum of understanding outlining their
cooperation framework and objectives. The memorandum of understanding stated that the coalition
would hold a national convention to which each party would send an equal number of delegates. At the
convention, the parties would agree to support an independent unity candidate for president.
The memorandum defined the coalition’s common goals. These included changes to the electoral laws
to ensure free and fair elections, the establishment of statutory term limits; and stronger oversight of the
executive through constitutional reform and measures to protect the freedom of civil society. The
memorandum also included goals for restoring social harmony by promoting tolerance of ethnic,
linguistic, political and religious diversity, advancing gender equality, and reestablishing a secular state.
The manifesto also highlighted the regime’s human rights abuses and called for redress. The parties
declared their intention to set up a truth and reconciliation commission with the power to recommend
remedies for past injustices, including the payment of compensation by the state. A separate commission
of inquiry would consider claims involving property. Finally, a general amnesty for Gambians in exile would
allow their unconditional return.
The memorandum included a set of economic policy measures and institutional reforms. The coalition
committed to reintegrating The Gambia into ECOWAS and the Commonwealth and reestablishing
compliance with all conventions on human rights and other international commitments. The
memorandum called for safeguarding freedom of representation and expression by repealing laws
criminalizing speech, protecting the right to a fair and speedy trial by respecting the independence of
courts and judges, and establishing a Judicial Service Commission to oversee the enforcement of legal
rights. The memorandum also called for the creation of a National Human Rights Institution to review
convictions, release persons detained unlawfully, and inspect all places of detention to stop torture and


                                                                                                          39
other unlawful practices. The memorandum’s overarching objective was to develop a new Gambia free
from extreme poverty, persecution, and impunity, where democracy and the rule of law would thrive, and
were dissent and free expression would be tolerated.
The Gambian diaspora strongly supported the opposition. The diaspora was a major sources of financing
for the opposition, and it spread information about opposition political activity through internet
publications beyond the control of the Jammeh regime. Diaspora organizations publicly and consistently
insisted on a united opposition,116 even threatening to withhold financial support for any candidate or
party attempting to run against the coalition.117 The diaspora leveraged social networks to encourage the
participation of an ever-growing group of expatriates, and it used innovative internet-based fundraising
instruments to finance the opposition.118 Online fundraising site GoFundMe indicated that US$71,107 was
raised from 686 donors, mostly part of the US-based diaspora, on behalf of the coalition. A large majority
of these gifts were under US$100, pointing to significant grassroots participation.119

The Independent Electoral Commission Proved Credible and Effective

Since 2006, the regime had repeatedly amended the electoral laws to entrench its advantages. The
second round of voting was eliminated, the official campaign period was shortened to 11 days, the deposit
required from each was increased, and greater restrictions had been placed on political organizing and
fundraising. In this context, and especially given the violence and repression that preceded the elections,
many observers believed that the Independent Electoral Commission would not serve as an autonomous
arbiter of a fair process. The president appointed the commission members, in consultation with the
Judicial Service Commission and the Public Service Commission,120 and could remove them with judicial
approval. This cemented the perception that the Independent Electoral Commission, like most other
organs of the state, was beholden to the incumbent and his party and that it would not allow for a free
and fair election. However, this assessment proved inaccurate.
The Independent Electoral Commission has a high degree of technical capacity, which it demonstrated
in previous elections.121 International observers had refused to certify the 2011 election because the
existing political environment was not conducive to a fair campaign.122 The observers, however,
complemented the Independent Electoral Commission on its conduct of the elections (see Box A2.1). Since
the 2011 election, the electoral commission had implemented technical changes that improved the
process of vote counting.123 These changes included improved biometric voter identification, a redrawn
electoral map that created more manageable voting districts, and on-the-spot vote counting. Prior to the
elections, the chairman of the commission launched a nationwide outreach effort designed to promote
public confidence in the integrity of the electoral process.
Box A2.1. The Independent Commission History of Competent Election Management:
Evidence from 2011
The Commonwealth Election Observer team gave glowing marks to the Gambia’s Independent Electoral
Commission, despite the fact that most international observers considered that the elections were not free and fair.
Below, we provide the assessment of the behavior of the electoral commission in 2011, pointing to the fact that this
agency has a history of carrying out its functions efficiently.




                                                                                                                40
According to the report, the election day was managed in accordance with the Constitution and Electoral Act of
2009. All elements of the conduct of elections, from a technical standpoint, were handled with professionalism. For
example, observers noted that most polling stations opened on time, that they were generally well laid out, and that
polling officials and party agents present appeared to discharge their duties effectively. The secrecy of the vote was
guaranteed as ballot drums were placed behind dark screens away from voters, polling staff, party agents, and
observers. Transparent and broken windows of school classrooms where ballot boxes had been placed were covered
with improvised opaque materials. Voter register appeared robust; there were only a few instances in which
individuals were denied the opportunity to vote. Polling officials observed the closing procedures appropriately: they
sealed the mouth of the ballot drums with diligence and then transported the drums to designated counting centers
across the country with adequate security and within view of polling agents and observers.
The rules of counting were closely followed. Presiding officers publicly announced ballot tokens supplied and those
remaining, as well as any invalid votes. The seals of the ballot drums were broken in full view of those present,
emptied into a sieve, and the marbles arranged into special counting trays holding 200 to 500 marbles at a time.
Each candidate’s result was publicly announced and the trays holding their tokens shown around before the result
was certified. After this, the results were collated and declared by the assistant returning officer before being
transmitted to the regional electoral commission office, and then to the electoral commission headquarters.
The team was impressed by the general atmosphere of transparency and in some cases collegiality in which the
closing and counting processes were conducted. It also commended the swift announcement of results on 25
November, the day after the election.
Source: A. Bolaji Akinyemi, “The Gambia Presidential Election 2011: Preliminary Statement 28 November 2011,” The
Commonwealth, November 28, 2011.

The Jammeh Administration Overestimated the Magnitude of Its Own Entrenched
Advantages

Following the surprise victory of Adama Barrow and the seven-party coalition, it appears that the
Jammeh administration mistakenly believed that its campaign of intimidation, voter suppression, and
the restriction of opposition activity would be sufficiently effective that the actual election did not need
to be rigged. However, the credibility of the election process empowered the opposition, encouraging
coalition parties to mobilize their supporters despite a climate of fear and repression. The UDP had
boycotted previous elections, but the coalition determined that in this case a boycott would be an
ineffective strategy, and that placing their trust in the electoral process could yield a major political
victory.
Box A2.2. The Gambian Voting System
The Gambia has an unorthodox voting system where glass marble ballots and colored drums are used to count votes.
Marbles represent ballot papers and ballot drums are voting boxes. Each of the presidential candidates gets a metal
drum painted in a specific color, with their photograph and symbol pasted on it. Voters, once their identity has been
verified, are handed a glass marble; they are then sent to an enclosed space private space to vote by slipping the
marble into the drum of their choice. Polling officials listen carefully for the sound of a bicycle bell which is attached
to the end of a tube inside the drum. The sound signal is intended to prevent individuals from inappropriately
handling the drum. Sawdust or sand is sprinkled on the bottom of the barrel so that no inadvertent sound is heard.
Afterwards, voters have a finger dipped in indelible ink.
To count the vote, polling station personnel pours the marbles into a wooden tray with 200 or 500 holes. The
candidate with the greatest number of votes is declared the winner. In this election, the counting of the vote will
take place directly at the polling stations and the winner will be declared at the polling stations.
The advantage of this voting system is that it is simple, affordable and locally owned. The system has been in use
since 1965, to account for the population’s illiteracy. Accordingly, Gambian voters are well acquainted with the
system, and it is reputedly difficult to rig.


                                                                                                                      41
There are three main disadvantages. First, it does not allow voters to express a blank vote in secrecy. The absence
of ringing clearly indicates to the audience in the polling station that a vote was not cast in one of the drums. Also,
slight (but clearly noticeable) tone-ringing differences between drums may produce unacceptable breaches in the
secrecy of the vote and may lead to potential intimidation or undue influence on voters. Second, despite its
reputation for probity, the system could be manipulated. Drums are usually placed behind the polling booth and,
thus, they are not visible to polling officers and electoral observers. It could be relatively easy under these
circumstances to tamper with the security seals of any of the drums. Furthermore, in case of election-related
disputes, the absence of ballot papers (and consequently, of a paper trail with clearly marked ballots) makes an
eventual postelection vote recount an exercise that may prove more difficult to dispel or rebut any allegations of
electoral fraud. In an environment where the credibility and the capacity of the state is limited, claims of fraud and
corruption that cannot be transparently contradicted take on a factual dimension which further diminishes the
credibility of the system.
Source: ACE Election Practitioner’s Guide 2006, updated to reflect current understanding from various available
newspaper sources, 2017
Election day brought a mix of anticipation and fear, as both foreign and domestic media reported that
the election was likely to be closely contested. The Gambia’s election had received significant global
media attention, and the regime’s inability to control the media narrative may have further discouraged
it from attempting to manipulate the results. After the polls closed, precinct-by-precinct vote tallies were
reported on national radio and television.124
On December 2, the chairman of the Independent Electoral Commission announced that Adama Barrow
had won the election by a nine-point margin, and President Jammeh shocked the nation by conceding
defeat the same day. Early results indicated that Barrow had received 263,515 votes (45.5%), while
President Jammeh took 212,099 (36.7%), and a third-party candidate, Mama Kandeh, won 102,969
(17.8%).125 Several days after the election, the Independent Electoral Commission amended the tally to
correct a mathematical error, which narrowed Barrow's margin of victory from 9 percent to 4 percent.126
However, the commission made it clear that the correction did not affect the election result.
The regime may have been too complacent to energize its base. The Independent Electoral Commission
indicates that voter turnout was moderate at approximately 59.3 percent, broadly in line with the
historical average for freely contested democratic elections in The Gambia and slightly below the average
for Sub-Saharan Africa.127 The number of nonvoters exceeded the margin of victory ten times over, leading
some analysts to conclude that Jammeh focused too heavily on intimidating the opposition rather than
energizing his own base. Ultimately, his loss may have been caused as much by the apathy of his
supporters as by the passion of the opposition.
The fact that the coalition candidate did not win a clear majority has important implications for the new
government. Although the coalition has a compelling electoral mandate, it will need to reach an accord
with the former ruling party and its supporters. The new government has made encouraging public
statements to this effect. However, implementing much-needed political and economic reforms will
inevitably alter the distribution of resources and political authority, and the new government must be
extremely careful to build consensus regarding the necessity of these reforms to avoid creating the
impression that their intent is to penalize former regime supporters. Even in the best-case scenario, the
new government may be vulnerable to demagogues attempting to capitalize on the perceived
disenfranchisement of the Jammeh regime’s core constituencies.
The ARPC will remain active regardless of whether Jammeh is leading it, and its supporters remain
politically powerful. Moreover, former President Jammeh himself is not prohibited from returning to The
Gambia or continuing to engage in national politics. It is likely that Jammeh has amassed significant
resources that would allow him to continue to influence the political system, should he choose to do so.



                                                                                                                   42
The Barrow Administration Faces Complex Political Challenges

Though recently elected and generally popular, the Barrow administration already faces important
threats to its credibility. While the overall results of the election are not in doubt, significant irregularities
were reported at the local level. Supporters of the former regime have attempted to cast doubt on the
results, eroding the credibility of democratic institutions at a pivotal moment. Moreover, although
President Barrow indicated that ministers in his government would be compelled to declare their assets
before assuming office, detailed rules for asset declaration were not provided. A failure to honor this
promise would be a major blow to the new regime’s efforts to restore confidence in public sector
transparency.128 In addition, Barrow’s appointment of Fatoumata Tambajang as vice president was sharply
criticized and ultimately rescinded.129 Although Tambajang is a former minister and United Nations
Development Programme staffer, and is considered a key architect of the seven-party coalition, at age 67
she did not meet the constitutional criteria for the vice presidency, which imposes an age limit of 65.
During Barrow’s first press conference in Banjul on January 28, he indicated that while he was reviewing
comprehensive changes to all aspects of the public sector, he would maintain the secret police, which
has long been responsible for the torture and intimidation of Gambian citizens. He indicated that the
agency’s name would be changed and that its staff would be retrained. However, these assurances have
failed to mollify concerns about its past abuses. Barrow has also stated that he will reform the armed
forces with the assistance of The Gambia’s development partners, but much of the Jammeh-era command
structure remains in place.130
The opacity of the Jammeh regime, the turbulence of the transition, and a limited pool of experienced
public administrators have hindered the new government’s ability to implement its agenda. The new
administration must assume the burden of governing despite having virtually no knowledge of the inner
workings of the previous regime. The president has indicated that he would use his administration’s first
hundred days to carry out a comprehensive review of all aspects of government activity. While this review
will be necessary, the length of time required to complete it will slow the implementation of the reform
agenda. Finally, the government will consist of a completely new set of ministers who will have to rely on
a depleted cadre of senior civil servants, some of whom may be regarded as untrustworthy due to their
past association with the Jammeh regime.
The new administration is dependent on ECOWAS peacekeepers, foreign military assistance, and deeply
unpopular domestic security agencies. Over 7,000 ECOWAS soldiers were deployed to The Gambia during
the crisis, and their withdrawal has been delayed at the behest of the Barrow administration. These forces
will likely remain responsible for the security of the state while the military and law-enforcement agencies
are being reformed. However, keeping ECOWAS forces in the country may require concessions, which
could include guarantees regarding Senegalese overland commercial transport through The Gambia, the
long-discussed construction of a trans-Gambia bridge, or measures to suppress separatist activity in the
Casamance region.
Cracks have already emerged in the seven-party coalition. Almost immediately after the election, the
parties became deeply divided over the question of whether former President Jammeh would face
prosecution. While that conflict was ultimately resolved with the support of the international community,
it underscored the challenge of maintaining a broad-based consensus. This episode was followed by an
ongoing controversy over the choice of vice president. The legislative elections further strained the
coalition, and the impact of the UDP’s success in those elections remains to be seen. One coalition party,
the NRP, has already moved to distance itself from the coalition by assuming the minority leadership in
the National Assembly.




                                                                                                              43
The Legislative Elections Intensified Political Partisanship

On April 6, 2017, elections were held for the National Assembly. The coalition parties won an
overwhelming majority, while the APRC lost 38 seats. The UDP dominated the election, claiming 31 seats
of 53 seats in the legislature. Meanwhile, the other coalition parties received a combined 12 seats. Only
three of the nine registered parties—the UDP, GDC, and PDOIS—appear to have a broad national
following, while support for the other six parties was concentrated in specific regions.
    Figure A2.1: The Composition of the National Assembly and Share of the Popular Vote by Political Party

     UDP    NRP    PDOIS    PPP   APRC    GDC    IND




The UDP’s legislative majority carries both advantages and risks. The UDP’s ability to pass legislation
unilaterally could expedite the reform process. However, less powerful coalition parties could become
alienated if they feel the UDP is ignoring their input. Beyond its political implications, this situation could
intensify social tensions, as many smaller parties have relatively narrow ethnic and regional
constituencies. Whether the coalition can maintain its solidity will have important consequences for the
success of the new government.
The new administration’s adherence to the memorandum of understanding between the coalition
parties will be vital to maintain its standing as a unity government. Honoring its commitments under the
memorandum will require the Barrow government to focus on four key priorities. The first will be to
review the national constitution and propose specific amendments designed to achieve the objectives set
forth in the memorandum. The second will be to reform the electoral system to enhance its transparency
and integrity. The third will be to review and reform the judiciary and civil service to improve their
effectiveness and impartiality. And the fourth will be to review and reform the nation’s foreign policy.
Achieving meaningful progress in each of these areas while also carrying out a comprehensive analysis of
the public sector will be among the most crucial challenges facing the Barrow administration.




                                                                                                             44
Annex 3. Lessons from The Gambia’s 1985
Fiscal Crisis131
In 1985, The Gambia experienced an acute debt crisis. External arrears exceeded 50 percent of GDP,
foreign debt was approaching 250 percent of GDP, the current-account deficit was over 30 percent, and
the public-sector budget deficit was around 25 percent. The Gambia also faced a host of other economic
challenges, including high inflation, declining real per capita income, large-scale capital flight, pervasive
dollarization, weak agricultural production, dwindling real investment, deteriorating physical
infrastructure, shortages of basic commodities, low business confidence, poor public-sector
creditworthiness, and the suspension of all donor aid except for humanitarian assistance.
The government responded to this dire economic situation by embarking on one of the most
comprehensive structural-adjustment programs of any country in Sub-Saharan Africa. Known as the
Economic Reform Program (ERP), the strategy’s objectives were to halt the deterioration of the economy
and to lay the foundation for sustained growth. The government swiftly and comprehensively
implemented the ERP, and an economic revival began almost immediately. After contracting for three
consecutive years, the GDP growth rate rose to an annual average of 4.3 percent over the following five
years.
The reforms were dramatic in both their speed and scope. Within 18 months, the government had
floated the dalasi and made it fully convertible, raised interest rates and established a treasury-bill tender
system to determine market interest rates, raised taxes on petroleum and rice while lowering many
import duties, cracked down on customs fraud, rescheduled external debt, reduced the civil service by
almost 20 percent, adopted stricter public investment criteria, sharply increased the producer price of
groundnuts, raised prices for water and electricity, public transportation and petroleum, liberalized the
fertilizer market, and privatized one government bank and one trading company.
Managing the political unpopularity of many vital reform measures required sharing the burden of difficult
tradeoffs. The ERP imposed costs on virtually all political constituencies. The devaluation of the dalasi
eroded the incomes of civil servants and pensioners; high interest rates raised financing costs for
individuals and enterprises; reduced public-sector employment and the retargeting of public spending
forced the reallocation of labor and capital, particularly among the urban population; the reform of the
parastatal sector increased the cost of basic services; and higher user fees and commodity prices,
particularly for gasoline, raised costs for business and individuals.
The pace of the ERF’s implementation also helped the government overcome the political challenges of
a difficult reform effort. There are advantages and drawbacks to a rapid implementation timetable. In a
highly unbalanced or distorted economy, gradual or partial reforms can worsen economic problems,
because improved efficiency in one market can increase the relative cost of the remaining distortions in
other markets. For example, if controls on foreign capital flows are removed, but trade protections are
not, more investment is likely to flow into inefficient industries. Moreover, the benefits of a gradual
approach take longer to materialize, allowing more time for negatively affected interest groups to
organize opposition. However, implementing comprehensive reforms in a short period require substantial
institutional capacity and a highly selective reform agenda. ERP reforms focused on “stroke-of-the-pen”
measures, such as changes in administratively set prices (e.g. exchange rates and electricity tariffs) or the
suspension of regulatory controls (e.g. on currency flows and fertilizer marketing). These reforms did not
require extended institutional action or coordinated implementation. Two crucial reforms that were
sustained for several years—monetary restraint and reduced budget deficits—were backed by the


                                                                                                           45
concerted efforts of donors, particularly the International Monetary Fund. Other reforms that required
more sustained implementation, including the crackdown on customs fraud, improved public investment
criteria, the use of performance contracts for public enterprises, and tax reform, were less successful.
The urgency of the crisis also facilitated the reform process. The problems of The Gambia’s economy
were evident as early as 1979, and they would have been more easily resolved had policymakers
responded earlier. By 1985, the economy was experiencing a major crisis, which was exacerbated by the
widespread perception that an economic collapse might lead to The Gambia’s annexation by Senegal. The
obvious severity of the crisis encouraged policymakers to adopt drastic measures that they might
otherwise have resisted, and encouraged the public to overcome risk aversion and self-interest and
embrace radical change and shared sacrifice.132
The Gambia’s strong political leadership was vital to the implementation of the ERP. Many countries in
Sub-Saharan Africa have experienced economic crises, but few countries have been able to execute a
comprehensive reform program as swiftly and thoroughly The Gambia. The Gambia’s political leadership
was crucial to the success of the ERP. President Dawda Jawara clearly identified the sources of the
country’s economic crisis and advocated decisive action. He charged the Minister of Finance, Sheriff Sisay,
with championing he reform effort; Sisay showed strong leadership in convincing his Cabinet colleagues
to support the necessary measures and proactively engaged with donor agencies to solicit advice and
economic support. Though less common in Sub-Saharan Africa, political leaders in East and Southeast Asia
have frequently entrusted macroeconomic policies to technocratic senior officials, insulating them from
political pressure. This strategy has contributed to the economic success of many of these countries.
President Jawara’s political popularity encouraged public confidence in the reform program, and the
ruling People’s Progressive Party maintained a strong base of support across the country. The
government adopted an effective communications strategy and encouraged open debate about policy
reforms, which helped build consensus and provided an opportunity for citizens to assess the costs and
benefits of proposed policy changes. The decisiveness and commitment of the political leadership also
encouraged robust and constructive donor support.
The ERP offers a prime example of well-designed donor support encouraging stabilization and reform.
Rather than attempt to ease the political pressure generated by the crisis with assurances of emergency
aid, the donor community made it clear that unless the government launched a far-reaching reform effort,
international agencies might let events take their course. The small size of the Gambian economy greatly
increased the relative value of external support, further increasing the leverage wielded by the donor
community. When the government demonstrated a credible commitment to reform, donors responded
with both financial support and technical assistance. External technical assistance enhanced The Gambia’s
capacity to design and implement reforms, allowing the authorities to take a more active role in designing
the ERP and increasing local ownership over the reform program.
The least-successful elements of the ERP shared a common feature: they involved institutional
reorganization and changes in the attitudes and behaviors of public officials. These reforms required
extensive, sustained attention to institutional characteristics and incentive systems. While high-level
commitment is a necessary condition for bureaucratic change, it is not sufficient to ensure success. The
Gambian public sector lacked the managerial capacity to build consensus within affected institutions, to
appoint reform proponents to key positions, restructure institutional incentives, or implement training
activities to facilitate the reform process. Effective managers could have created a greater sense of
ownership among subordinates by encouraging a more participatory reform process, they could have built
a consensus for reform within public institutions, and they could have enlisted high-level support to
overcome institutional resistance to change. Greater technical capacity among public-sector managers
could have enabled them to better distribute the costs of reorganization across administrative units,


                                                                                                        46
evaluate the impact of reforms on institutional structures, and predict problems that would delay the
implementation of the reform agenda.
The Gambia’s experience with the ERP demonstrates that a democratic government can provide the
strong leadership necessary to rapidly implement a deep and expansive reform program. President
Jawara's elected government conferred popular legitimacy on the reform agenda. It distributed the costs
of the reforms across a wide range of constituencies and interest groups, and it focused the benefits on
poor households. Designating a technically qualified official with a meaningful degree of autonomy to lead
the reform program strengthened confidence in the political impartiality of the reform effort.
Elections have served as precursors to important reform efforts elsewhere in Sub-Saharan Africa. For
example, the strong electoral mandate enjoyed by the Chiluba government in Zambia enabled it to
implement economic reforms that had long eluded its predecessors. Moreover, a successful economic
reform program can enhance the popularity and legitimacy of the government In Ghana, the military
government of Jerry John Rawlings implemented a multiyear austerity and economic recovery plan, after
which Rawlings’s was elected president.
The Gambia’s experience also offers lessons for the donor community. While standing by to provide
humanitarian aid may appear to be a responsible approach, it can also diminish the sense of urgency
necessary to effect deep reforms. However, providing targeted assistance to poor and vulnerable
households and/or politically important groups during the reform process can help eliminate potential
sources of resistance and maintain popular consensus. Finally, extensive technical assistance can enhance
the government’s capacity to participate in the design of the reform program, helping to build local
ownership and enabling donors to leverage on-the-ground knowledge of the country’s institutional and
policy framework.




                                                                                                       47
                      Annex 4. The Environment
Environmental degradation presents a serious challenge to The Gambia’s long-term economic
development. The country’s vulnerability to windstorms, rainstorms, droughts, and coastal erosion
present major challenges to an agriculture sector that is mainly rain-fed, with negative implications for
poverty and food security. As the agriculture sector employs about 79 percent of the workforce and
contributes about 30 percent of gross domestic product, any environmental risk that affects croplands
and crop yields will also impact household income and food security.
The Gambia is one of the most vulnerable countries in Africa to the adverse impacts of climate change.
Roughly half of its total land area is fewer than 20 meters above sea level, and about a third is fewer than
10 meters above sea level. Any significant rise in sea levels could submerge much of the country. Currently,
about 20 percent of The Gambia’s land area is flooded annually, and its mangrove ecosystems are already
affected by saline intrusion as well as flooding. Linear trends indicate that total rainfall during the wet
season fell by an average of 8.8 mm per month per decade between 1960 and 2006. While destructive
flooding is an annual risk, other hazards such as drought are rare but potentially devastating events.
The effects of climate change—including increasing temperatures, rising sea levels, and an uptick in
extreme weather events—compound The Gambia’s already substantial development challenges. The
country’s first national communication to the United Nations framework convention on climate change
projected that a 1-meter sea-level rise will inundate about 92 square kilometers of land in the coastal
zone, including the entire capital city of Banjul. Projected climate change will also have a deeply negative
impact on crop production, biodiversity and wildlife, coastal resources, and forestry. Climate-change
mitigation and adaptation is not only a precondition for sustainable development, it is essential to
maintain social and economic stability in The Gambia.
Agricultural Practices and Population Pressures are Causing Serious Environmental Damage
The Gambia’s rapidly growing and urbanizing population and its heavy reliance on rain-fed subsistence
agriculture are putting enormous strain on environmental resources. Unplanned growth has contributed
to urban sprawl, and the inadequacy of waste management and sanitation services intensifies the
environmental impact of a growing population. Environmental degradation in urban and peri-urban areas
is compounding the social instability associated with urbanization. Meanwhile, the country’s farmers are
clearing more and more land to feed a growing urban population.
Desertification caused the loss of nearly 100,000 hectares of forested area in The Gambia between 1998
and 2009.133 Slash-and-burn agriculture is the principal cause of desertification,134 combined with the
population’s overwhelming reliance on charcoal (14.3%) and wood (83.4%) to meet its energy needs and
the continued encroachment of human settlements into protected areas.135 Forests cover approximately
41 percent of The Gambia’s total land area of 1,130,000 hectares.136 In the 1950s, 34,000 hectares were
set aside for forest and parks, but by 2001, only 2 percent of this area remained protected. Forest fires,
which directly result from slash-and-burn crop agriculture, hunting, wild honey harvesting, and charcoal
burning negatively impact the country’s economy and biodiversity. In the Lower River Region, about
70 percent of community forests and 95 percent of forest parks were destroyed in 2016.137 The impact of
deforestation is clear both in environmental terms and in economic terms. The erosion of The Gambia’s
natural resources will reduce its desirability to tourists.
The government recognizes the danger posed by deforestation and has established a legal and
administrative framework to improve forest management, but lack or resources undermines the
government’s capacity to implement the necessary policies and programs.138 With support from


                                                                                                         48
international organizations, such as the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization, The Gambia
has introduced innovative forest-management systems, which provided local populations with secure and
permanent forest ownership rights. Transferring forest tenure from state ownership to management by
local communities has enabled them to reduce illegal logging and forest fires.139
Environmental degradation poses especially serious risks to countries with weak institutions, which
have a limited capacity to absorb the social, economic, and political shocks associated with
environmental disasters. Deteriorating environmental quality leads to competition for land resources,
encourages unplanned rural-urban migration, worsens health outcomes, and reduces the economic
potential of rural areas. Environmental degradation multiplies the risks posed by other dimensions of
fragility. It aggravates already challenging socioeconomic conditions and intensifies the risk of instability
and conflict. The Gambia’s rapid population growth, underdeveloped agricultural sector, and disorganized
urbanization process are damaging critical ecosystems and increasing the multidimensional vulnerability
of the population. Reversing these trends will require building the capacity of institutions to provide public
services in rural areas, including agricultural extension, the prevention of illegal logging, environmental
protection, and sustainable water and sanitation systems.




                                                                                                           49
                                             Endnotes

1
  CIA World Leaders 2016, information updated on 15 August 2016
2
  Gambian Soldiers Loyal to Jammeh Accused of Taking Part in Kanilai Demonstrations. Smbc News 05 June, 2017.
3
  CIA World Factbook, 2016; and Encyclopedia Britannica, 2016.
4
  Omar A. Touray, The Gambia and The World: A History of the Foreign Policy of Africa’s Smallest State, 1965–1995
(Hamburg: Institute of African Affairs, 2000), 14
5
  FAO, Gambia at a glance. www.fao.org/gambia/fao-in-gambia/gambia-at-a-glance/en
6
  FAO Gambia at a glance. www.fao.org/gambia/fao-in-gambia/gambia-at-a-glance/en
7
  Joint Country Partnership Strategy (AfDB, and the World Bank), For Fiscal Years 2013-2016, March 11, 2013, p.4
8
  World Bank, 2016 “World Development Indicators” and CIA World Factbook, 2016.
9
  Jean-Louis Arcand and Dany Jaimovich, “Does Ethnic Diversity Reduce Economic Interactions? Evidence from
Exchange Networks in Rural Gambia,” MPRA Paper 60497 (Munich Personal RePEc Archive, Apri l 29, 2015).
10
   Tukulur and Lorobo are tribes closely associated to the Fulani tribe.
11
   Arcand and Jaimovic, “Does Ethnic Diversity Reduce Economic Interactions?”
12
   World Christian Database, taken from Association of Religion Data Archives. Data pertains to 2010.
13
   Thomson, “Revisiting ‘Mandingization’ in Coastal Gambia and Casamance (Senegal): Four Approaches to Ethnic
Change,” African Studies Review 54, no. 2 (2011): 95–121.
14
   Momodou Darboe, “Gambia,” African Studies Review 47, no. 2 (2004): 73–82.
15
   Kenneth Roberts Wray, Commonwealth and Colonial Law (London: Stevens, 1966), 782–85.
16
   Arnold Hughes and David Perfect, A Political History of The Gambia, 1816–1994 (Rochester, NY: University of
Rochester Press, 2006).
17
   Ibid.
18
   McPherson, M. and S. Radelet (Eds.) 1996. “Economic Recovery in The Gambia: Insights for Adjustment in Sub-
Saharan Africa.” Harvard Studies in International Development. Cambridge: Harvard University Press
19
   Steve Fishman, “Gambia: Tiny Sliver of a Country Still Shaking After Coup Attempt,” Christian Science Monitor,
August 14, 1981, http://www.csmonitor.com/1981/0814/081452.html.
20
   John A. Wiseman, “The Gambia: Recent History,” in Katharine Murison, ed. Africa South of the Sahara 2004, 33rd
ed. (New York: Europa Publications, 2005), 456.
21
   Human Rights Watch, 2015. State of Fear: Arbitrary Arrests, Torture and Killings
22
   The administration restricted political participation by requiring presidential candidates to make a US$1,000
deposit and produce at least 5,000 signatures. The president’s party routinely used state resources, including
state-run media, in its political campaigns, while opposition parties relied exclusively on private donations. The
authorized campaign period was shortened to just 11 days, and political organization and campaigning by the
opposition was discouraged. Opposition political figures and party members were subject to harassment, violence,
imprisonment, and even targeted killings.
23
   IRIN, 2006. Gambia: Murky Voter Registration Mars Election Run-Up.
24
   The Irresponsible Salve of Tribalism in The Gambia, April 8, 2015 – Kairo News
25
   International Monetary Fund (IMF), Article IV Consultation 2013.
26
   BBC News, Gambia’s President Elect Adama Barrow’s Life Story, 19 January 2017.
27
   Gambia Talents Radio. 2017. Is the UDP a Mandinka Party?.
28
   Gambia: Is Widespread Ethnic Cleansing Planned for the Civil Services and Security Forces?”, Freedom
Newspaper, March 27, 2017. See also
29
   Foreign Travel Advise, Government of the United Kingdom – April 11, 2017.
30
   Ibid
31
   See also The Gambia after Elections: Implications for Governance and Security in West Africa, Edrissa Sanyang
and Sanna Camara, Friedrich-Ebert Stiftung Peace and Security, 2017, p. 9 and p. 10 “According to Wikileaks, a
landing fee of $3 million is paid to Jammeh for every haul that arrives from South America”and “whilst the regional




                                                                                                                50
trafficking was ongoing between Banjul, Bissau and Dakar, General NA Chuto enjoyed Jammeh’s personal
protection was given sanctuary in Banjul for many years”.
32
   Kairo News. 2016. Senior NIA Officer Nabbed with Drugs.
33
   U.S. State Department, Trafficking in Persons Report: 2016 (Washington, DC: U.S. State Department, June 2016).
34
   President Barrow resigned from the United Democratic Party and ran as an independent in the 2016 election.
35
   Gambia: Which Parties Constitute the Minority in the National Assembly, FOROYAA Newspaper, 28 April 2017
36
   The Freedom Newspaper. 2017. Post-Election Violence Hits Gambia; As Fighting Ensued Between APRC And UDP
Supporters in Foni; Diabugu, Too, Is in A Messy Situation!.
37
   Constitution of The Gambia, 1997 and reprinted in 2002, Chapter VII, Part 1, Article 1.
38
   Constitution of The Gambia, 1997 and reprinted in 2002, Chapter VII, Part 1, Article 4.
39
   Constitution of The Gambia, 1997 and reprinted in 2002, Chapter VIII, Part 4, Article 5 (a).
40
   The World Bank, World Development Indicators, various recent years
41
   IMF, Article IV Consultation, September 2015.
42
   CIA World Leaders 2016, information updated on 15 August 2016
43
   The Gambia: Improving Civil Service Performance, Volume I: Report No. 51644-GM February 2010, P.17
44
   Peter Dörrie and Robert Beckhusen, “Gambian Dictator Cracks Down after Half -Baked Coup Attempt,”
Medium.com, January 10, 2015, https://medium.com/war-is-boring/gambian-dictator-cracks-down-after-half-
baked-coup-attempt-23d53fda18c7.
45
   Freedom House, Freedom in the World, Gambia, 2012
46
   Abdou Karim Sanneh, ”How The Gambia Has Become a Drug Transit State,” Maafanta.com, May 19, 2009.
47
   Abdoulaye Saine, The Paradox of Third-Wave Democratization in Africa: The Gambia under AFPRC-APRC rule,
1994–1998 (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2009), 92, 204, and 112.
48
   www.accessgambia.com/ngos
49
   Reporters without Borders, 2017 World Press – The Gambia
50
   Article 25 of the Constitution provides for the freedom of speech and free expression of the press, but the
government does not respect those rights in practice.
51
   Amnesty International, Annual Report: Gambia 2011 (New York: Amnesty International, 2012). The latest
example is the detention of the manager of the Taranga FM community radio station, who was detained in July
2015 and remained in custody for months.
52
   National Nutrition Agency, National Nutritional Survey in The Gambia Using Standardized Monitoring and
Assessment of Relief Transition (SMART) Methods, 2013. The Gambia has a national global acute malnutrition
prevalence of 9.9 percent, which according to its classification is quite elevated.
53
   According to the Cadre Harmonisé analysis conducted in August 2016.
54
   2016 UNOCHA, Gambia Humanitarian Need Overview, November 2015, p. 15
55
   Kevin Sieff, “Africa Exodus: Tiny Gambia Has a Big Export: Migrants Desperate to Reach Europe,” Washington
Post, June 14, 2015.
56
   International Organization for Migration, as reported by the Guardian. “Gambian Migrants who Risk Death Find
Life less than Sweet in Italy”, Friday 6 May 2016.
57
   C. Omar Kebbeh, “The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s ‘Smiling Coast,’” Migration Policy Institute, August 15, 2013.
58
   Ibid.
59
   The Gambia after Elections: Implications for Governance and Security in West Africa, Edrissa Sanyang and Sanna
Camara, Friedrich-Ebert Stiftung Peace and Security, 2017, p. 9
60
   “Crisis Analysis of The Gambia,” ACAPS, n.d., www.acaps.org/country/gambia/crisis-analysis.
61
   The Gambia: Youth Employment and Skills Development Study: Improving Youth Employment Outcomes through
Enhanced Skills Development (Washington, DC: World Bank, August 2010).
62
   The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s Smiling Coast, C. Omar Kebbeh, August 15, 2013 migrati onpolicy.org and
“Measuring the international mobility of skilled workers”, by Frédéric Docquier and Abdesalam Marfouk,
WorldBank WPS3381, 2006 – Table 2
63
   Kebbeh, C. Omar, 2013 “The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s Smiling Coast” migrationpolicy.org
64
   Docquier, Frédéric and Abdesalam Marfouk, 2006. “Measuring the International Mobility of Skilled Workers
WorldBank WPS3381
65
   Gambia Economic Outlook, African Development Bank, 2016. https://www.afdb.org/en/countries/west-
africa/gambia/gambia-economic-outlook/

                                                                                                                 51
66
   FAO, Gambia at a Glance, 2016 -www.fao.org/gambia/fao-in-gambia/gambia-at-a-glance/en
67
   Misha Hussain, “West Africa Ebola Crisis Hits Tourism, Compounds Hunger in Gambia,” Reuters, October 1, 2014.
68
   In 2016, the British government’s foreign travel advice for The Gambia stated that “there is an underlying threat
from terrorism. As seen in Mali, Cote d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso, terrorist groups continue to mount attacks on
beach resorts, hotels, cafés and restaurants visited by foreigners.” 68 Foreign Travel Advise, Government of the
United Kingdom” – April 11, 2017.
69
   Hussain, “West Africa Ebola Crisis Hits Tourism.”
70
   It is estimated that a one-meter increase in the sea level would completely submerge Banjul as a city. See: UN
Habitat: Banjul Urban Profile, United Nations Urban Settlements Program, 2012 -
71
   E.S. Sanneh, Allen H. Wu, Y.M Chang, and Edrisa Sanyang, “Introduction of a Recycling System for Sustainable
Municipal Solid Waste Management: A Case Study on the Greater Banjul Area of The Gambia,” Environment,
Development and Sustainability 13, no. 6 (2011), 1065–80; and “The mapping and documentation of dumpsites
that cause, or have potential to cause flooding” by NEA and Mahfouz Engineering Consultants, 2014 Kanifing ,
p.1072.:
72
   Africana: The Encyclopaedia of the African and African American Experience (New York: Oxford University Press,
2005), 721.
73
   Amadou Ndiaye, “Blocus à la Frontière Gambienne,” Le Monde, April 20, 2016.
74
   Gambian Red Cross. 2017
75
   “As Casamance Fighting Continues, Displaced Bed In,” IRIN, September 15, 2016,
http://irinnews.org/fr/node/227930
76
   The Gambia: Migration in Africa's "Smiling Coast", C Omar Kebbeh, August 15, 2013 – Migration Policy Institute
77
   World Bank Estimates based on IMF Balance of Payment data and OECD GDP Statistics.
78
   Freedom House, 2016 Freedom in the World Report.
79
   A Year of “Sustaining Peace”: What Was Learned from Burundi and The Gambia? - By Lesley Connolly, Center for
Security Studies, May 3, 2017.
80
   Over twenty percent of the population is within 18-24 years old. Source: CIA Factbook.
81
   A Year of “Sustaining Peace”: What Was Learned from Burundi and T he Gambia? - By Lesley Connolly, Center
for Security Studies, May 3, 2017.

82
   CIA World Factbook, 2017. https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/ga.html
83
   Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation – Country Brief 2014
84
   OECD, Development Aid at a Glance, Statistics by Region, 2017
85
   L’OCDE appelle les donateurs à soutenir les Etats Fragiles afin d’enrayer l’instabilité
86
   OECD, Development Aid at a Glance, Statistics by Region, 2017
87
   There is no definitive indicator that comprehensively captures all dimensions of fragility. Many indicators overlap
in the aspects that they assess, but vary in terms of definition, methodology, or approach, and may cover more
comprehensively one aspect of fragility while overlooking others. Generally, indicators are crticized for providing a
backward look at the situation of a country but failing to provide any actionable information. Indicators are not
meant to replace in-depth analysis of fragility, its drivers, or its root causes. They do not provide a good basis for
designing policies to address fragility. However, they do provide interesting insight into manifestations of fragility
and trends. In this sense, they raise some “flags” that can be used to identify analytical elements that merit additional
study.
88
   The FSI makes political risk assessment based on a proprietary Conflict Assessment System Tool analytical
platform. It measures fragility on 12 indicators: demographic pressures, refugees and displacement issues, uneven
economic development, group grievance, human flight and brain drain, poverty and economic decline, state
legitimacy, public services, human rights and rule of law, security apparatus, factionalized elites, and external
intervention. It collects data from primary sources and then triangulates them and subjects them to critical review
to obtain one final FSI score.
89
   The HDI focuses on life expectancy, mean years of schooling, and gross national income per capita. It is only a
partial measure of human development. It does not measure inequalities, poverty, or human security. Recently,
UNDP has also launched what it calls an inequality-adjusted HDI, but data are available for only a limited number
of years. For the purpose of cross-indicator comparison, this discussion uses HDI.


                                                                                                                     52
90
   Exception is made for Guinea, which is showing a generally flat HDI progression since 2012; and Guinea-Bissau,
which similarly shows a flat progression since 2011.
91
   “Briefing Note for Countries on the 2016 Human Development Report: Gambia,” UNDP, n.d.,
http://hdr.undp.org/sites/all/themes/hdr_theme/country-notes/GMB.pdf.
92
   The MPI is also used to complement information on human development. It has been produced by UNDP since
2010 to complement monetary measures of poverty by identifying deprivations across the same dimensions as the
HDI (health, education, and standards of living) but uses different indicators such as nutrition and child mortality,
years of schooling, availability of cooking fuel, toilets, water, electricity access, thus showing the people who are
multi-dimensionally poor. MPI data is available for a much smaller sample of countries than the HDI.
93
   “Briefing Note for Countries on the 2016 Human Development Report: Gambia.”
94
   The ratings are the product of staff judgement. The CPIA is used to determine the allocation of resources to
countries receiving concessionary term financing (such as International Development Association financing).
95
   Only Guinea-Bissau is showing similar deteriorating trends, although the decline appears significantly less abrupt
and pronounced.
96
   Mark Davidheiser, “Joking for Peace: Social Organization, Tradition and Change in Gambian Conflict
Management,” Cahiers d’Etudes Africaines 4, no. 184 (2006): 835–59.
97
   Human Rights Watch, World Report 2016:The Gambia. www.hrw.org/word-report/2016/country-
chapters/gambia
98
   C. Omar Kebbeh, “The Gambia: Migration in Africa’s ‘Smiling Coast,’” Migration Policy Institute, August 15, 2013.
99
   World Health Organization, Ebola Situation Report – 16 March 2016. apps.who.int/ebola/current-
situation/ebola-situation-report-16-march-2016
100
    Edward McAllister, “Gambia’s Jammeh Faces a Rare Challenge in December 1 Poll after 22 -Year Rule,” Reuters,
November 30, 2016.
101
    McAllister, “Gambia’s Jammeh Faces a Rare Challenge in December 1 Poll.”
102
    “Gambian Interior Minister Fired,” Afrol News, November 23, 2016; “Where Is Gambia’s Public Service
Commission?,” Sidi Sanneh, June 23, 2014; and “Gambia: Confused Jammeh Orders 27 Fired Officials to Report to
Work Today!,” Freedom Newspaper, August 26, 2016.
103
    Ibid. “Gambian Interior Minister Fired,” Afrol News, November 23, 2016
104
    Maggie Dwyer, “A Failed Coup Attempt (and Forecast) in the Gambia,” Da rt-Throwing Chimp blog, January 2,
2015. Confirmed by Human Rights Watch report on national elections.
105
    Ibid
106
    In the most recent Freedom House report, The Gambia scored 87 on a scale of 1 to 100, where 100 was the
lowest possible score.
107
    Freedom House, Freedom of the Press 2016 (Washington, DC: Freedom House, 2016).
108
    Freedom House, Freedom of the Press: The Gambia 2015 (Washington, DC: Freedom House, 2015).
109
    Human Rights Watch, “More Fear Than Fair.”
110
    “Gambia: How Africa’s Most Brutal Dictator Committed Political Suicide.”
111
    Ibid.
112
    “Gambia: UN Adviser Condemns President’s Reported Threats against Ethnic Group,” UN News Centre, June 10,
2016.
113
    Ibid. “I am profoundly alarmed by President Jammeh’s public stigmatization, dehumanization and threats
against the Mandinka,” the special adviser said. “Public statements of this nature by a national leader are
irresponsible and extremely dangerous. They can contribute to dividing populations, feed suspicion and serve to
incite violence against communities, based solely on their identity.”
114
    CIA World Factbook, 2016.
115
    “Gambia: Two Opposition Parties Form Coalition,” The Point (Banjul), March 29, 2016.
116
    Kaba Sallah, “An Open Letter to the Opposition Parties from the Diaspora,” Gainako.com, April 27, 2015.
117
    Pa Nderry Mbai, “Gambia: Mass Defection Exodus Hits the GDC Diaspora Wing, as Mama’s Supporters Defect to
the New Opposition Alliance!,” Freedom Newspaper, November 3, 2016.
118
    Sulayman Bah, “Diasporic Gambians Raising Funds for Adama Barrow, SBN, November 13, 2016, confirmed by
review of crowdfunding information found on www.gofundme.com/2016-gambia-coalition
119
    The fundraising account was located at https://www.gofundme.com/2016-gambia-coalition.
120
    Constitution of the Gambia, 1997, reprinted 2002, Part 2, Article 1.

                                                                                                                  53
121
    A. Bolaji Akinyemi, “The Gambia Presidential Election 2011: Preliminary Statement 28 November 2011,” The
Commonwealth, November 28, 2011, http://thecommonwealth.org/media/news/gambia-presidential-election-
2011-preliminary-statement#sthash.P531BgBL.dpuf.
122
    Observers from the African Union, Commonwealth, and EU were monitoring the vote. However, ECOWAS
decided not to send a mission, saying that its fact-finding mission had found “an unacceptable level of control of
the electronic media by the party in power…and an opposition and electorate cowed by repression and
intimidation.” Gambia: Ecowas observers boycott “unfair poll”, BBC News 23 November 2011
123
    Ismail Akwei, “Ins and Outs of Gambia's Electoral System as They Vote with Marbles,” AfricaNews.com,
November 29, 2016.
124
    GAMBIA 2016 Election Live Results: How to Find Up-to-Date Totals from Thursday’s Controversial Vote,
Inquisitr.com, 30 November 2016. http://www.inquisitr.com/3758387/gambia-2016-election-live-results-how-to-
find-up-to-date-totals-from-thursdays-controversial-vote/
125
     BBC News, 2 December 2016,Gambia's Jammeh loses to Adama Barrow in shock election result
126
    “Gambia Leader Yahya Jammeh Rejects Election Result,“ BBC News, December 10, 2016.
127
    Gambia Election Results – JollofNews, https://jollofnews.com/gambia-2016-election-results/
128
    Lamin Sanyang, “Gambia’s New Cabinet Ministers to Declare Assets,” The Fatu N etwork, January 28, 2017.
129
    Al Jazeera, 24 January 2017 Gambia's Adama Barrow names Fatoumata Tambajang as VP

130
    Gambia: New CDS Vows To Reform The Armed Fotrces, Reconnect Them With Gambians Freedom Newspaper,
28 January 2017
131
    McPherson and Radelet: Economic Recovery in The Gambia – Insights for adjustment in Sub-Saharan Africa
(1996).
132
    (Grindle and Thomas, 1991).
133
    Tackling Land Degradation and Diversification in The Gambia, FAO - June 5, 2016, http://www.fao.org/in-
action/action-against-desertification/news-and-multimedia/detail/en/c/422939/
134
    “‘Deforestation a Major Environmental Challenge Confronting The Gambia,’” The Point, April 08, 2014,
http://thepoint.gm/africa/gambia/article/deforestation-a-major-environmental-challenge-confronting-the-
gambia.
135
    According to the World Bank, The Gambia’s greenhouse gas emission levels stood at 0.30 per capita in 2010, up
from 0.18 in 2007. According to the country’s official 2014 Millennium Development Goals status report, vehicles
remain the main source of greenhouse gas emissions into the atmosphere.
136
    Mongabay.com Forestry statistics, http://rainforests.mongabay.com/deforestation/archive/Gambia.htm
137
    IFRC International Disaster Response Law (IDRL) in The Gambia: A Study on Legal Preparedness for Facilitating
and Regulating International Disaster Assistance (Geneva: International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent
Societies, 2016).
138
    Source: FAO-supported Forest Policy in Gambia Wins Award,” FAO, September 21, 2011
139
    “FAO-supported Forest Policy in Gambia Wins Award,” FAO, September 21, 2011. Community forestry has also
been successful in reducing the impact of the Casamance conflict, an additional positive externality to improved
management of forest resources in the subregion. See Louise Hunt, “Community Forestry Is Defusing Africa’s
Longest-Running Conflict,” Ecologist, May 5, 2014.




                                                                                                                54
