ROMANIA
Advisory Services Agreement on
Support to the Implementation of the Public Procurement Strategy




OUTPUT 1
First stage of the Web-based Guide




February 2017




                       !                            
Disclaimer

This document is a product of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / the
World Bank. The findings, interpretation, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not neces-
sarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they
represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.

This document does not necessarily represent the position of the European Union or the Roman-
ian Government.



Copyright Statement

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions of this work
without permission may be a violation of applicable laws.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with the com-
plete information to either: National Agency for Public Procurement, General Directorate for
Public Policy and International Relations, 2 Foișorului Str, Bucharest, Romania or (ii) the World
Bank Group Romania (Vasile Lascăr Street, No 31, Et 6, Sector 2, Bucharest, Romania).




                                                                                                2
3
This report has been delivered under the Advisory Services Agreement on Support to the Imple-
mentation of the Public Procurement Strategy signed between the National Agency for Public
Procurement and the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development on September 1st,
2016. It corresponds to Output 1, under Component A “Setting up a Web-based Guide – a prima-
ry source of guidance and in-depth practical information to the contracting authorities”, Activi-
ty 1 “Developing a Web-based Guide in line with the relevant European Directives”, stage 1
”development of an information wizard of complete procurement cycle for contracting author-
ities and public procurement practitioners with initial priority content related to the open pro-
cedure and standard bidding documents for the selection of consultants”, of the above-men-
tioned agreement.




                                                                                               4
Table of Contents

Table of Contents ...........................................................................................5
Web-based Guide Overview............................................................................... 6
First stage of the Web-based Guide .....................................................................9
   I. Information wizard ..................................................................................9
   II. Content deliverables ...............................................................................15
Communication arrangements ..........................................................................23
Annex 1a: Workflow of the procurement portfolio planning stage .............................25
Annex 2: Brief description of content materials ...................................................29
Annex 3: List of technical and coordination meetings ............................................ 32
Annex 4: Source codes and Content (EN + RO)......................................................35




                                                                                                            5
Web-based Guide Overview

In accordance with the RAS Agreement, Component A, the Web-based Guide will be developed
in four stages, each having a corresponding output (see table 1), considering the priority needs
expressed by the National Agency for Public Procurement (hereinafter called ”ANAP”). Its
structure and content is developed by taking into consideration:
    • The relevant national legislation in force (see point II below);

     •   EC Directive 2014/24/EU, Art 83, paragraph 4: „Member States shall ensure that: [….]
         (b) support is available to contracting authorities with regard to planning and carrying
         out procurement procedures”;

     •   the National Public Procurement Strategy, as approved through GD 901/2015;

     •   studies and guidance issued by the Commission services related to the management of
         structural funds1.

Throughout the four stages of developing the Web-based Guide, relevant content will be made
available including associated legislation, regulation, standard documents (including a total of up
to 10 standard bidding documents), templates, checklists, best practice case studies, etc.



In order to provide a platform for offering guidance, enabling shared working models among
procurement stakeholders, and promoting capacity development, the Web-based Guide will con-
sist of three major modules: (i) an information wizard with guidance for different procure-
ment stakeholders, (ii) an interactive tool with instructions on the use of the Web-based Guide,
and (iii) an online collaborative forum as platform for online meetings, discussions, and consul-
tations.



                          Table 1 List of outputs of the Web-based Guide



    Output                                 Description                                 Deadline

    Component A: Setting up a Web-based Guide – a primary source of guidance and in-
    depth practical information to the contracting authorities




1 Information available at http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/ro/policy/how/improving-investment/
public-procurement/.



                                                                                                  6
Output                                Description                                   Deadline

  1      First stage of the Web-based Guide:                                        Dec. 16,
            -                                                                       2016
                initial priority content for open procedure: guidance, check-
                lists, templates for the procurement planning stage;

            -   elaboration of one (1) set of standard bidding documents for
                the selection of consultants;

            -   development of an information wizard of complete procure-
                ment cycle for contracting authorities and public procurement
                practitioners;
  2      Second stage of the Web-based Guide:                                       April 30,
                                                                                    2017
            -   development of additional content related to the open proce-
                dure including guidance, checklists, and templates for all phas-
                es of the procurement cycle (market consultations, market in-
                teraction, bids receiving, opening, evaluation, negotiation,
                award, and contract management);

            -   elaboration of two (2) sets of standard bidding documents for
                works and goods;

            -   piloting of the information wizard with initial priority content;

            -   development of an interactive tool with instructions on how to
                use the Web-based Guide;

            -   assessing ANAP`s existing on-line platform and providing
                recommendations to upgrade it to ensure the proper function-
                ing of the Web-based Guide and the existing helpdesk;

  3      Third stage of the Web-based Guide:                                    May 31,
            - development of guidance for contracting authorities and public 2018
                 procurement practitioners as well as other operational instru-
                 ments and methods related to other procurement procedures:
                 simplified, restricted, competitive dialogue;

            -   elaboration of up to four (4) sets of standard bidding docu-
                ments;

            -   an online collaborative forum;

            -   link the Web-based Guide to the Recipient’s existing help
                desk;




                                                                                                7
Output                               Description                                 Deadline

  4      Fourth stage and final version of the Web-based Guide:                  May 31,
            - development of advanced guide content based on an in-depth         2019
                assessment of user feedback including a survey;

            -   development of guidance for contracting authorities and public
                procurement practitioners as well as other operational instru-
                ments and methods related to other procurement procedures:
                design contest, negotiated procedures, partnership for innova-
                tion;

            -   elaboration of three (3) sets of standard bidding documents;

            -   recommended updates on content and features of the Web-
                based Guide;

            -   provision of the final Web-based Guide.




                                                                                            8
First stage of the Web-based Guide

The first stage of the Web-based Guide was implemented by December 16, 2016, in accordance
with the RAS agreement, and includes:
   • the development of an information wizard of complete procurement cycle for contracting
        authorities and public procurement practitioners, freely accessible at www.achizitiipub-
        lice.gov.ro;
   •   the link to the ANAP helpdesk;
   •   development of the initial priority content for the procurement planning stage, with focus
       on the open procedure, where applicable;
   •   elaboration of one (1) set of standard bidding documents for intellectual services.
The present report summarizes the process of elaboration of the Web-based Guide, of the soft-
ware component as well as of the content which was published on the website. The output in-
cludes in annex all the materials and documents published on www.achizitiipublice.gov.ro, as
they were agreed upon with ANAP representatives. In case ANAP considers it is necessary or
relevant, the materials may be improved during the contract implementation.


  I.   Information wizard

The information wizard is available at www.achizitiipublice.gov.ro and provides a one-stop
shop for all users with detailed guidance and relevant content. The users have the option of
searching by theme, procurement stage, specific text (phrase/word), and type of document. Inter-
nal logical linkages between the different themes will be embedded so that the information is
consistent throughout the website, intuitive, easy to navigate, and not repetitive.

The content management mechanism allows for easy updates of the posted information and doc-
uments. Content documents are available through commonly used web browsers in compatibility
with commonly used operating systems including mobile technology and in commonly used
document formats. The information wizard is available for targeted users including ANAP staff,
who will be able to manage content, and end users such as contracting agencies, procurement
specialists, economic operators, and other stakeholders interested in public procurement includ-
ing civil society, academics, and citizens.

The structure of the website was agreed upon with ANAP and it follows the matrix presented in
fig. 1.




                                                                                               9
                          Figure 1: Structure of the Web-based Guide




!

Three solutions for site design were presented to ANAP, the chosen one being improved in line
with ANAP`s feedback (figure 2 shows the homepage), with the main scope to enable users to
operate the switch from a static view of the public procurement to a dynamic view. The dynamic
view mainly enables the users to access the information from the macro to micro level of under-
standing, accuracy and documentation.




                                                                                            10
                            Figure 2: Web-based Guide Homepage




!




The information architecture of the Web-based Guideline is structured top-down starting from 3
major objects of considerations: Procurement Portfolio, Procurement Processes and Project (fig-
ure 3).

                     Figure 3: Web-based Guide Objects of consideration




                                                                                            11
!

Each object of consideration is structured in 4 processes/phases: Planning, Performing/ Imple-
menting, Monitoring & Controlling and Review and Document Performance (figures 4a and 4b).

               Figure 4a: Workflow of the procurement portfolio planning stage




!
                Figure 4b: Workflow of the procurement process planning stage




                                                                                           12
!


Each phase will be further developed in order to show the workflow of activities within the
process (Annex 1). For each workflow it is possible to access the activities in logical and chrono-
logical order as well as other relevant associated information. The activities of the workflow re-
lated to the planning stage include links to the primary and secondary legislation, guidance and
best practices on the topic including appropriate tools and templates that can be downloaded
from the website (an example is shown in figure 5).

                            Figure 5: Example of activity description




                                                                                                13
!


The Web-based Guide is linked to the helpdesk that is currently functioning at the level of
ANAP2 through a button that can be accessed when the user is navigating within the workflow
(figure 6).




                                  Figure 6: Link to ANAP Helpdesk




2   More information on the helpdesk here: http://www.anrmap.ro/ro/autoritati-contractante.




                                                                                              14
!

A pin drive with the relevant Source codes and content is attached to the report (annex 4).


    II. Content deliverables

The first stage of the Web-based Guide includes the priority content for procurement portfolio
and procurement process planning stages, and draft standard tender documents for intellec-
tual services, as agreed with ANAP during the coordination meetings. Content materials for the
interactive wizard during the first stage (component A.1.a) of the RAS Agreement) applies to the
Open Procedure, where the case, and include tools, documents, templates etc which were com-
pleted after consultations with the main stakeholder ANAP and EIB.

The content deliverables were submitted for feedback to ANAP and translated into English. The
quality assurance was implemented by a diligent review of the WB, considering its experience in
public procurement throughout the world in general, and in Europe & Central Asia in particular,
and also with the scope to ensure consistency with the EU Directives. EIB was also part of the
review process having in view their experience in EU-funded projects mainly and also consider-
ing the need to coordinate activities under to WB and EIB contracts.. Documents were refined in
accordance with the feedback provided by ANAP on November 29, 2016. Agreed content mate-
rials were finalised and uploaded on the website at the corresponding activity by December 16,
2016, in accordance with the RAS project plan.

The content deliverables associated to the first stage of the Web-based Guide, as agreed with
ANAP, and currently publicly available, both in Romanian and English version, are listed in
Table 2 (brief description of content materials and complete documents are provided in Annex
2).



                                                                                              15
                                   Table 2 List of content materials

  Nr. crt.     Document                                                    Date of final version

               PROCUREMENT PORTFOLIO
  1            Procurement portfolio planning stage - flow & descrip-      December 6, 2016
               tion of activities

  2            Requirements package                                        December 6, 2016
  3            Market analysis (5 files)                                   December 15, 2016

  4            Risk analysis (2 files)                                     December 15, 2016
  5            CA capacity analysis (2 files)                              December 15, 2016

  6            Annual strategy framework                                   December 6, 2016
  7            Annual programme (PAAP)                                     December 6, 2016

  8            Request for information form                                December 6, 2016
  9            Calendar for the elaboration of the annual strategy         December 6, 2016

  10           Stakeholder analysis (2 files)                              December 15, 2016
               PROCUREMENT PROCESS

  11           Procurement process planning stage - flow & description     December 11, 2016
               of activities
  12           Contracting strategy framework                              December 18, 2016



The approach used to develop the content materials for both procurement portfolio and pro-
curement process planning phases included:
      -   desk research and experience of the team
      -   establish drivers for concepts
      -   reflect the information from desk research and available experience within the team in the
          concepts, while using as reference the established drivers.
The desk research has been used with the purpose of identifying the sources of information for
content aspects, which are divided into two categories:

 a. Primary data:




                                                                                                   16
   i.    Law no. 98 of May 19, 2016 on Public Procurement

   ii.   Government Decision no. 395 of June 2, 2016 approving the Methodological Norms
         for the application of provisions concerning the award of public procurement contract /
         framework agreement related to the Law 98/2016 on public procurement

   iii. Government Decision no. 866 of November 16, 2016 for amending and supplementing
         the Methodological Norms for the application of provisions concerning the award of
         public procurement contract / framework agreement related to the Law 98/2016 on
         public procurement, approved by Government Decision no. 395/2016.

   iv. Order no. 281 of June 22, 2016 issued by the President of the National Agency for Pub-
         lic Procurement under the provisions of art. 6 para. (4) of Government Decision no.
         634/2015 on the organization and functioning of the National Agency for Public Pro-
         curement establishing standard forms of Annual Public Procurement Programme and
         the Annual Programme for Utilities Public Procurement

   v.    Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 February
         2014 on public procurement and repealing Directive 2004/18/EC

   vi. Government Decision no. 901 of October 27, 2015 approving National Strategy on
         Public Procurement

   vii. Emergency Ordinance no. 13 of May 20, 2015 on the establishment, organization and
         functioning of the National Agency for Public Procurement

   viii. Government Decision no. 634 of July 28, 2015 on the organization and functioning of
         the National Agency for Public Procurement

   ix. Emergency Ordinance no. 40/2015 on promoting green and energy efficient road trans-
         portation vehicles

   x.    Law no. 121/2014 on energy efficiency public procurement

b. Secondary data:




                                                                                             17
      i.    Public Procurement Guidance for practitioners on the avoidance of the most common
            errors in projects funded by the European Structural and Investment Funds, issued by
            EC (DG Grow and DG Regio) in 20153                  ‑




      ii. DG GROW website on public procurement that is the primary source of information on
            public procurement matters in the EU4           ‑




      iii. Web pages included in the concept note for web based guideline during PP Strategy
            Preparation as Similar tools and best practices available with other Member States with-
            in the EU or around the world5

      iv. World Bank - Project Procurement Strategy for Development (Long Form Detailed
            Guide)6

      v. Order no. 400 of June 12, 2015 for approval of the Code of internal management control
            of public entities and Order no. 200 of February 26, 2016 amending the Order of Gener-
            al Secretary of the Government no. 400/2015 approving the Internal Control Code /
            managerial public entities

      vi. Vertical legislation in areas connected to objectives in public procurement (mainly ver-
            tical legislation connected to EU 2020 and CSR Romania, ex-ante conditionalities)

      vii. Questionnaire submitted by EC when starting the structural dialogue on PP Strategy; the
            document is an internal document that was accessed by the project manager Violeta
            Simionescu while she was acting as Public Procurement Expert within “Romania Deliv-
            ery Unit – P147482”, project financed by World Bank Romania concerning establishing
            and accelerating reform in various areas including public procurement.

3 Available at http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/en/information/publications/guidelines/2015/public-procurement-guidance-
for-practitioners

4 Available at http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/public-procurement/index_en.htm
5 New Zeeland Government Procurement tools available at http://www.procurement.govt.nz/procurement/for-agencies/guides-
and-tools;
Republic of Cyprus, Treasury of the Republic, Public Procurement Directorate, Public procurement best practice guide available
at http://www.publicprocurementguides.treasury.gov.cy/OHS-EN/HTML/index.html; Scottish Government Riaghaltas na h-Alba
gov.scot
Procurement journey available at https://www.procurementjourney.scot/procurement-journey .

6 Available at http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/847531467334322069/PPSD-Long-Form-June-30.pdf




                                                                                                                          18
      viii.Standard Bidding Documents issued by various contracting authorities that published
           the contract notices on Official Journal7 ,

      ix. Standard Bidding Documents issued by the World Bank8

      x. Practical Guide to Contract Procedures for EU External Actions (PRAG)9

      xi. Guidance on how to check public procurement and procurement within utilities issued
           by Romanian Court of Accounts10


The identified drivers for designing the planning stage for procurement portfolio and procure-
ment process are:
    1. The concept has to allow for adaptation/customisation based on:
              a. Complexity of procurement scope
              b. Dimension of a contracting authority
              c. Specific context of each procurement and contracting authority
    2. The concept has to allow the use of the same tools by all public entities in order to secure
       consistency for next process on the chain – ex-ante evaluation by ANAP
    3. The concept has to provide assurance in fulfilment of objectives of procurement function
       and objectives of contracting authority

7 Contract notice published in 2016 S230 with the no. 418818 of 29/11/2016 by The City of Bradford Metropolitan District Coun-
cil, Open procedure SBD available at http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:418818-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML; Contract notice
published in 2016 2016/S 224 with the no. -407870              of 19/11/2016 by http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:
407870-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML&tabId=1; Contract notice published in 2016 S 229 with the no. 416965 of 26/11/2016 by The Borough
Council of Gateshead available at https://procontract.due-north.com/Advert?advertId=e892defd-2fb6-e611-8118-000c29c9ba21;
Contract notice published in 2016/S 233 with the no. 425095 of 2/12/2016 by the Lancaster University, available at http://
ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:425095-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML; Contract notice published in 2016/S 233 with no. 425090 of
2/12/2016 by Fold Housing Association http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:425090-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML; Contract notice
published in 2016/S 223 with the no. 407067 of 18//12016 by Alpha Housing Association available at http://ted.europa.eu/udl?
uri=TED:NOTICE:407067-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML&tabId=1; Contract notice published in 2016/S 233 with no. 423869 of 2/12/2016 by
DCH available at http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:423869-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML&tabId=1; Contract notice published in
2016/S 218 with no. 396051 of 11/11/2016 by North Homes Limited available at http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:
396051-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML; Contract notice published in 2016/S230 with no. 418762 of 29/11/2016 by West Lindsey District
Councile available at http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:418762-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML; Contract notice published in 2016/
S 229 with no 416925 of 26/11/2016 by Transport Scotland South West available at http://ted.europa.eu/udl?uri=TED:NOTICE:
416925-2016:TEXT:EN:HTML

8 Standard procurement documents for use after July 1, 2016, Consulting services, available at http://www.worldbank.org/en/
projects-operations/products-and-services/brief/procurement-new-framework

9 http://ec.europa.eu/europeaid/node/101249


10 Guidance on how to check public procurement and procurement within utilities, issued by Romanian Court of
Accounts, Direction of control for public procurement, for preparation of the methodology in this area and for
training of specialized staff, 2016, available at http://www.curteadeconturi.ro/Regulamente/Ghid_control_achiz-
itii_publice.pdf




                                                                                                                          19
    4. Costs related to implementation have to be lower than expected benefits
    5. The target group consists mainly of procurement officers within the contracting authori-
       ties
    6. The concept has to be governed at least by basic management rules.


The following drivers have been considered in order to structure the planning processes:
    1. The actual legislation in Public Procurement and financial control: the structure of one
       process in sub-processes and activities is made with the consideration of the Public Pro-
       curement legislation, content of the Order 400/2015 related to internal control and the
       related terms and definitions provided by the legislation
    2. Coordination with the EIB team
    3. According to art. 6 of the Order 400/2015, the process is seen as object of consideration
       and by consequence:
             a. it includes activities
             b. it describes all steps in logical and chronological order
             c. there are associate responsibilities for performing/execution of an activity and
                working templates available
             d. the practical/operational experience transposed into the frame
The drivers for designing the content of the templates and the content (text) to be inserted into
the Web-based Guide are:
             a. to be used also as communication instruments, more specific in communicating
                results of an activity to other users
             b. contribute to the processing of data within a certain activity or at the process level
             c. useful, precise, easy to handle, available and accessible to all interested parties
             d. the description of the activities includes operational instructions in a form that
                provides the necessary information for performing an activity.


The content of the Standard Bidding Documents for intellectual services11 was developed so
as to secure a common interpretation, the same set of clear, coherent, structured and complete
reference for all stakeholders involved in a procurement process related to information on what
we buy and from whom we buy. The general approach of the Standard Bidding Documents is il-
lustrated in figure 7.



11 The intellectual services cover, but are not limited to, the following range of professional and intellectual ad -
vice services: feasibility studies, advisory services, construction supervision, policy studies, strategy formulation,
preparation of key documents such as tender documents, training, quality control, financial and accounting ser-
vices, environmental or social impact studies, economic analysis, professional editing etc.




                                                                                                                   20
                Figure 7: General content of the Standard Bidding Documents




!


The complete set of standard tender documents for intellectual services was submitted to ANAP
for feedback on December 22, 2016. The set includes the following documents:

            DRAFT STANDARD TENDER DOCUMENTS in-
            cluding:

    13      Scope of Work for consulting services - template            December 22, 2016

    14      Form of technical proposal for consulting services -        December 22, 2016
            template

    15      Form of financial proposal for consulting services - tem-   December 22, 2016
            plate

    16      Form of tender/bid letter for consulting services - tem-    December 22, 2016
            plate

    17      Bid data sheet – as the model is included online in SEAP    December 22, 2016
            - template

    18      General information associated to the bid data sheet        December 22, 2016
    19      Form of Contract for consulting services - template         December 22, 2016




                                                                                            21
  20        General conditions of the contract for consulting services   December 22, 2016
            - template
  21        Specific conditions of the contract for consulting services December 22, 2016
            - template


The draft Standard Tender Documents will be further developed in order to include examples and
best practices specific to intellectual services cases, in accordance with ANAP`s feedback pro-
vided during the technical meeting that took place on January 17, 2017 and coordination meeting
from January 18, 2017.




                                                                                             22
Communication arrangements

The World Bank team is in charge with providing advisory services to help ANAP implement
selected priority measures envisaged in the Public Procurement Strategy and meet ex-ante con-
ditionalities in the public procurement area.

All content materials and site developments were discussed, improved and agreed upon with the
ANAP counterpart team during technical meetings and confirmed during the weekly coordina-
tion meetings (list of technical and coordination meetings is presented in Annex 3). Two WB
missions took place in order to assess the implementation status (October 17-21, 2016; Decem-
ber 5-10, 2016).

Weekly and ad-hoc technical level meetings took place between the World Bank and European
Investment Bank (EIB) in order to ensure a unitary approach in the development of the tasks as-
signed to each of the parties, with consistency and high quality of the outputs. In addition, EIB
staff was included as peer reviewer of the deliverables under Stage 1 of the Web-based Guide.

A communication mechanism for content development was agreed and implemented by the par-
ties for quality assurance purposes. Table 3 suggests the methodology for the process of develop-
ing the Web-based Guide as an example of the World Bank’s interaction points with ANAP and
EIB. The suggested steps are iterative with the final version of the content communicated with
and agreed by all interested stakeholders.

              Table 3: Methodology for content development of Web-based Guide

                                                                             Role
   Step                         Activity                          World
                                                                             ANAP        EIB
                                                                  Bank

    1     Desk research for each main headline in the Web-
          based Guide, based on criteria for selecting the evi-      x
          dence
    2     Preparation of the core information on each head-
                                                                     x
          line of the Web-based Guide content

    3     Peer review                                                x                     x
    4     Prepare and perform a multidisciplinary technical
          working group (objective of the technical working          x          x
          group communicated in advance)

    5     Adjust and develop the content based on technical
                                                                     x
          working group result




                                                                                               23
6   Final review of the content at the multidisciplinary
                                                           x   x
    technical working group level

7   Upload the final deliverable on the website and
                                                           x
    send it for translation
8   Upload of EN version                                   x




                                                                   24
Annex 1a: Workflow of the procurement portfolio planning stage




!




                                                                 25
!




!




    26
Annex 1b: Workflow of the procurement process planning stage




                                                               27
28
Annex 2: Brief description of content materials




                                                  29
•      P
           Deliverable               Type            Description
     ath
           •   Procurement portfo- •     We b s i t e •   The flow of the activities to be performed at the
               lio process planning      Interface        contracting authority level in order to plan the pro-
               flow of activities                         curement processes portfolio for one budgetary
                                                          year, as required by the GD 394/2016. The flow
                                                          includes the name and the order of activities per-
                                                          formance, as well as the roles suggested as being in
                                                          charge with performing those activities, and the
                                                          templates to be used in performing each activity
                                                          during planning phase.

           •   Planning of the pro- •    We b s i t e •   Detailed description and explanation of the activi-
               curement portfolio        Interface        ties performed for planning the procurement portfo-
               processes                                  lio –including the downloadable tools/templates
                                                          and it is in connection to the legal provisions.
           •   Time schedule port- •     1 .xlsl     •    Template for scheduling the portfolio planning con-
               folio planning                             taining instructions and guidelines.

           Request for information   •   1 .doc      •    Template describing the request information by the
                                                          procurement department to the internal clients for
                                                          the elaboration of Procurement Strategy and Annual
•                                                         Public Procurement Programme.
    Pro
    cure
    men    Requirements package      •   1 .doc      •    Template for documenting the needs identified at
      t                                                   the contracting authority level, describing its impor-
    port                                                  tance in defining and documenting the needs, the
    foli                                                  legal basis and the benefits of its usage.
     o
           Contracting authority’s •     1 .xls + •       Description of how to evaluate the contracting au-
           capacity analysis             1 .doc           thority capacity for carrying out the procurement
                                                          processes and the associated tools:
                                                          • Checklist on contracting authority capacity:
                                                               questionnaire on four relevant dimensions of
                                                               the CA capacity
                                                          • Capacity evaluation matrix: the matrix is the
                                                               result of applying the Checklist enabling the
                                                               contracting authority's decision on the re-
                                                               sources and skills available to perform pro-
                                                               curement processes and the need to attract ad-
                                                               ditional resources
           Annual Procurement •          1 .doc      •    Template developed according to the legal provi-
           Strategy                                       sions (art. 11 and art. 12 GD 395/2016) to docu-
                                                          ment the decisions on procurement approaches for
                                                          planning the procurement portfolio

           Annual Public Procure- •      1 .xls      •    Template based on ANAP’s President Order
           ment Programme                                 281/2016 with instructions on how to fill it in.
           (APPP)

•          Contracting strategy •        1 .doc      •    Template provided for documenting the decisions
    Pro    frame                                          related to procurement approach for one procure-
    cure                                                  ment process according to art. 2 and 9 of GD
    men                                                   395/2016 containing also instructions.
      t




                                                                                                              30
•       P
            Deliverable              Type            Description
      ath
      t
    proc    Flow of planning process •   We b s i t e •   The flow of the activities to be performed.
     ess    for one procurement          interface
            process

            Set of bidding docu- •       8 .doc + •       Templates with instructions:
            ments                        1 .xls           • Bid data sheet – as the model is included on-
                                                             line in SEAP
                                                          • General information associated to the bid data
                                                             sheet
                                                          • Terms of Reference for consulting services
                                                          • Form of technical proposal for consulting ser-
                                                             vices
                                                          • Form of financial proposal for consulting ser-
                                                             vices
                                                          • Form of tender/bid letter for consulting ser-
                                                             vices
                                                          • Form of Contract for consulting services -
                                                             template
                                                          • General conditions of the contract for consult-
                                                             ing services
                                                          • Specific conditions of the contract for consult-
                                                             ing services

            Market analysis          •   1 .doc + •       Document that describes in detail how to perform
                                         1 .xls           the market research and analysis, its benefits and
                                                          description of the associated tools and templates
                                                          and how to use them


            Stakeholder analysis     •   1 .doc + •       Document that describes in detail how to perform
•                                        1 .xls           the stakeholder analysis and contains one associated
    Pro                                                   template (one excel file with multiple sheets) relat-
    cure                                                  ed to:
    men                                                   • Stakeholder profiling grid is a table that should
      t                                                        be filled in with information regarding stake-
    port                                                       holders’ name, involvement, objectives, im-
    foli                                                       pact, anticipated reactions, etc.
     o                                                    •      Stakeholder interest (RAPID evaluation) that
    and                                                        categorizes stakeholders according to their in-
•                                                              terest and involvement in procurement activi-
    Pro                                                        ties
    cure                                                  • Influence and engagement mapping matrix
    men                                              •     - describes possible solution to different types of
      t                                                   stakeholder relationships
    proc
     ess    Risk management          •   1 .doc + •       Description of the concept and of the steps for a
                                         1 .xls           successful risk management and templates (one
                                                          excel file with multiple sheets) used in risk man-
                                                          agement in order to log the identified risks, their
                                                          impact and remedy actions and to rank the risks by
                                                          risk impact and occurrence probability:
                                                          • Risk Register
                                                          • Risk Matrix




                                                                                                             31
Annex 3: List of technical and coordination meetings




                                                       32
Technical meetings   Coordination meetings

November 1, 2016     October 26, 2016
November 8, 2016     November 2, 2016

November 9, 2016     November 9, 2016
November 16, 2016    November 16, 2016

November 23, 2016    November 23, 2016
                     November 29, 2016




                                             33
34
Annex 4: Source codes and Content (EN + RO)




                                              35
                                    Competența face diferența!
Proiect selectat în cadrul Programului Operațional Capacitate Administrativă cofinanțat de Uniunea
                               Europeană, din Fondul Social European
                                 Competence makes a difference!
 Project selected under the Administrative Capacity Operational Program, co-financed by European
                                Union from the European Social Fund




                                                                                                 36
