  THE FORCED DISPLACEMENT CRISIS
            A JOINT PAPER BY MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS




This report was written by a group of Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs), comprised of the African
Development Bank (AfDB), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and
Development (EBRD), the European Investment Bank (EIB), the Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), the
Islamic Development Bank (IsDB), and the World Bank Group (WBG). Input was also received from staff of the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR).



                                                                                                         1
Table of Content

A.        Introduction ......................................................................................................................................... 4
     1.      The Joint Paper ................................................................................................................................. 4
     2.      Forced displacement as a development challenge ............................................................................ 4
     3. The role of the MDBs and the need to bridge the gap between humanitarian and development
     efforts ........................................................................................................................................................ 6
B.        Strategic agenda .................................................................................................................................. 7
     1.      Mitigating the crisis: reducing fragility ............................................................................................ 7
     2.      Responding to the crisis .................................................................................................................... 8
C.        Operational implications .................................................................................................................. 10
D.        Framework for collective action ...................................................................................................... 11
E.        Next Steps .......................................................................................................................................... 12


Annex I - Definitions ................................................................................................................................. 14
Annex III - MDBs initiatives under way ................................................................................................. 16
Annex IV - Voluntary Migration and Development .............................................................................. 29
Annex V - The New Financing Initiative to Support the Middle East and North Africa ................... 30




                                                                                                                                                                     2
Abbreviations and Acronyms
ADB     Asian Development Bank
AfDB    African Development Bank
AFR     Africa Region
CSO     Civil Society Organization
CSR     Corporate Social Responsibility
EBRD    European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
EIB     European Investment Bank
EU      European Union
IADB    Inter-American Development Bank
IBRD    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
ICT     Information and Communications Technology
IDA     International Development Association
IDB     Islamic Development Bank
IDP     Internally Displaced Person
IFC     International Finance Corporation
IMF     International Monetary Fund
IOM     International Organization for Migration
IsDB    Islamic Development Bank
M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
MDB     Multilateral Development Bank
MENA    Middle East and North Africa
MIGA    Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency
SDG     Sustainable Development Goal
SME     Small and Medium Enterprises
UN      United Nations
UNDP    United Nations Development Programme
UNHCR   United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
WBG     World Bank Group




                                                                3
                  JOINT MDB PAPER ON THE FORCED
                       DISPLACEMENT CRISIS


     A. Introduction
1.   The Joint Paper
•        This joint paper aims to define a framework for collective action for Multilateral Development
Banks (MDBs) in response to the forced displacement crisis, within the context of the “One Humanity”
agenda issued by the UN Secretary General on February 9, 20161. The paper outlines an agenda for MDBs
to further strengthen their contributions, complementing humanitarian, diplomatic and peacekeeping efforts
in specific areas where stronger synergies are desirable and possible. It also spells out MDBs mutual
commitment to bring the agenda forward and achieve results on the ground, building on their comparative
advantages, namely: (i) investments (e.g., infrastructure, service delivery, in schemes which support
medium and small enterprises access to finance, job creation and livelihood opportunities, local/national
capacity development); (ii) analytical capacity, to help inform public debates and policy formulation; (iii)
technical capacity to facilitate project development and implementation; (iv) capacity to leverage public
and private financing to support a sustained engagement with fragility prone and currently affected
countries; and, (v) convening power, to enable stronger synergies between the various stakeholders
involved and to promote regional cooperation. Beside the immediate response, the challenge is to define an
effective, evidence-based approach – and to adjust processes and instruments to be able to deliver
effectively on this agenda (see Annex III for examples of MDB initiatives under way).
•       This paper was jointly coordinated by the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the World Bank
Group (WBG) and prepared by staff from the following MDBs: African Development Bank (AfDB),
Asian Development Bank (ADB), European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD), European
Investment Bank (EIB), Inter-American Development Bank (IADB), Islamic Development Bank (IsDB)
and the World Bank Group (WBG), all together referred in the report as the MDBs. Input was also received
from staff of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR). The paper has three main sections focusing on MDBs’ strategic agenda as they attempt
to mitigate and/or respond to the crisis (Section B); operational implications of this response in terms of
financial instrument, organizational challenges (Section C); and, finally a framework for collective action
(Section D). Annexes I to III provide additional definitions and numbers.
2.   Forced displacement as a development challenge
•        Recent events have drawn the world’s attention to a crisis that has been building up for a long
time—forced displacement. Beside five million Palestinians, over half of the refugees worldwide originate
from Syria, Afghanistan and Somalia – with Sudan, South Sudan, the Democratic Republic of Congo
(DRC), Myanmar, Iraq, and Eritrea also accounting for large numbers. Not surprisingly, the overwhelming
majority of the refugees are hosted in neighboring countries: Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan, Pakistan and
Iran, Ethiopia and Kenya, etc. Internally Displaced People (IDPs) are also concentrated in a few countries,
including Syria, Colombia, Iraq, Sudan, DRC, and Pakistan. However, recent events have demonstrated
that the forced displacement crisis cannot be contained in isolated corners of the world, but affects both
developing and developed countries. While receiving less coverage due to shifting political and media
attention, other regions of the world such as Central America continue to face an exodus of people due to

1
 The “One Humanity” report proposes a set of objectives for the international community to better respond to ongoing
crises, including through stronger synergies between development and humanitarian actors.


                                                                                                                  4
some of the highest violence and homicide rates in the world. While the crisis is global, it affects some
countries and regions disproportionately, and in particular Africa, the Middle East, and South Asia.
•        Forced displacement2 has now emerged as an important development challenge. Long considered
a humanitarian problem to be addressed by specialized agencies, the issue has gained increased prominence
on the international agenda, in large part due to recent events including the Syrian crisis, and the unfolding
tragedy across the Mediterranean Sea. There is a growing recognition that short term humanitarian
interventions are not sufficient, in part because displacement is often protracted, and need to be
complemented by immediate and medium term efforts to alleviate the burden on host community and social
infrastructure. Medium and long term measures are also warranted to both address the drivers of forced
displacement and to create economic resilience in host countries. Furthermore, those structural issues that
force displacement (e.g., insecurity, violence, war) are often the same that, if not tackled, create the
conditions for a crisis. While some MDBs are already working to address the drivers of this fragility, the
forced displacement crisis presents additional cross-border challenges. In all cases, long-term solutions will
be a critical complement to the medium and short-term responses to the more urgent and immediate
humanitarian needs of forcibly displaced populations.
•        The crisis poses a substantial threat to origin and many host countries’ development, including
the achievement of Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Refugees and asylum seekers and IDPs often
(though not always) end up being among the poorest and most vulnerable of the global population. They
are overwhelmingly hosted in developing countries, which puts further strain on these societies in their
efforts to reduce poverty and promote development. Their distress can also translate into further risks by
increasing the danger of conflict diffusion, instability, and further displacement. The types of engagement
that MDBs can have in these two settings can be vastly different. The common actions taken by MDBs will
contribute to the fulfillment of the 2030 Agenda and the attainment of the Sustainable Development Goals
(in particular SDG16).
•        Forced displacement is distinct from voluntary migration because of both the motivation for the
move and its typical destination. The forcibly displaced flee violence and conflict, either by crossing
international borders in the case of refugees and asylum seekers or by relocating within their own countries
in the case of IDPs. In many cases, they end up in environments where their skills may not be in demand
and where they may not even have the right to work. From an economic perspective, for countries facing
large shocks, this “mismatch” on the labor market yields a suboptimal outcome for themselves as well as
for their hosts. Hence a strong policy response is needed to support labor market insertion to help both the
forcibly displaced to overcome their “mismatch” on the labor market and to support host communities
which have to manage a demographic and labor supply shock that can unsettle pre-existing equilibriums.
•        Forced displacement has an important gender dimension. Women and girls who are forcibly
displaced face specific challenges. Forced displacement is often associated with an increase in female- or
child-headed households as well as family separations. Discrimination and gender-based violence,
including sexual violence and forced prostitution, are also a threat for highly vulnerable populations.
Unaccompanied women and girls, women heads of households and pregnant, disabled or older women may
face even higher challenges. Addressing gender disparities proves critical to the consolidation of peace and
security in fragile and conflict-affected situations. There may also be important gender dimensions to
consider, both in terms of challenges and opportunities, in the process of inclusion in host communities, as
well as inclusion in any future decision making process including peace negotiations, economic planning,
etc.




2
    See Annex I for key definitions



                                                                                                            5
•       Forced displacement also affects children, youth, indigenous people and minorities
disproportionately, according to the UNHCR3. Almost half of the world’s forcibly displaced people are
children. Children are at a greater risk of abuse, neglect, violence, exploitation, trafficking or forced military
recruitment. They may also witness or experience violent acts and/or be separated from their families. Many
of the world’s refugees and asylum seekers are members of minority groups in their own country.
Indigenous groups and minorities are among the most marginalized communities in many societies, often
excluded from participation in the socioeconomic life. Exclusion and discrimination are multiplied during
forced displacement.
3.   The role of the MDBs and the need to bridge the gap between humanitarian and development
     efforts
•        Synergies across humanitarian and development actors need to be strengthened to allow a
collective response to emerge. The displacement crisis is not only a humanitarian issue but also a
development challenge. It merits a global response within a revised policy framework for collective action
that requires humanitarian, development, security and diplomatic engagement. Achieving outcomes
collectively will also call for a shift from the current input- and sector-based coordination model to one that
is based on outcomes and comparative advantages over multi-year timeframes.
•        This, in turn, calls for a rethinking of the synergies between international humanitarian and
development actors and national counterparts. Development actors have an important contribution to
make, which is distinct from – and complementary to – the traditional humanitarian and rights-based focus.
While some MDBs can help address some of the specific socio-economic vulnerabilities of the forcibly
displaced (e.g., catastrophic loss of assets, trauma, lack of planning horizon, status and rights, lack of access
to health or education services and lack of economic opportunities in many places of asylum) by means of
appropriate investments to support local infrastructures; others will be best positioned to support host
countries and communities in their efforts to reduce poverty, promote development, increase fiscal space
by supporting greater private investments, or provide appropriate services to forcibly displaced people at a
time when host countries and communities have to absorb a large demographic shock which unsettles pre-
existing equilibriums.
•        A development approach to forced displacement has several characteristics. It takes a medium
and long-term perspective and seeks sustainability. It aims to address drivers of fragility and displacement.
It aims to go beyond protection and subsistence and to foster economic opportunities. It sees the forcibly
displaced and their hosts as economic agents, and as such, places particular attention on institutions and
policies. It addresses prevention and aims at building countries’ economic resilience to shocks. It aims to
build partnerships with and between governments, international organizations, civil society and private
sector; the latter in particular can play a central role in providing sustainable livelihoods. It aims at
mobilizing and leveraging scarce (public and private) financing resources. But it also has to be part of a
broader international effort, including diplomatic, security, and humanitarian components, to be effective.
•        The development approach to forced displacement can also learn from migration economics (see
Annex IV). Forced displacement is distinct from voluntary migration in many respects. From an economic
perspective, voluntary migrants move to environments where their skills can be used more productively
than at home which yields benefits for migrants, host communities, and origin countries. By contrast, those
who are forcibly displaced seek safety first and foremost, and many of them end up in locations where there
are few job opportunities, typically in economically lagging border regions. This raises a number of
challenges for both the displaced and their host communities and often results in secondary movements to
urban environments or wealthier countries. Ultimately, the availability of economic opportunities is critical


3
   Working With National Or Ethnic, Religious And Linguistic Minorities And Indigenous Peoples In Forced
Displacement, United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, 2011


                                                                                                                6
for a successful resolution of these situations. In this respect, important lessons can be learned from the
experience of voluntary migration.
•        Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) have been gradually rising to the challenge. While a
development response does not necessarily mean a MDB response, MDBs are already intervening in areas
of particular relevance to this crisis. MDBs responses have included a number of measures to address the
refugee crisis. Several financial initiatives are already in place, aiming at providing support to displaced
people across countries and regions such as the financing of health care systems, education, or social
housing and social infrastructures, as well as supporting microfinance institutions lending to refugees and
other vulnerable groups. MDBs are carrying out research and studies, both economic and sectorial, to
provide the analytical base for appropriate action, including supporting countries to identify appropriate
priorities. Recent events further illustrate the increased MDB response to the refugee crisis: at the
Supporting Syria Conference in London on February 4, MDBs (e.g., IDB, EBRD, EIB, WBG) pledged up
to EUR 40 billion lending to support the region bordering Syria over the next five years. On the eve of the
conference, the EBRD hosted an associated event on “Enabling the private sector to support refugee-hosting
communities.” A number of financing initiatives focused on the Middle East and North Africa region are
under way to support private sector development to provide a better foundation for inclusive growth and
resilience in host countries. With regards to Central-America, IADB has been leading the coordination of
an unprecedented development plan to tackle severe structural issues sustaining irregular migration.
Another concrete example of MDB action is a common initiative to set up a technical assistance facility to
support preparation and implementation of projects that alleviate pressure on social infrastructure and
promote economic resilience and growth.


     B. Strategic agenda
1.   Mitigating the crisis: reducing fragility
•        Most forcibly displaced people today are fleeing conflict or some other form of widespread
violence. Empirical data show that violence and insecurity remain key drivers of forced displacement, while
economic considerations play a role in determining the destination of the migration journey. Natural
disasters, while of a different kind, are other factors that can force people out of their homes and in some
cases can contribute to fragility. Reducing fragility is therefore a critical component of a long-term solution
to forced displacement.
•       MDBs need to broaden their support to help effectively reduce fragility risks, including regional
spillovers. Most efforts to date have focused on countries already in a situation of “observable fragility”
and post-crisis situations. Strengthened forms of regional cooperation and international support are critical
to success. Lack of opportunities, poverty, economic exclusion, poor governance and youth unemployment
are among drivers of conflict and fragility. MDBs and other development institutions should, therefore,
address long term drivers of fragility and build resilient economies and institutions at national and sub
national levels. Learning from current crises, MDBs will invest in prevention, in close coordination with
governments and UN Agencies to define early warning systems to significantly minimize future
displacements, in a pro-active manner. Institutional capacities, enabling environment, and youth economic
empowerment in countries susceptible to fragility must be strengthened.
•        MDBs need to provide continued and strengthened support in fragile situations identified as
those where there is a recognized risk of escalation into a crisis situation. In close cooperation with other
international actors, including the UN system (focused mostly on the maintenance of peace and security),
the International Monetary Fund (IMF), regional organizations and governments, MDBs have to focus on
the reduction of fragility risk and economic vulnerability. Building on their comparative advantages (e.g.,
technical capacity, convening power, financial leverage), development actors can complement much
needed humanitarian aid by dealing with the multiple drivers and risks of continued fragility and on


                                                                                                             7
contributing to better economic resilience. The provision of effective development assistance is insufficient
to restore stability at time of the crisis, but it can help mitigate risks of fragility over the medium-term
before the crisis arises.
2.   Responding to the crisis
•        Development institutions have an important contribution to make by helping shift the focus to
the socioeconomic aspects of the crisis. The traditional focus of international efforts – and specifically
under the remit of humanitarian and refugee agencies – has been on legal protection and humanitarian
support – providing temporary “care and maintenance” and helping the forcibly displaced get back under
the protection of a country, through return, inclusion, or resettlement. For the development community, the
forcibly displaced constitute a priority because of their specific vulnerabilities, which often results in a
poverty trap that affects their ability to seize opportunities. Since such vulnerabilities are specific,
traditional poverty reduction efforts may not suffice and special interventions may be needed, where MDBs
can play a significant role.
•       MDBs could, when their mandates and instruments so allow, help strengthen resilience of those
who stay behind in their home countries, especially in relatively stable parts of otherwise unstable
countries. In many crisis situations the overwhelming majority of the population stays behind. But those
who stay suffer from increased vulnerability and gradual impoverishment as access to services and
livelihood opportunities diminishes. This further reduces their ability to cope with external shocks, to the
point that they may have no choice but to leave.
•        MDBs can help address some of the specific vulnerabilities of the forcibly displaced. Such
specific vulnerabilities typically include: a lack of planning horizon; a sudden and catastrophic loss of
assets, which can have long-lasting consequences; trauma and psychological stress; a temporary legal status
or loss of rights which can result in limited freedom of movement, legal restrictions on employment,
decreased access to education and health services, and vulnerability to abuse, lack of knowledge about
refugees rights in general. While all MDBs are not equipped to provide services in all areas, their expertise
in financing investments, including social infrastructures and project preparation, are critical to the overall
refugee response. Preventing brain drain by maintaining and supporting the best and the brightest, investing
in educating a new cadre of experts to assume responsibility in post conflict era, and providing education
opportunities for younger generations in host countries are of high importance for post-crisis recovery and
development. To this effect, MDBs can assist by financing education systems, improving access to finance
and entrepreneurship services as well as increasing availability of training programs. Finally, MDBs
responses to the needs of forcibly displaced people should target the most vulnerable of them: solutions
should promote gender equality across all sectors, from girls’ enrolment and retention in school to increased
women’s participation in decision-making, livelihoods, etc.
•        MDBs must help host communities. Assistance to host communities is necessary not only to
facilitate the acceptance and inclusion of the forcibly displaced, but also to support their own economic
resilience and/or poverty reduction efforts and to ensure their own sustainability. With the sudden inflow
of forcibly displaced, host communities typically experience a demographic shock. This pressure causes a
series of short-term disequilibria across a number of markets (including the labor market) and among social
groups, as well as massive overburdening of infrastructure and local services such as education, health,
solid waste management, water services and urban transport. These shocks are eventually absorbed and a
series of new equilibriums are reached. From a development perspective, the challenge is to help ensure
that the new equilibriums can be reached relatively rapidly and that on balance they are better—or at least
not worse—for the host community than the pre-existing ones. This typically depends on initial conditions,
on the size, nature, and pace of the shock, and on the authorities’ ability to develop adequate policy and
investment responses. As such, the focus must shift beyond social protection for refugees to include
economic growth in the areas hosting them, so that refugees and local communities can share economic
progress. One important aspect regarding the planning of local infrastructure works is the assessment of


                                                                                                             8
how long the forcibly displaced will remain in the host country or region, given that investments required
to address additional public infrastructure capacity needs are usually only justified if the higher demand for
public services persists over time. If demand is more short term, alternative solutions need to be deployed,
e.g. mobile facilities or facilities that can be converted to other use). Furthermore, assistance must be
provided to host communities to ensure that once the crisis is over, returning migrants do not fall back into
poverty. As forced displacement in host countries requires a global response both in developed and
developing countries, recognizing that host countries provide a global good, such response will have to be
country specific to take account of their specificities including their level of development.
•        MDBs can support host communities through various means. Support programs can include
support for infrastructure and services (including through private sector led financing and provisioning so
as to reduce the fiscal burden of governments), technical assistance, job creation, service delivery and social
protection, support to enabling business environment to facilitate economic activity. MDBs can blend loans
with grants to support municipal infrastructure projects to improve efficiency and sustainability, as well as
establish public-private partnerships in health, education, and water and sanitation/waste management
sectors. Many projects, including vocational education and skills testing initiatives, will improve access for
host communities and forcibly displaced populations alike and MDBs can facilitate opportunities with
employers to open up work based learning opportunities for all parts of the communities. Through such
initiatives, research shows that the presence of refugees can ultimately greatly increase economic
connectivity throughout the region as a whole, particularly following repatriation as language and business
links to host communities are sustained. Speedy disbursements from IMF emergency financing facilities
can also help host governments handle emerging fiscal and balance of payments pressures. In addition to
solutions addressing the needs of host communities and refugees, initiatives that promote social integration
also need to be considered. Finally, MDBs can also play an important role through innovative financing
mechanisms leveraging both public and private investments.
•        MDBs can help improve the effectiveness of humanitarian support, by sharing and helping adapt
lessons of development experience as well as through research and data analysis. Specific areas of focus
include: helping ensure that humanitarian aid is effectively targeted to the most vulnerable; promoting the
use of cash over in-kind assistance wherever relevant; facilitating local procurement of goods and services
as a way to spur economic activity in the host environment; and encouraging a gradual shift towards the
use of country systems and overall development strategies, especially for the delivery of basic services,
where it is adequate. These interventions must be context specific and include a gender and minorities
dimension and pay special attention to education and skills preservation/increase so that the displaced
populations preserve their productive potential and can contribute to economic growth in the host countries
as well as to the developments in their countries/regions of origin should they return. Support to temporary
resettlement of displaced persons-owned microfinance and Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in the
host area, and access to market could be part of the solution. MDBs can also benefit from UN agencies
experience working on political risk, etc. MDBs experience of building local capacities and empowering
host country institutions to provide basic services to displaced communities, will help shorten humanitarian
aid operations life cycle and need for funds.
•        MDBs need to focus on providing the type of support needed to find solutions that are sustainable
from a socioeconomic perspective. Experience suggests that large numbers of forcibly displaced people do
not—and do not want to—return to rural areas and that they instead settle in cities, thus contributing to the
global urbanization trend, which in turn creates an even greater need for investments in physical and social
infrastructure in cities. Similarly, a significant number of forcibly displaced people may not repatriate in
the immediate term, or if they do return to their countries of origin they may resettle in urban centers.
Finally, many refugees will not be granted asylum and thousands of people may return thus creating a
challenge on the country of origin. From a development perspective, the focus ought to be on helping
manage the long-lasting consequences by creating economic opportunities for the forcibly displaced in the
places where they have settled. This can be done through the provision of essential services (e.g., electricity,


                                                                                                              9
water, sanitation, health, education). It can also be facilitated by building close partnerships with private
sector and civil society actors as well as through innovative approaches such as Information and
Communications Technology (ICT)-enabled access to educational and health services as well as digital
financial services, online mapping and crowdsourcing tools to mobilize resources, etc. This requires a
combination of education, skills, employment, and entrepreneurship programs, which are adapted to these
specific groups and developed in close partnership with civil society and the private sector. Private sector
networks play an important role in supporting economic resilience in this respect, particularly by providing
pathways to work, skills matching, vocational/skills training and various forms of entrepreneurship support.
The forcibly displaced often need humanitarian aid in the short term but they also need economic
opportunities, which require fostering economic growth in hosting areas as well as enabling them to seize
such opportunities.


    C. Operational implications
•        MDBs’ effectiveness is directly linked to their ability to develop synergies among themselves,
with other international organizations and governments, as well as with the private sector. Partnerships
are critical to successfully reducing vulnerability and responding to the forced displacement crisis, in
particular in contexts where development agendas are subsumed by political negotiations and security
concerns. Increased exchanges of information among MDBs and joint sectoral and geographic approaches
would increase effectiveness of each institution’s programs. Key partners include specialized United
Nations agencies (e.g., United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees – UNHCR, United Nations
Development Programme – UNDP), other multilateral development banks, the IMF, regional organizations,
the private sector, civil society organizations and academia. Beyond close cooperation between
international actors, local and national decision makers and stakeholders should be properly involved in
order to ensure the buy-in and the sustainability of the solutions put forward beyond the horizon of
initiatives and programs put in place by the international community. Ultimately, governments need to be
the owners of any policy addressing the forced displacement problem, and bear responsibility for the way
they address forced displacement issues.
•        Existing financing instruments can have significant limitations as tools to engage at the
necessary scale in support of forcibly displaced populations. Reducing fragility and forced displacement
is a global public good, which requires collective action going beyond providing support programs for
individual countries, and the effective mobilization and deployment of substantial amounts of financing.
The country-based model is inadequate when people live outside of their country: host countries are often
reluctant to borrow on non-concessional terms or to use part of their limited grant allocations to address the
needs of non-nationals (and to date forced displacement projects have been largely focused on IDPs or host
communities, i.e. nationals). More predictability may also be needed to ensure that efforts can be sustained
over time. There is also an important “space” where current financial instruments are unavailable or
insufficient, for example, to engage at scale in fragile countries which are in non-accrual situations (and
from where many forcibly displaced stem), to finance innovative humanitarian-development partnerships,
to mobilize significant private investment, to address regional spillovers and conflict systems, etc.
•        Increased use of grants; guarantees and risk capital for concessional financing and risk
mitigation. In many countries and regions, the ability to take on further debt to address the forced
displacement crisis is low. In order to secure sound public finances, concessional lending for part of the
financing may be needed, and the availability of grants for blending may be a crucial factor, in the absence
of which the implementation of projects will not materialize. Critical amounts of grants available from
donors would make concessional lending possible where needed, in particular in the public sector, but also
to mitigate financial risks to enable private sector investment. Guarantees may also be required to enable
the debt-related component of blending to materialize. MDBs need to partner with development partners,
international organizations as well as the private sector and civil society in order to collectively ensure



                                                                                                           10
maximum impact of donor funds for the benefit of refugees and host countries. Risk insurance (e.g., disaster
insurance, multi-purpose micro-insurance) could also help strengthen the resilience of those who stay.
Finally, diaspora expertise could also be tapped to facilitate investment of nationals of affected countries
including those forcibly displaced, and members of host communities, as part of innovative solutions.
•       MDBs need to ensure a coordinated and effective use of grants by developing and applying clear
and consistent criteria for the application of grant funding and clear conditions relating to the
requirements for leveraging. Further financial instruments may be developed to address the needs. At the
same time, coordination needs must be balanced against the need for donors and MDBs to respond quickly
to unfolding crisis situations.
•        Risks are inherent to an engagement in fragile situations and in support of the forcibly displaced.
These risks include financial risks, operational risks, security risks, and reputational risks. Yet, while the
risks of engagement are high, the risk of inaction is often greater. It is therefore critical to adopt a risk
management approach4, drawing on techniques used in managing a portfolio of scarce resources in an
environment of volatility: resource allocation needs to be flexible, decision-making structures need to
predefine roles and responsibilities and to support quick responses and reactions. It is also important to
adequately manage security, operational, and reputational risks.
•        Success over the medium-term is also a function of MDBs’ ability to learn. This is essential in
areas which are inherently complex, such as fragility. Research and the collection of evidence constitute a
critical part of the agenda. Further enhancing Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) frameworks to track
outcomes, measure success, and most importantly draw lessons from experience is equally essential.
Partnership with UN agencies and other organizations may prove effective in this regard.


    D. Framework for collective action
•       Forced displacement is a global crisis and as such it calls for a global response. No individual
agency or government or group of governments can address the forced displacement challenge at the scale
required. Events in countries of origin and host countries are all linked and cannot be sustainably addressed
with responses to individual challenges. Therefore, MDBs should strengthen cooperation among
themselves and with other stakeholders to ensure effective responses to these challenges.
•    Furthermore, the response to new crises should not undermine the response of the development
community to other (pre)existing crises.
•        There is a clear need for a paradigm shift in terms of how the international community addresses
the drivers of forced displacement through diplomatic and peacekeeping processes, proactive
development efforts, as well as better planned humanitarian operations and last but not least, to better
mobilize, allocate, and deploy assistance across countries. While some of these interventions may be best
tackled by humanitarian actors, some may actually fall within the realm of multilateral development banks.
For example, structural challenges that may contribute to building a crisis can sometimes be addressed
through medium and long term development efforts: MDBs can play a critical role in tackling some of those
issues that increase vulnerability. Prevention is more effective than responding to destructive crises.
•        A stronger global governance system is necessary with more predictable ways and means for
collective action and support. The current international architecture does not provide adequate, predictable
support for host countries, even though they are providing a global public good. An effective global
response should be underpinned by a comprehensive strategic approach that sets principles for sharing

4
 The ADB has been applying a fragility- and conflict-sensitive approach to mitigate operational risks. See
http://www.adb.org/publications/peacebuilding-tool-conflict-sensitive-approach-development-pilot-initiative-nepal
and http://www.adb.org/documents/working-differently-fragile-and-conflict-affected-situations-adb-experience


                                                                                                                11
responsibilities, optimizes the use of resources, including grants, at a global level, links financing with
policy actions, fosters synergies between development and humanitarian actors, and connects the
development response with parallel efforts aimed at tackling the roots of the crisis. MDBs are and should
be a vital part of the international community response to the global refugee crisis. This should, however,
in no way replace or reduce the level of support, including financial support, for countries of origin.
•        MDBs can collectively contribute significantly to addressing the forced displacement crisis,
complementing necessary humanitarian aid and other development agencies. Building on their
competitive strengths, and in line with their mandates, MDBs can take action in countries of origin and host
countries. Collectively, they can ensure an effective use of available funds to address drivers of the crisis
and leverage much needed additional resources from both the private and public sectors to the benefit of
host countries and refugees. To facilitate this, cooperation may focus on providing the necessary analysis
to inform public debates and policy making; developing common responses in areas such as infrastructure,
job creation, education, regional cooperation, trade facilitation, entrepreneurship, and microfinance/access
to finance; stepping up technical assistance; supporting project preparation and capacity building; and,
ensuring coordinated and effective use of financial resources as well as working through and empowering
local institutions.
•        MDBs can build resilience and help developing countries prevent future crises or build the
capacity to respond to crisis. This could be done by providing analytical and technical support for early
warning systems, promoting social cohesion and coexistence, enhancing conflict and crisis management
skills, enhancing capacities of national and sub-nations institutions, providing economic opportunities
(particularly for youth); or, supporting policy and governance reform.


    E. Next Steps
•       Following the Heads of MDBs meeting, which took place on the margins of the WBG/IMF
Spring meetings in Washington DC (April 17, 2016), institutions agreed to focus on practical next steps.
The first specific contribution MDBs collaboratively agreed to make ahead of the World Humanitarian
Summit (WHS) was to produce a short statement outlining their collective commitment building on this
paper.
•       Focusing on concrete areas for collective action. To define an action-oriented agenda, MDBs will
focus on opportunities around specific areas where joint action is possible. These include:
        o    Joint country-level engagements for both crisis prevention and response – including joint
             assessment and planning based on synergies and complementarities that reflect MDBs
             respective comparative advantages;
        o    Innovative financing to strengthen MDBs collective engagement, the first concrete
             opportunity of which being the MENA Facility (Annex V); and,
        o    Data and evidence to strengthen the basis on which policies and programs are designed.
•        To achieve their objectives, MDBs should also collaborate with the private sector to increase
impact on both host communities and refugees/IDPs. The EIB, IFC and EBRD will take the lead in
mobilizing private sector resources5.The private sector can play an important role in the following areas:
(i) strengthening the economic resilience of countries; (ii) making countries more competitive and inclusive;
(iii) boosting job creation and livelihood opportunities (including for women); (iv) improving the quality
of infrastructure and services and also reducing the financing burden of host governments; (v) fostering

5
 In line with the recommendations of the report to the Secretary-General from the High-Level Panel on Humanitarian
Financing “Too important to fail—addressing the humanitarian financing gap”.



                                                                                                               12
entrepreneurship; (vi) exploring digital technology options including in financial services; and, (vii) raising
funding through Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) avenues of private firms to help both host
communities and refugees/IDPs.
•        Finally, to structure their conversation at working level and ensure adequate follow-up, MDBs
agreed to establish a Joint MDBs Coordination Group. The Group, composed of representatives of each
MDB, will aim to enhance knowledge sharing and foster stronger institutional and operational collaboration
and coordination between the seven institutions. The UNHCR will be invited to join the Group as Observer.
The Group will meet virtually as necessary but at least quarterly. One of its first tasks will be to identify
joint country engagement opportunities. Building on the respective capacity, MDBs shall leverage each
other’s strengths towards the implementation of projects that generate the highest impact.




                                                                                                            13
Annex I - Definitions
Forced Displacement: Situation of persons who are forced to leave or flee their homes due to conflict,
violence, persecution, human rights violations:
• Refugee: Someone who "owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
    nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of his
    nationality, and is unable to, or owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that
    country." (1951 Refugee Convention);
• Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs): “Persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged
    to flee or to leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as a result of or in order to
    avoid the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights or
    natural or human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally recognized border"
    (Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement)6;
• Asylum seeker - A person who seeks safety from persecution or serious harm in a country other than
    his or her own and awaits a decision on the application for refugee status under relevant international
    and national instruments. In case of a negative decision, the person must leave the country and may be
    expelled, as may any non-national in an irregular or unlawful situation, unless permission to stay is
    provided on humanitarian or other related grounds (IOM).
Protracted Displacement: A situation where “more than 25,000 refugees have been in exile for more than
five years” (UNHCR)
Economic Migration: “covering all cases where the decision to migrate is taken freely by the individual
concerned, for reasons of ‘personal convenience’ and without intervention of an external compelling factor”
(UN ECOSOC Commission on Human Rights)
Mixed Migration: Combination of economic and conflict factors; War affects the economy which in turn
affects the decision to leave
Country of origin - The country that is a source of migratory flows (regular or irregular) (IOM)
Resettlement - The relocation and integration of people (refugees, internally displaced persons, etc.) into
another geographical area and environment, usually in a third country. In the refugee context, the transfer
of refugees from the country in which they have sought refuge to another State that has agreed to admit
them. The refugees will usually be granted asylum or some other form of long-term resident rights and, in
many cases, will have the opportunity to become naturalized. (IOM)
Returnees are former refugees who return to their own countries or regions of origin after time in exile.
Returnees need continuous support and reintegration assistance to ensure that they can rebuild their lives at
home. Returnees can also refer to economic migrants who go back to their country of origin.
About ‘Climate Refugees’: UNHCR has – over time, expressed serious reservations with respect to the
terminology and notion of environmental refugees or climate refugees, which according to it have no basis
in international refugee law7. UNHCR is actually of the opinion that the use of such terminology could
potentially undermine the international legal regime for the protection of refugees whose rights and
obligations are quite clearly defined and understood. It would also not be helpful to appear to imply a link
and thus create confusion regarding the impact of climate change, environmental degradation and migration
and persecution that is at the root of a refugee fleeing a country of origin and seeking international
protection.




6
    Unless otherwise specified, this paper only refers to those IDPs who have been affected by conflict or violence.
7
    Climate change, natural disasters and human displacement: a UNHCR perspective, www.unhcr.org/4901e81a4.pdf


                                                                                                                  14
Annex II - Key Facts and Figures8
By end-2014, 59.5 million individuals were forcibly displaced worldwide as a result of persecution,
conflict, generalized violence, or human rights violations. This is 8.3 million persons more than the year
before (51.2 million) and the highest annual increase in a single year.
An estimated 13.9 million individuals were newly displaced due to conflict or persecution in 2014. This
includes 11.0 million persons newly displaced within the borders of their own country, the highest figure
on record. The other 2.9 million individuals were new refugees.
For the first time, Turkey became the largest refugee-hosting country worldwide, with 1.59 million
refugees. Turkey was followed by Pakistan (1.51 million), Lebanon (1.15 million), the Islamic Republic of
Iran (982,000), Ethiopia (659,500), and Jordan (654,100).
59.5 million forcibly displaced worldwide:
    •   19.5 million refugees (14.4 million under UNHCR’s mandate 5.1 million Palestinian refugees
        registered by UNRWA)
    •   38.2 million Internally Displaced Persons
    •   1.8 million asylum-seekers
Developing regions hosted 86 per cent of the world’s refugees – at 12.4 million persons, the highest value
in more than two decades. The Least Developed Countries provided asylum to 3.6 million refugees or 25
per cent of the global total.
More than 5.9 million refugees under UNHCR’s mandate (42 percent) resided in countries where the
GDP per capita was below USD 5,000.




8
 Source: Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) of the Norwegian Refugee Council (NRC), UNHCR
Global Trends 2014


                                                                                                       15
Annex III - MDBs initiatives under way
With sudden and significant inflow of refugees, pressure on host communities tends to increase beyond
capacity. MDBs have an important role in complementing necessary humanitarian aid with financing for
social and economic infrastructure and services, job creation and economic growth, in order to increase
resilience. Through adequate financial instruments, and recognizing the need for providing concessional
financing where necessary, MDBs can crowd-in necessary financing from third parties, including private
investors, thus leveraging investment and enhancing development impact
MDBs responses have so far included a number of measures to address the refugee crisis. Several financial
initiatives are already in place, aiming at providing support to displaced people across countries and regions.
Important efforts have also been made to strengthen project preparation facilities to help building a pipeline.
Below is a non-exhaustive list of MDB initiatives in response to the refugee crisis.
    1. African Development Bank (AfDB)

From Fragility to Resilience
The AFDB has adopted the Strategy for Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in its regional
member countries for the period 2014–2019. The Bank recognizes that fragility is not limited to a
nationwide phenomenon but can occur as pockets of conflict as a result of exclusionary practices and could
therefore result in national or regional instability. Currently, more than 250 million Africans are affected
by fragility, with significant regional spill-over effects: political instability, security threat, refugee’s
displacement, high migration. Bank’s intervention addressing fragility is focusing on following area:
(i) Strengthening state capacity and establishing effective institutions;
(ii) Promoting resilient societies through inclusive and equitable access to employment, basic services and
shared benefits from natural resource endowments.
(iii) Enhancing the Bank’s leadership role in policy dialogue, partnerships and advocacy around issues of
fragility
The Bank has developed several programs over the years which seek to reintegrate displaced communities
and refugees in their host countries in situations of prolonged conflict or as a result of disasters such as the
floods or the recent Ebola pandemic. Response to address the needs of displaced or refugees as a result of
conflict and fragility is complex and needs substantive high level political leadership to continue to support
the livelihoods of the affected population.
Response to forced displacement
Direct support to refugee’s crisis: The Bank Group has traditionally used emergency relief assistance
which is financed by the Special Relief Fund (SRF) established by the Board of Governors of the Bank in
1974 as a Special Fund with a maximum of 1 million dollars by operation. Typically, emergency relief
operations are characterized by the need for prompt remedial actions to save and protect lives, salvage
property and minimize the destruction of basic infrastructure. Operationally, the design and delivery of
Bank Group assistance for relief operations will be entrusted to the appropriate organizations operating in
the field at the time (e.g. WFP, UNHCR), or an appropriate government agency or NGOs. In the specific
case of refugees, few operations have been developed:
Migrants Crisis due to the Libyan revolution and the AfDB answer in terms of Emergency Assistance: since
the force of the Arab Spring has spread across numerous countries in the region 790,000 migrant workers
and their families have crossed the Libyan border into other countries, and especially Tunisia, to escape the
ongoing violence. The massive outflow of migrants fleeing the violence in Libya represents one of the
largest migration crises in modern history. To help deal with the crisis, The Bank has approved in March
2011, from the Emergency Humanitarian Response Fund (ERF), a USD 1 million humanitarian emergency



                                                                                                             16
assistance grant to the International Red Cross Committee (ICRC) and the Tunisian Red Crescent (TRC).
The ICRC and the TRC are been charged with administering the Bank assistance to the displaced people at
the border. The grant helped to improve logistics such as increased sheltering capacity, purchase of vehicles
and supply of blankets. On the medical front, health facilities such as medical kits and water and sanitation
systems helped also to prevent the spread of epidemics.
The Emergency Humanitarian Assistance from AfDB to Refugees from Burundi: On March 2015, the
political crisis led to the flight of the first wave of refugees to Rwanda. Statistics from UNHCR and
MIDMAR indicate that Burundian refugees had edged slightly over 70,000 by September 2015. Rwanda’s
Ministry of Disaster Management and Refugee Affairs (MIDIMAR) created two reception centers to
facilitate immediate emergency services. Both centers are near the Rwanda-Burundi border. Due to the
emergency, the Government of Rwanda and AfDB signed on January, 2016, a USD 1 million emergency
assistance grant to Burundian refugees in Rwanda. The emergency support will contribute to: (i) Ensuring
timely supply of fire wood in the refugee camps in order to mitigate the consequences related to the
insufficient quantity of firewood as it results in conflicts with the host communities; and (ii) Promoting the
use of alternative sources of energy such as the supply of energy saving cooking stoves to reduce biomass
consumption and ensure environmental sustainability.
Voluntary migration programs
Intra-regional mobility and Migration Policies: The African Development Bank is supporting the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) Commission, in developing a common
migration policy for ECOWAS. In 1979, the ECOWAS Commission adopted the Protocol on Free
Movement of Persons. The citizens of ECOWAS are among the most mobile in the world, and trends
indicate that they mainly migrate within the ECOWAS region. However, recent labor and migration trends
have begun to reveal gaps in the Protocol of Free Movement. This is especially so with respect to the Rights
of Residency and Establishment, as well as issues of the mutual recognition of qualifications, which neither
facilitate social mobility of the migrants, nor leverage migration for development both in receiving and
sending countries. These issues pose a major policy challenge. AFDB is supporting the development of a
modern day migration policy that responds to the aspirations of the region’s citizens.
One of the Bank’s priorities is to improve the quality of live for the people of Africa. The human
development portfolio has 90 operations valued at US$ 2.32 billion, out-of-which 34% is devoted to
entrepreneurship promotion, job creation, and provision of social safety nets for the vulnerable. In 2015,
alone, the Bank’s Boards of Directors approved 20 new operations, amounting UA587 million; which
includes 5 small projects (UA3.35 million) related to either emergency relief, economic and sector work
and technical assistance to RMCs through MIC grants. The other 15 projects supports (i) skills development
and technology to foster the gains of the Africa’s demographic dividend and meet skills level required by
the private sector including emerging industries (Angola, Eritrea, Kenya, Zambia); (ii) improved quality
and efficient service delivery in social sectors (Ethiopia, Malawi, and two projects in Sudan), and (iii) Foster
entrepreneurship, job creation and providing social safety nets for the vulnerable (Djibouti, Central African
Republic, Tunisia, South Africa, a regional Ebola project, and two projects in Togo).
New perspective of intervention for AfDB: the “Jobs for Youth in Africa” Strategy
In order to scale up the impact on jobs for youth in the continent, the Bank is leading the design of a catalytic
initiative- “Jobs For Youth in Africa”- as part of solutions to unprecedentedly leapfrog employment creation
for Africa’s youth bulge. This is a continental initiative to significantly scale-up access to productive and
decent jobs on the continent, thereby helping tackle the underlying push factors for migration in Africa.
The vision of the initiative is to equip Africa’s youth to realize their economic potential and drive economic
transformation and inclusive growth across the continent. The Initiative seeks to bring more scale, focus,
and structure to current efforts in addressing the youth employment challenges in Africa anchored on three
sectors prospective economic including agriculture, industry and ICT. The Initiative leverages AfDB’s
unique role as a bridge between public and private sectors in Africa and is underpinned by a dedicated


                                                                                                              17
funding facility. An estimated 60 million youth are envisaged to be reached by this strategy with a USD 5
billion investment facility and 28 million jobs (direct, indirect and induced) are expected to be created over
the next decade under Employ Africa. As part of Jobs for youth strategy, the Bank had developed jointly
with EIB, Boost Africa is a new initiative to promote innovation and entrepreneurship in Africa. By
applying a blended finance principle, coupled with synergic interventions in the area of capacity building
and ecosystem development, the fund of funds will push the boundaries of the two institutions by taking
greater risk and invest into venture capital, impact investing and business angels network across the
continent.
The AFDB was also mandated by African Union (AU) to leverage its technical, financial and operational
strength through projects and programs to address labor market issues9.
    2. Asian Development Bank (ADB)

Response to Fragility
Under its Operational Plan for Enhancing ADB’s Effectiveness in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations
(FCAS), ADB is working to: 1) make country strategies and plans for all FCAS countries more fragility-
and conflict-sensitive; 2) strengthen human resources for FCAS operations; 3) seek to augment financial
resources for FCAS countries; 4) adopt differentiated flexible business processes for FCAS activities and
develop an appropriate risk framework; 5) develop customized institutional strengthening framework for
FCAS countries; and 6) refine its approach to identifying FCAS countries by harmonizing its method of
classifying ADB developing member countries as FCAS countries with methods used by other multilateral
development banks. This last action will allow ADB to better coordinate its assistance with the operations
of other development partners in the countries concerned.
Response to Forced Displacement and Voluntary Migration Programs
Among ADB’s developing member countries, Afghanistan is one of the three that account for half of the
refugees worldwide. Meanwhile, Pakistan is among the countries with the highest numbers of internally
displaced persons (IDP). ADB’s operations in these two countries are not designed to directly address
refugees and IDP. However, ADB support to economic growth, access to markets and services, and job
stimulation (through better transport, improved access to electricity, and greater agriculture productivity)
can make a contribution to mitigating displacement and migration. ADB financing and technical advice has
helped to establish some of the enabling conditions for private sector development, while also contributing
to sustainable job creation, thereby improving resilience.
ADB’s engagement in Afghanistan is based on a medium and longer-term development strategy to support
the country’s economic and social development and poverty reduction. In particular, ADB aligns its support
to the country government strategy by promoting inclusive growth through regional infrastructure
investments. These investments support higher economic growth, connecting poor people to markets, and
increasing access of poor people to basic productive assets and social services.
Priority sectors for ADB support are transport, energy, and agriculture and natural resources. Work in these
sectors is accompanied by institutional capacity building and governance improvements. ADB remains
committed to Afghanistan for the long-term, and will continue with its focused strategy to contribute to
improved domestic conditions and economic opportunities for the Afghan people.
Specifically, investment projects and TAs in transport have incorporated inclusive growth strategies that
provide livelihood and employment opportunities and increased access to social services among vulnerable
and disadvantaged groups, including poor farmers and women.


9
 In the framework on the continental wide Joint Youth Employment Initiative for Africa (JYEIA) launched in 2011
with AU, AFDB and ILO.


                                                                                                             18
ADB’s energy projects in Afghanistan aim to improve the electrification rate, increase energy security, and
facilitate regional trade and cooperation. Greater availability of cheaper, more reliable energy will boost
productivity at home and in the workplace, reduce the cost of doing business, create more jobs, promote
greater technology adoption, enable the production of more higher-value products and exports, and expand
economic activity into rural areas.
ADB’s investments in agriculture and natural resources continue to improve connectivity with markets
and address critical gaps, thereby increasing the performance and efficiency of key commodity value
chains, and enhancing quality for both domestic import substitution and export of commodities. These
investments directly benefit thousands of rural poor and generate on-farm employment.
Private sector investments and private sector development have also been a part of ADB’s activities in
Afghanistan. Key successes have been in the telecommunications and banking sectors, leading to the
development and expansion of Afghanistan’s mobile telecommunications sector and infrastructure,
catalyzing the entry of more financial institutions into Afghanistan’s financial sector, and creating new jobs.
The government views ADB's primary role to provide the lead in infrastructure development, transport
(road and rail), energy, and water resources/irrigation. This puts in place the enabling conditions for
medium- and long-term inclusive economic growth and improved service delivery, private sector
development, and sustainable job creation. ADB's lead role in infrastructure is complemented by its
administration of the Afghanistan Infrastructure Trust Fund, which has commitments and pledges of over
$800 million to date.
ADB's ongoing and planned projects are already in line with many of the activities under the Jobs for Peace
initiative. The (i) $57 million Northern Flood-damaged Infrastructure Emergency Rehabilitation Project,
(ii) $10 million Community-based Irrigation Rehabilitation and Development Project, and (iii) $18.5
million Enhanced Value Chains for Sustainable Livelihood and Development Project are all being
implemented through community labor and contributing to increased employment and enhanced
sustainable livelihood in project areas. These programs also have important gender benefits. ADB's energy
and transport portfolio also contribute to substantial job creation through construction and other project
related activities.
ADB recently carried out an analysis for the Ministry of Finance in relation to the Job's for Peace initiative
and calculated that all ongoing ADB projects are generating over 7 million labor days for over 120,000
people in Afghanistan. For 2016, ADB is planning several new projects that are in line with the Jobs for
Peace Program. These include the new $61.5 million Transport Asset Management Project in 2016, which
will finance operations and maintenance of roads with local communities in the area providing labor for the
project. The $75 million Panj-Amu River Basin Project to rehabilitate irrigation infrastructure will also
create rural jobs and promote enhanced productivity and improved livelihoods.
In Pakistan, ADB is working with the Government to improve connectivity, productivity, and access to
markets and public services to support more rapid inclusive and sustainable growth to create productive
employment productive employment opportunities, and reduce poverty. ADB’s current strategy focuses on:
(i) infrastructure development to improve connectivity, boost productivity, help attract private investments,
create jobs, and provide access to markets and basic public services; and (ii) institutional reforms to help
mobilize resources, facilitate effective private sector participation, and improve public service delivery.
Priority sectors include energy, transport, agriculture and natural resources, water and other urban
infrastructure, public sector management, and finance.
ADB’s support to Pakistan will help relieve some of the main constraints to inclusive growth, such as
energy shortages, impediments to connectivity, deficient governance and institutions, and inadequate access
to finance. ADB is helping Pakistan to increase agricultural productivity, and improve the natural resource
base in the arid and semi-arid areas of Balochistan, Federally Administered Tribal Areas, Khyber
Pakhtunkhwa, and Punjab. ADB is also providing assistance for (i) urban services to help achieve the



                                                                                                            19
Sustainable Development Goals; (ii) provincial roads, railway rehabilitation, and urban transport to provide
better access to the less well-off rural and urban population; (iii) cash transfers to poor women under
Pakistan’s largest social safety net program, the Benazir Income Support Program; and (iv) mitigating the
risks of natural disasters and climate change, which disproportionately impact poor people.
       3. European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD)

Many of the immediate needs faced by countries dealing with large scale migratory flows or large numbers
of refugees are outside the EBRD’s mandate; however, the Bank can provide support for acute and
concentrated needs of a medium-term nature, in line with its mandate and core areas of operation. Broadly
speaking, the Bank’s efforts to address forced displacement aim to bolster the economic resilience of
affected groups and regions.
Response to Forced Displacement
In line with the needs of the Bank’s affected countries of operation, specifically Jordan and Turkey and in
due course Lebanon10, the Bank’s response to forced displacement in these countries focuses on two major
areas:
1. Municipal infrastructure
     • Support for rehabilitation/upgrading of infrastructure and improvements in public services for water,
       waste water, solid waste and urban transport, which are under strain from the sharply increased
       numbers of users.
     • This is likely to take the form of discrete investments or sector investment programs with municipal
       entities.
     • As per all EBRD investments in this sector, projects and programs would include capacity building,
       advice and support for the design and implementation of policy actions, with a view to promoting
       service delivery which is sustainable over the medium- to long-term. In some cases, this might include
       public-private partnerships.
     In December 2015, the first project under the Bank’s refugee response provided Water Authority of Jordan
     with a USD 14 million loan to upgrade a wastewater pipeline in Al Zarqa which was under severe strain
     due to sharply increased numbers of users. Additional projects in the current pipeline for Jordan include
     a proposed financing package for a private-sector operator, chosen through open tender, to provide a waste
     to energy solution, as well as a public-private sector partnership focusing on photovoltaic electricity for
     the Jordanian water sector.
2. SME, MSME and early entrepreneurship support
     • Credit lines for local banks and microfinance institutions, accompanied by technical assistance and
       risk sharing grants.
     • Direct finance, with risk-sharing and post-investment support, to flagship SMEs operating in affected
       regions.
     • Know how for businesses via local consultancy and international advisory projects.
     • Business resource centers to provide information about starting a business, training, accessing finance
       and other support.
The EBRD is currently developing a proposal for Business Resource Centers in affected regions of Turkey
in collaboration with the Turkish Chambers of Commerce and Chambers of Industry. Gaziantep has been

10
  Lebanon has applied to become a member of the Bank, with a view to becoming a country of operation. The Bank
has started the procedure for membership.


                                                                                                             20
identified as a pilot location, with a gradual roll-out to follow. These Business Resource Centers will
provide advisory services and professional resources to new and experienced entrepreneurs including legal
services, accountants, translators as well as assistance with regards to opening bank accounts.
In addition, recognizing the strong needs within these countries for regional, youth and gender inclusion,
all projects part of the EBRD crisis response will weave inclusion elements throughout.
    •   Programs will include skills mapping and improved access to local training, as well as support to
        increase verification centers for tertiary and vocational skills.
    • The EBRD is currently engaging with local-community based organizations and CSOs with a view
        to finding opportunities which support inclusion and income-generating activities, as a first step in
        Gaziantep and the larger Turkish agribusiness sector with a view to expanding across affected
        regions.
In addition, while not part of EBRD’s specific refugee response, other operations in the affected regions
may also contribute to economic development, job creation and to mitigating heightened pressures on public
services. These include projects for public-private partnerships for infrastructure investments in the health
sector and investments in the manufacturing sector.
Given the nature of projects in response to crisis, investments within the EBRD pipeline require high levels
of concessional financing. EBRD is currently in discussions with bilateral donors. In addition, in order to
contribute to the mobilization of grant funding, EBRD management has proposed a net income allocation
of around EUR 100 million over 2016-2018 to support the Bank’s refugee response, subject to appropriate
governance rules and the Bank’s continuing profitability.
In line with its broader mandate to support private-sector development, in its work on forced displacement,
the EBRD will aim to play a strong role one engaging with the private sector as a key part of efforts to
supporting resilience. In this regard, the EBRD hosted an event on 3 February 2016, on the eve of the
London Syria Conference on ‘Enabling the private sector to support refugee-hosting communities.’
Voluntary Migration Programs
Historically, some EBRD countries of operation are or have been the origin of significant outward migrants,
some of whom have returned when the economic climate in destination countries has deteriorated.
Recently, Kosovo, Albania and some regions of Southern Serbia have been the origin of significant numbers
of migrants. As an example of the approach the Bank has implemented to stem the flow of migrants and to
support reabsorption of returning migrants, the Bank intends to expand some of its existing programs in
this region. The following instruments could be scaled up for this purpose:
 • Lending to MSMEs through local banks and microfinance institutions.
 • Specialized lending and/or portfolio risk-sharing facilities through local banks to reach the local
   agribusiness sector (a hitherto under-served sector), particularly in rural areas.
 • Advisory support for start-up entrepreneurs and MSMEs, where possible linked to financing and/or
   risk-sharing facilities.
    4. European Investment Bank (EIB)

The EU Bank’s mission is to support EU policies and to address EU needs both within the EU and outside
the EU. This includes addressing the longer term effects of the refugee crisis in countries of origin, transit
and destination in close coordination with EU Member States, the European Commission, and International
Financial Institutions. In light of the urgent needs in the region and the invitation by the European Council
to contribute further to the common EU response, the EIB intends to step up its efforts in regions affected
by the refugee crisis – especially the Western Balkans, and Southern Neighborhood – over the course of
the next five years using existing grant-loan blending facilities to the extent possible. The focus will be on


                                                                                                           21
public and private sector investments which boost the resilience of host communities as well as directly
benefitting refugees.
Infrastructure
The EIB will continue to expand its financing for investments in transport, energy, urban development,
water supply, waste water and solid waste to support economic development as well as fostering connection
to and closer links with the EU. The economics of the underlying projects, as well as debt sustainability
concerns in many of the affected countries, generate an increased need for concessional financing for
infrastructure investments. Furthermore, EIB activity will include supporting PPPs that governments wish
to undertake, with a focus on PV Solar and wind, Water supply/desalination, Waste and Waste to Energy,
by engaging private investors to improve efficiency and broaden the sources of financing.
Loans for SMEs and mid-caps
The Bank will continue to provide funding through intermediation by commercial banks to SMEs and mid-
caps. In order to further improve absorption and reach of these loans, the EIB will continue to try to access
a number of grant sources. Support to youth employment in the relevant regions could be targeted through
credit lines to local financial institutions for on-lending to local companies combined with an element of
further grants depending on the number of new young employees and promotion of start-ups. Furthermore,
significant impact on growth and employment could also be achieved through financial products that
support trade and mitigate foreign exchange risk for SMEs in line with international trade rules, for example
through trade financing and local currency financing.
Microfinance
On 28 December 2015 a new risk-capital mandate for microfinance in the so called “Southern
Neighborhood”, comprising Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Morocco, Palestine, Syria and
Tunisia was signed between the EIB and the European Commission to address the alleviation of poverty
and unemployment by promoting access to finance to low income persons and micro-entrepreneurs.
Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Boost Africa is a new initiative under preparation in partnership with AfDB to promote innovation and
entrepreneurship in Africa for job creation and financial inclusion of first-time entrepreneurs, in particular
among youth and women. The fund of funds will be combined with a significant capacity building program
and a Knowledge & Innovation Lab. The project will apply for blending from the AFIF and/or the EU
Emergency Trust Fund). A similar initiative is being prepared for MENA countries (Boost MENA).
Project preparation
The EIB is currently finalizing a common initiative with the UK Department for International Development
(“DFID”), setting up a technical assistance facility under the FEMIP Trust Fund to support preparation and
implementation of projects, mainly in Lebanon and Jordan, that alleviate pressure on social infrastructure
and promote economic resilience and growth, which may substantially enhance the activity in the Middle
East and North Africa (“MENA”) region.
Migration Financing Envelope
The UK Department for International Development (“DFID”) is proposing to collaborate with EIB, the EC
and other Member States to put together a dedicated migrations financing envelope to address drivers of
migration and improve living conditions in the MENA region, the Horn of Africa (e.g. Eritrea, Djibouti,
Somalia, Kenya), the Sahel and potentially other countries such as Pakistan. The MFE would have a strong
focus on private sector operations, inclusive growth, decent job creation (especially for youth) and female
economic empowerment to provide a better foundation for socio-economic growth and resilience in both
rural and urban areas.


                                                                                                           22
New Financing Initiative for MENA (Concessional Financing Facility and Guarantee Facility)EIB is
committed to work with the World Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, the UN, the donor community
and other partners to implement the New Financing Initiative for MENA expected to be signed later this
year.
    5. Inter-American Development Bank (IADB)

The Protracted Crisis of Migrant Children from the Northern Triangle
Over the last months the attention of the world has focused on the Syrian-Afghan migrant crisis, as well as
the migrant flows from the North of Africa. Despite the reduced media coverage, Central America, in
particular the Northern Triangle —Honduras, Salvador and Guatemala— continues to face the major
challenge of the protracted crisis of undocumented migrant children.
During the summer 2014 approximately 68,000 unaccompanied and undocumented migrant children from
Central America reached the Southwest border of the United States. President Obama declared that the
situation was of humanitarian concern. Approximately 75% of those children were from the Northern
Triangle countries. These figures add to the thousands of adults from Central America who take the
extremely risky journey through the Mexican desert trying to reach the United States.
Following a series of actions from the US, Mexican and Central American governments, the number of
undocumented Central American migrants reaching the US decreased after the 2014 summer and during
most of 2015, but the numbers have been increasing over the last months at an alarming rate. According to
the US Department of Homeland Security, during the last 3 months of 2015 approximately 17,000
unaccompanied children reached the US Southern border, representing an increase of 117 percent compared
to the same 3 months of 2014.
While migration is not new for Central America, it reminds us of the structural challenges that force people
to leave their countries (mainly lack of socio-economic opportunities and pervasive crime and violence);
the crisis of migrant children suggests a severe deterioration of the socio-economic and security condition
in Central America.
Furthermore, the Northern Triangle governments face the major challenge of managing the return
(following deportation from Mexico and the US) of thousands of their citizens every month.
The Plan of the Alliance for the Prosperity of the Northern Triangle
The challenge of migration from Central America is complex. While to some extent migrants decide to
migrate (voluntary migration) to seek a better life elsewhere, some others are pushed to flee crime, violence
and the continuous threat of gangs (forced migration), while authorities work to promote economic
development and security in a context of very limited resources (fragility).
Because of the complex nature of the problem and the need for urgent action, the governments of Honduras,
El Salvador and Guatemala jointly developed the Plan of the Alliance for the Prosperity, a multi-annual
reform and investment plan which focuses on tackling crucial structural challenges in prioritized territories
and leverage the support of partners such as the US Government, which has recently committed US$750
million for their Central America strategy. The ultimate goal is to tackle those issues that sustain
undocumented migration and foster economic inclusion.
The Plan of the Alliance focuses on 4 main pillars: i) Human Capital Development, ii) Fostering the Private
Sector, iii) Improving Citizen Security and strengthening the rule of law, iv) Better Institutional Capacity
and Greater Transparency. The governments of Honduras, El Salvador and Guatemala have started the
implementation of the Plan and have committed approximately US$ 2.5 billion of national resources to
projects that are priorities under the Plan for 2016.
The Role of the IADB



                                                                                                          23
The IADB, in the role of Technical Secretariat, is supporting the multi-year Plan of the Alliance through a
dedicated team of specialists within its Central America, Mexico, Panama and the Dominical Republic
Country Department.
 The IADB has also provided technical assistance to hire experts that can support the Northern Triangle
governments in the design of country-specific projects for migrants; furthermore, the IADB is working with
the governments of the Northern Triangle to pilot initiatives on employability of returned migrants and
building institutional capacity in the area of counter-trafficking with the goal of reducing vulnerability for
migrants. Last but not the least, a dedicated team of specialists is working on a flagship publication on
migration in Central America, Mexico, Panama and the Dominican Republic that will generating data and
build knowledge to inform socio-economic policies that can reduce the vulnerability of migrants, prevent
migrants crisis, and leverage the opportunities provided by the migration phenomenon.
The IADB has been a strong supporter of this unprecedented regional endeavor. The commitment of the
IADB is to continue to work closely with the Central American governments to provide support and
technical assistance in the prioritization of high-impact projects, to fostering the dialogue with multiple
donors and to support the dialogue with all stakeholders, including the private sector and civil society.
    6. Islamic Development Bank (IDBG)

IDBG has contributed and continue to contribute to projects aiming at mitigating the suffering of refugees
and IDPs directly and indirectly in the most affected countries including Palestine, Syria, Somalia, Yemen,
Pakistan, Indonesia, just to name few. These projects covered many areas including agriculture, education,
health, water and sanitation and other services. The following are just examples of these interventions.
In Palestine, the IDBG works with UNDP and UNRWA to alleviate the suffering of the refugees and IDPs
and the victims of the occupation among the Palestinians. One of the main projects in this regard is an
ongoing project aiming at rehabilitation and restoration of 910 units partially damaged in the 2014 war. 95
percent of the project is implemented already; the remaining 5percent is ongoing. The other very successful
model program that is implemented in Palestine is Deprived Families Economic Empowerment Program
(DEEP). DEEP worked through intermediary non-governmental organizations (NGOs), microfinance
institutions (MFIs) and private-sector institutions to provide a comprehensive package of financial and non-
financial services to meet the needs of poor and destitute families among the IDPs and refugees in the
occupied Palestinian territory (oPt). DEEP consists of two main components of services for poor
households: microfinance (financial services), targeting impoverished families; and economic
empowerment grants, targeting families living in extreme poverty. The DEEP methodology is based on the
principle of participation with beneficiaries. DEEP values and principles include a poverty focus,
diversified interventions, capacity building, adaptation, neutrality, transparency, outreach, sustainability,
national capacity-building, effective targeting of poor households, linking livelihoods with microfinance,
and partnership-building. The multidimensional nature of poverty and the vulnerability of the people of the
oPt requires concerted and integrated efforts from the government, public and private institutions and civil
society organizations across a variety of sectors, economic, financial and social. DEEP succeeded in
harnessing such efforts. There are also many other projects in Palestine that cover different sectors including
construction, agriculture, education and health.
For Syrian refugees and IDPs, IDPG is currently implementing many education projects for Syrian IDPs
and refugees including electronic education, which was launched on 23 March 2016, which is designed to
reach every Syrian student wherever he is through many platforms. Another program is working on
rehabilitation and restoration of severely damaged schools and construction of new schools for Syrian IDPs
and refugees inside Syria and in the hosting countries. IDBG also is working with its partners to provide
university scholarships for Syrian students, and provide extracurricular education for Syrian schools drop-
off children. Among the finalized projects is printing school textbooks in which more than 3million copies
have been printed and distributed. During the London Conference on ‘Supporting Syria and the Region’,



                                                                                                            24
held on 4th February 2016, IDBGG announced its readiness to scale up financing to the affected countries
in the Arab region to the tune of US$9 billion over the three years period from 2016-18. IDBGG has
coordinated with World Bank, EBRD and EIB to provide blend financing for the affected countries in the
region.
In Somalia, IDBG has a long history of providing services to the internally displaced persons (IDPs) and
refugees since 1991 in which it implemented many projects in relief, health, education and VCT. After the
collapse of the Somalia government in 1991, the IDB Group has approved 85 projects in Somalia worth
US$96 million. The Bank supported early interventions to combat the 2011 famine with Grants totaling
US$3.2 million as humanitarian assistance. The Bank also delivered US$4.35 million emergency relief to
drought-hit areas in Somalia in coordination with the London-based Islamic Relief Worldwide. Under the
Fael Khair Program, IDBG again approved urgent Relief operations totaling US$4 million to mitigate the
impact of the drought in mid-2014. Under the Fael Khair Program also, there is a massive program ongoing
now in Somalia that is aiming at alleviating the root cause of water scarcity and drought circles that hit
Somalia every decade causing famines like the one of 2011, which created the largest number ever of IDPs
in Somalia. The program consists of drilling deep boreholes and building schools in the neediest areas
allover Somalia, to help the IDPs to resettle back in their original villages. Somalia’s Fail Khair Programme
is funded by US$ 27 million from the late King Abdullah Ibn Abdulaziz to drill 72 deep wells across
Somalia regions and install solar panels to provide power for the boreholes, and to build an equivalent
number of schools in the wells vicinity. IHH of Turkey and Islamic Relief Worldwide from the UK
implementing the program. 30 deep boreholes have been already drilled in many deprived villages while
the rest is ongoing. The schools construction is starting in the second half of 2016.
In Yemen, IDBG delivered US$2 million emergency relief operations for hospital supplies and health,
education, food for children in IDPs camps. Under the Fael Al-Khair Program, IDBG committed US$49.50
million to deliver 15 Mobile Clinics, which also covers the operational expenses for five years. The first set
of six (6) mobile clinics will be delivered by August 2016 in six different Governorates in Yemen. IDBG
also approved re-scoping of two Active Projects under implementation for re-building social infrastructures
related to health and education sectors in the seven governorates affected by the on-going conflict. US$50
million were approved for Youth Employment Support (YES) program and US$17 million were approved
for Integrated Rural Development (IRD) program.
In preparation for the World Humanitarian Summit (WHS), IDBG is working in coordination with the
Organization Islamic Corporation (OIC) on a paper about the resilience building for the OIC Member
Countries. The paper will analyze the root causes of the Humanitarian caseload of the Muslim World and
will provide recommendations on preventive and preparedness measurements and resilience building
intervention to go beyond managing the symptoms of the humanitarian crises and disaster management to
addressing the root causes of armed conflict and natural and man-made disasters.
    7. World Bank Group (WBG)

The WBG’s operational portfolio addressing displacement needs in the Middle East and North Africa
(MENA) region has grown over the last several years. In the early stages of the Syrian crisis, projects tended
to focus on the needs of refugees and directly affected host populations and were typically implemented by
NGOs. However, as the burden of hosting Syrian refugees began to weigh more heavily on receiving
governments, WBG support has moved toward support for host communities and governments to
complement continuing, largely humanitarian support being given to refugees. In practice this has meant
that the WBG has focused on activities aimed at safeguarding development achievements, promoting social
stability, enhancing service delivery, and emphasizing the role that good analytics can play in understanding
the social and economic impacts of regional displacement. There has been less support to IDP populations
in Syria or Iraq, largely due to access issues, yet national programs (e.g. social protection, education and
health operations) have adjusted, in the case of Iraq, to be more cognizant of the vulnerability of IDPs.



                                                                                                           25
The New Financing Initiative to Support the Middle East and North Africa was presented in October, 2015
during the WBG-IMF Annual Meetings in Lima, Peru. The working group formed then, which is co-chaired
by the UN, the WBG, and the Islamic Development Bank Group (IDB), is in the process of developing a
roadmap for implementation.
The approach proposes blending contributions from supporting countries with lending from implementation
support agencies (a broad range of partners, including MDBs) to improve the concessionality of
development financing. It integrates blending arrangements with a financing facility that can provide
coordination and oversight. The WBG would act as the Trustee for a Financial Intermediary Fund, receiving
contributions from supporting countries, holding and investing these funds, and transferring funds to
Implementation Support Agencies (including UN agencies).
Regional Initiatives in AFR
Over the past 2 years, the WBG AFR region has launched regional initiatives in the Great Lakes, the Sahel,
and the Horn of Africa, as well as the Lake Chad Basin. The initiatives are all premised on the assumption
that greater regional cooperation and integration, and enhanced development, will support efforts to
promote peace and security in regions affected by conflict.
In 2013, the WBG launched the Great Lakes Regional Initiative (GLRI) “Reviving the Great Lakes”,
designed to work in support of achievement of the Peace Security and Cooperation Framework (PSCF) for
the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC) and the region. US$ 100 million was allocated under the GLRI
for a project to address the vulnerabilities of the displaced and their host communities. This “Great Lakes
Region Displaced People and Border Communities Project” intends to improve the integration and socio-
economic development prospects of those affected by forced displacement, including the local communities
which host the displaced. Based on confirmed Government demand, the project is now moving ahead in
DRC, Zambia and Tanzania. The project will focus on: (i) livelihoods and sustainable access to socio-
economic services for IDPs, returnees and refugees in the DRC; and (ii) achieving the local integration of
the former Burundian refugees in Tanzania and former Angolan refugees in Zambia and improving the
development prospects in the settlements where they have continued to live for more than forty years.
The WBG launched the “Regional Initiative in Support of the Horn of Africa in October 2014”, covering:
Djibouti, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South Sudan, Sudan, and Uganda. The initiative highlighted
protracted forced displacement as one of the most complex and pressing regional development challenges.
As a result, a regional operation is being designed to support Djibouti, Ethiopia and Uganda to address the
impacts of refugee presence on the host communities. The project aims to improve access to social services,
expand economic opportunities and enhance environmental management for host and forcibly displaced
households in the targeted areas of Djibouti, Ethiopia and Uganda. The operational approach will be
Community Driven Development (CDD) oriented and will involve: (i) building grassroots institutions, (ii)
ensuring voice of all communities including refugees in decision making, (iii) strengthening decentralized
government administrative functions, as well as (iv) investing in public service delivery and social
mobilization to enhance the social cohesion among the beneficiary communities.
Selected operations on Forced Displacement
•   Afghanistan: livelihoods and food security (2015; $50m)
•   Azerbaijan: living standards and livelihoods for IDPs (2011/2016; $50m/ $50m)
•   Great Lakes: DRC (community driven development, livelihoods, and capacity building; 2015; $50m),
    Tanzania (livelihoods and infrastructure; Pipeline 2016; $27m) and Zambia (livelihoods, infrastructure
    and capacity building; Pipeline 2016; $19,5m);
•   Horn of Africa – Djibouti, Ethiopia and Uganda (social services, economic opportunity and
    environmental management; pipeline: 2016; $170m);
•   Pakistan: IDP return, early recovery, child health, and emergency response (2015);
•   Sri Lanka: community livelihoods (2009; $65m)


                                                                                                        26
    8. International Financial Corporation (IFC)

Attracting investments even into financially viable sectors/projects in MENA is currently challenging given
the prevailing regional conditions. As such, IFC sees limited role from a private sector investment lens for
attracting private capital into the refugee space. However, the MENA team is currently in the process of
developing a holistic approach to addressing the refugee crisis that is in alignment with its overall strategy
in MENA as well as the broader WBG MENA Strategy. This is a new area for IFC and the private sector,
and hence the strategy will evolve over time as a better understanding is developed of the issues facing the
refugee and host communities. Moreover, given the sensitivities in the region on supporting refugees (i.e.,
that it may come at the expense of distracting from addressing similar development needs of host
communities), the key principle in IFC’s approach is that engagements will support both host communities
as well as refugee communities.
The four prongs of IFC’s current strategy to support refugees in MENA are the following:
Creating fiscal space for governments in the region to address humanitarian needs by attracting
investors into MENA to provide private financing and provisioning of services that would otherwise need
to be financed through public funds. Financing of infrastructure and services (including education and
health) through the private sector is an important focus of IFC that is helping alleviate the fiscal burden on
MENA governments, especially in Jordan, Iraq, and Lebanon.
Building resilience to IDP/refugee shocks by increasing opportunities for jobs/livelihood and improved
service delivery for both host and refugee communities through: infrastructure/ICT development,
improved food security, greater access to finance (especially microfinance), appropriate vocational and
training skills, and support for entrepreneurship (e.g., VC funds, start-Ups, incubators, accelerators, SME
Funds). While IFC’s approach is currently to support host communities in these areas, refugees/IDPs will
also benefit from our engagements if the necessary conditions prevail (e.g., regulatory/legal framework for
refugees to work, start businesses etc.).
Drawing on advisory tools to support the needs of refugees in sectors where IFC has a proven track
record in difficult markets. Some areas IFC advisory teams are in early stages of exploring include:
            a. Working closely with the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice (T&C) and WB
               regional teams on investment climate related reforms necessary for the establishment of
               well-functioning and financially viable special economic zones (SEZs) that could create
               jobs for Syrian refugees. The T&C GP is currently developing a Program for Results (P4R)
               project of approx. $300–500 million (“Economic Opportunities for Jordanian and Syrian
               Refugees P4R”) which has 5 pillars: investment climate reforms, labor market reforms,
               SEZ development, improved market access to EU, camp economy & entrepreneurship.
               IFC’s regional and T&C teams are working closely with WB teams in designing this P4R,
               and also sharing lessons learned from past/ongoing WBG’s engagements in SEZs which
               have not been very successful for the most part.
            b. Building skills (financial literacy, entrepreneurial skills) among refugee communities
               through instruments such as Business Edge.
            c. Exploring PPP possibilities for social housing, solid waste management, and landfills in
               locations close to refugee camps that could benefit both host communities and refugees.
            d. Off-grid energy access options: in line with IFC’s successful “Lighting” advisory
               programs in other markets which target bottom of the pyramid populations that lack access
               to critical infrastructure and services. Upcoming scoping missions in Jordan and
               Lebanon will try to identify potential for providing refugees with access to quality assured
               off grid solar powered devices which can provide essential services such as lighting and
               mobile phone charging- the latter of which has been reported to be critical to refugees who


                                                                                                           27
                need to retain contact with family members who are either still in conflict zones or
                migrating.
Leveraging the convening power of IFC to facilitate greater corporate social responsibility (CSR) related
to refugee issues in MENA. IFC will try to use its partnerships with key clients and other regional and
global private sector players that may be interested in helping alleviate the refugee crisis through CSR
efforts. Several private sector players in MENA are already involved in supporting refugees through CSR
initiatives, and IFC will try to identify ways of supporting these efforts. Informal roundtable meetings with
the business community in Lebanon, Jordan, and Iraq are also being planned over the coming months to
brainstorm on ideas of how the private sector can support refugees and host communities in relevant
markets.




                                                                                                          28
Annex IV - Voluntary Migration and Development
Voluntary migration is an integral component of economic growth and development. As industrial and
service sectors emerge and grow, workers move to places where they can find employment opportunities.
Voluntary migration is taking place largely within national borders, but some people choose to work and
live in foreign countries. Globally, around 48 percent of international migrants are women, although there
are stark geographic differences: there are more female migrants than male migrants in Europe and North
America, whereas migrants in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries are predominantly males.
Research suggests that reducing barriers to international migration can lead to large global gains, likely
larger than gains from trade liberalization. Model-based simulations suggest that a rise in voluntary
migration sufficient to increase the labor force of high-income countries by three percent phased over a 10-
year period would yield a global gain of real income of $674 billion.
The bulk of the gains accrues to the voluntary migrants, in the form of higher wages and improved social
indicators. Voluntary migrants who have moved from countries with a low human development index to
countries with a high human development index have experienced on average a 15-fold increase in income,
a doubling in the education enrollment rate, and a 16-fold reduction in child mortality.
In host countries, voluntary migration increases the labor force and availability of skills, thereby
improving competitiveness and creating employment for native workers. It also allows native workers to
perform higher value-added tasks by providing complementary, cheaper services (for example, child care).
In the long-term, international voluntary migration flows may contribute to mitigating the decline in
working-age population in aging countries. The net fiscal impact of voluntary migration over the past 50
years in OECD countries is on average close to zero, rarely exceeding 0.5 percent of GDP in either positive
or negative terms.
Migrants benefit their countries of origin via remittances, skill and technology transfers and investments.
In 2015, worldwide remittance flows to developing countries are nearly three times the amount of official
development assistance, and excluding China, they are larger than FDI flows. Unlike private capital flows,
remittances tend to be a-cyclical, or even counter-cyclical, thus acting as a stabilizing flow during economic
downturns. While the impact of remittances on economic growth is unclear, remittances play an important
role in reducing poverty, with no significant effect on income inequality—e.g., by 11 percent in Uganda,
six percent in Bangladesh, and five
percent in Ghana.
There are, however, also a number of
issues and challenges associated with
voluntary migration. Voluntary migrants
may be separated from family, they may
have to undertake long and hazardous
journeys, they may become vulnerable to
exploitation and abuse by traffickers and
employers: under such circumstances, the
net benefit from migration may be
negative. In some host countries, inflows of large numbers of migrants cause social tensions which need to
be carefully managed. In some origin countries, voluntary migration of high-skilled workers can lead to
shortage of skills in critical sectors (such as health and education).




                                                                                                           29
Annex V - The New Financing Initiative to Support the
Middle East and North Africa
To address the massive financing needs of the Syrian refugee crisis, conflicts and economic instability,
the WBG has partnered with the United Nations (UN) and the Islamic Development Bank Group (IDB
Group) to mobilize the international community through the New Financing Initiative to Support the
Middle East and North Africa. This effort is the result of an innovative partnership between international
financial institutions and the United Nations, with the objective of strengthening coordination between
humanitarian and development assistance to deliver additional financing to the MENA region.
The New Financing Initiative to Support the MENA Region is comprised of two distinct, yet
complementary facilities: (i) the Concessional Financing Facility: This facility aims to provide additional
development assistance on concessional terms for Jordan and Lebanon, the most impacted countries in the
MENA region by the Syrian refugee crisis; and (ii) the Guarantee Facility: This facility aims to provide the
large volumes of financing needed for post-conflict reconstruction and economic recovery across the
region.
The International Stakeholders’ Roundtable Meeting for the MENA Region, which took place during
the 2015 WBG-IMF Annual Meetings, was an important milestone in convening the international
community to recognize the need to provide large scale financial support to the MENA region through
innovative financing modalities. The Roundtable Meeting established a working group – co-chaired by the
WBG, the UN and the IDB Group, and with the participation of the G7, GCC and Northern European
countries. Following on the mandate provided by participants of the Lima Roundtable Meeting, three
working group meetings have taken place to finalize the details of the financing initiative.
The International Conference for the New Financing Initiative to Support the MENA Region raised
USD 141 million in grant contributions and USD 1 billion in concessional loans, which will generate
additional grant contributions, for the Concessional Financing Facility. These are initial contributions
for the first year, with the clear expectation that similar levels of contributions will be made over the next
five years. As a result, this amount of funding is fully in line with the objective of raising USD 1 billion in
grant contributions over the coming five years, as was announced by President Kim at the Supporting Syria
and the Region conference that took place in London in February 2016.
The initial level of funding raised at the pledging conference will be able to immediately leverage around
USD 600-800 million in concessional financing for both Jordan and Lebanon. The first Steering
Committee will be convened in June/July in order to begin financing transformational programs such as the
Special Economic Zones project in Jordan, which aims to create 100,000 jobs for both Syrian refugees and
host communities.
In addition, the International Conference for the New Financing Initiative to Support the MENA Region
raised USD 500 million in guarantees for the Guarantee Facility.
Donors, MENA benefitting countries, and international organizations have expressed strong support for
this initiative, recognizing that it represents an exemplary approach in bridging the humanitarian-
development nexus by bringing together multilateral development banks, the European Commission,
and the UN. Various donors have raised this initiative as a possible precursor to a global response to refugee
crises, as highlighted in the 2016 Development Committee communiqué




                                                                                                            30
