Working
Together to
Prevent Sexual
Exploitation
and Abuse:
RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR WORLD BANK
INVESTMENT PROJECTS




REPORT OF THE GLOBAL
G E N D E R - B A S E D V I O LE N C E
TA S K F O R C E

JULY 31, 2017
Acknowledgements
The Task Force would like to acknowledge the women and children in Uganda who suffered from abuse as a result
of a World Bank–supported project, as well as the persistent community leaders who worked to bring their plight
to light. The Task Force asked itself repeatedly whether the recommendations would prevent such abuse in the
future and hopes that the survivors and community will see that, by coming forward, they have made a vital contri-
bution to better the lives of others worldwide. The Task Force would also like to thank Bank staff and management
for sharing so openly their perspectives on the issues and challenges the Bank faces. In particular, it is grateful to
those who provided technical guidance, including Sanjay Agarwal, Chris Bennett, Qays Hamad, John Kellenberg,
Mark King, Enzo De Laurentiis, and Jon Lindsay, as well as to the Inspection Panel for its insights. The Task Force
is particularly grateful for the dedicated efforts of the GBV/SEA Task Force Secretariat led by Caren Grown and
Maninder Gill, with special thanks to Verena Phipps, Diana Arango, and Farwah Qasim for their strong substantive
and logistical support.




                                                           Cover photo courtesy of the United Nations, John Isaac (photographer).
Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms..............................................................................................................................................4

Executive Summary...............................................................................................................................................................5

Introduction: Why and Why Now.......................................................................................................................................9
The Task Force Mandate and Approach................................................................................................................................................ 14
The Framework: Actors Working Together............................................................................................................................................16

At the Center: Women and Children at Risk................................................................................................................... 19
Recommendations..........................................................................................................................................................................................22

The Community: A Risk Management Partner................................................................................................................25
Recommendations..........................................................................................................................................................................................27

Contractors and Consultants: Accountable Partners..................................................................................................... 31
Recommendations..........................................................................................................................................................................................35

The Government: Committed and Prepared.................................................................................................................. 39
Recommendations......................................................................................................................................................................................... 40

The World Bank: Responsible Change Agent................................................................................................................ 45
Recommendations..........................................................................................................................................................................................47

Bringing it all Together: SEA Prevention and Response in the World Bank Project Cycle...................................... 51

A Final Word: Looking Back to Look Forward.............................................................................................................. 59

Annex 1: Task Force Terms of Reference......................................................................................................................... 64

Annex 2: The Uganda Transport Development Project – What Happened................................................................67

Annex 3: Risk Factors for Gender-Based Violence Based on the Ecological Model................................................ 69

Annex 4: Gender-Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Risk Assessment Guidance..................... 70

Annex 5: Sample Code of Conduct—Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project...............................................................72
Company Gender Based Violence and Child Protection Code of Conduct.............................................................................72
Manager’s Gender Based Violence and Child Protection Code of Conduct............................................................................73
Individual Gender Based Violence and Child Protection Code of Conduct.............................................................................76

Annex 6: Draft Protocol for World Bank Staff Reporting to Bank Management on Allegations of Sexual
Exploitation and Abuse by Personnel Associated with a World Bank–Financed Investment Operations............78

Bibliography......................................................................................................................................................................... 81




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                                                                        3
Abbreviations and Acronyms
CEDAW	Convention to Eliminate All Forms of                                                SCD	Systematic Country Diagnostic
        Discrimination Against Women
                                                                                            SEA	Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
CHINCA	Chinese International Contractors
                                                                                            SEP	Stakeholder Engagement Plan
        Association
                                                                                            SIGI	Social Institutions and Gender Index
CSO	Civil Society Organization
                                                                                            SOPs	Standard Operating Procedures
CMC	Community Mobilization Coordinator
                                                                                            SORT	Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool
CRC	Convention on the Rights of the Child
                                                                                            SMS	Short Message Service
ESHS	Environmental, Social, Health and
      Safety                                                                                SPD	Standard Procurement Documents

ESF	Environmental and Social Framework                                                     TSDP	Transport Sector Development Project

ESMP	Environmental and Social Management                                                   UN	United Nations
      Plan
                                                                                            UNICEF	United Nations Children’s Fund
FIDIC	International Federation of Consulting
       Engineers (in French)                                                                UNRA	Uganda National Roads Authority

GBV	Gender-Based Violence                                                                  VAW	Violence Against Women

GLTFP	Great Lakes Trade Facilitation Project                                               WB	World Bank

GRM	Grievance Redress Mechanism                                                            WHO	World Health Organization

IASC	Inter-Agency Standing Committee

ICT	Information and Communication
     Technology

IDA	International Development Association

IEG	Independent Evaluation Group

INGOs	International Non-Governmental
       Organizations

MDB	Multilateral Development Bank

NAPs	National Action Plans

NGOs	Non-Governmental Organizations

OECD	Organization for Economic Co-
      operation and Development

OPCS	Operation Policy and Country Services

PAD	Project Appraisal Document

PIU	Project Implementation Unit

RFP	Requests for Proposal

SBD	Standard Bidding Documents



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                        4
Executive Summary


                                                                                                    “
In October 2016, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim established an indepen-
dent Task Force of external experts to provide guidance on how to strength-
en Bank systems, tools and processes to prevent and mitigate against risk of
sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), as well as other forms of gender-based                         GENDER-BASED
violence (GBV), in World Bank-supported infrastructure and other area-based                         VIOLENCE,
investment projects. The Task Force was created in response to findings emerg-                      INCLUDING SEXUAL
ing from an Inspection Panel investigation of the Uganda Transport Sector De-                       E X P L O I TAT I O N
velopment Project, which found evidence of a range of severe impacts related to                     AND ABUSE, IS A
sexual misconduct, including with minors, exploitation and abuse and other forms                    PREVALENT GLOBAL
of gender-based violence. The resulting impacts reflected a profound abrogation                     CHALLENGE AND
of responsibility by all parties involved, including by the Bank, to protect the safe-
                                                                                                    M A N I F E S TAT I O N S
ty, dignity and well-being of affected communities.
                                                                                                    L I K E LY E X I S T I N
Preventing or mitigating against project-related risk of sexual exploitation and                    EVERY ENVIRONMENT
abuse requires interaction and collaboration between five key groups of actors.                     WHERE THE BANK
These include: (i) women and children at risk, as well as other vulnerable popula-                  O P E R AT E S .
tions, in communities where Bank-financed projects take place; (ii) communities
that can play a role as dynamic risk management actors in expanding the circle
of protection; (iii) contractors and consultants responsible for following contrac-
tually mandated social and labor practices that prevent abuse and violence; (iv)
government partners at central and local levels who are critical to ensuring that
SEA prevention and accountability mechanisms are in place; (v) and finally, the
World Bank, which can put in place the policies and systems to prevent such
incidents and play a convening role to facilitate partnerships that allow each of
these actors, including the World Bank itself, to take on their respective roles and
accountabilities to protect women and children from grievous harm.

AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK

Gender-based violence, including sexual exploitation and abuse, is a prevalent
global challenge and manifestations likely exist in every environment where
the Bank operates. Violence against women and children—and sometimes even
against men—contributes to enduring physical and mental harm, while undercut-
ting the ability of survivors, and often their families, to engage in meaningful, pro-
ductive lives. Finding solutions to reduce and respond to GBV is a critical devel-
opment imperative, with implications for the productivity, agency and well-being
of individuals and communities. Identifying and understanding the risk to women
and children, as well as to other vulnerable populations, of SEA and GBV is chal-
lenging yet critical. Risk factors are myriad and cut across multiple spheres, in-
cluding at the individual, relationship, community, institutional and policy levels.
Development projects, depending on their scope, can exacerbate existing risks
or create new ones. Project-related risk factors include the size and scale of a
project; the scale of labor influx; the extent to which a community has capacity
to absorb labor influx or requires separate camp facilities; the inflow of income to
workers, which can exacerbate already existing inequities between workers and
community members; and the geographic location of project activities.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                               5
Recommendations. Identifying and mitigating SEA and GBV risks in World Bank projects requires development
of a robust risk assessment methodology, with a rating of “High Risk” of SEA/GBV triggering actions in project
design and supervision. It will be critical in High Risk environments to educate and raise awareness of women, ad-
olescents and children about risks of SEA and their legal rights. Service providers for survivors of SEA should be
identified in accordance with international standards that articulate a minimum basic package of services, ideally
including case management support, health services, psychosocial support, police support and security, access to
legal services, and shelter, if needed.

THE COMMUNITY: A RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER

Community settings and norms can both contribute to and mitigate against the risk of sexual exploitation and
abuse. The community context in which social relationships occur—such as families, schools, neighborhoods, and
workplaces—influences incidence of, and tolerance for, violence. At the same time, community members are often
the most knowledgeable about locally relevant risk and protective factors and are critical stakeholders in prevent-
ing and responding to SEA. For these reasons, communities can serve as a rich source of information about the
local context and as critical partners to the government, the implementing partner and the Bank in the design and
implementation of projects.

Recommendations. To foster a continuous and dynamic partnership with community actors to prevent and re-
spond to SEA and build community resilience, community partners should be identified through a scanning and
mapping exercise that should be integrated into risk assessment methodologies. In High Risk contexts, this should
be used to identify trusted sources for receiving and disseminating information, as well as sources of support to
provide timely services to survivors of violence. Engagement with communities can build trust and transparency
through early and full disclosure of anticipated project activities, intended outputs and expectations for contractor
and worker behavior. The use of innovative communication channels for engagement and feedback through new
technologies such as social media and text messaging platforms can extend the reach of traditional mechanisms
for dissemination of information from project activities.

CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS

Construction companies and supervisory engineering firms play a central role in the implementation and man-
agement of project activities; their performance is critical to strategies to prevent SEA in infrastructure and
related projects. There have been significant and promising Bank efforts to create an enabling environment for
sound contractor and consultant performance on environmental and social risks through the Procurement Frame-
work. Management has already built strong links between the new Procurement Framework and the Environmen-
tal and Social Framework as a means of strengthening proactive management of environmental, social, health and
safety (ESHS) aspects and ensuring that Contractors adhere to proper standards and that Supervisory Engineers
play an oversight role. The new approach and requirements provide flexibility to address identified SEA and GBV
risks and already include references to GBV and sexual harassment in some provisions. It will be important to en-
sure that this approach is further strengthened by including standards and requirements specific to the risks of
SEA and GBV identified in a particular contract’s operating environment.

Recommendations. Under the new Procurement Framework, social risk mitigation and related contractor obli-
gations are built into Standard Bidding Documents. Of note, Contractors are required to have sexual harassment
policies and worker’s Codes of Conduct. It is recommended that Codes of Conduct include specific prohibitions
against SEA, including prohibition of sexual activities with children, defined as anyone younger than 18. This stan-
dard must hold even when national standards, laws and policies have a younger age of consent.

Another new requirement is that contractors declare whether any contracts have been suspended or cancelled or
bid bonds called for incidents related to SEA and GBV. Disclosure of past incidents should trigger more intensive
due diligence by the government Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to assess whether the firm has demonstrated
sufficient capacity for prevention and risk management.



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                   6
In addition, for High Risk Projects, several features anticipated in the new Procurement Framework should be
mandatory. These include a requirement that contractors demonstrate that they have the capacity to manage SEA
risks, including prevention and response action plans and key staff with appropriate technical skill and experience,
as well as training and awareness-raising programs for workers. In High Risk Projects, contracts for Supervisory
Engineers should set explicit expectations for monitoring contractor performance of its SEA obligations, with
a protocol in place for immediate, timely, mandatory and confidential reporting in case of incidents. Oversight
should be further strengthened by using Third-Party Monitoring for High Risk Projects, with a focus on ensuring
that provisions to prevent and respond to SEA are in place and functioning. The selection of a Third-Party Monitor
should respond to the project context, scope and reality on the ground and may include a civil society organiza-
tion, international or local nongovernmental organization (NGO), academic partner, private sector firm or dispute
board mechanism. Finally, the Bank should work with industry to raise the bar by partnering with leading con-
tractors, consultants and industry associations to develop an industry engagement and capacity building plan for
prevention of SEA. The goal is to build a coalition of industry partners to champion change, support development
of best practices, and develop learning and tools.

THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED

Client governments—at the national, regional and local levels—are essential actors in preventing and respond-
ing to SEA and other forms of GBV. But the approaches recommended by the Task Force will, for many clients, be
new and not well understood. The Bank should work to mobilize the government as an active partner in prevention
and response to SEA and GBV and build government commitment and ownership

Recommendations. Technical Ministries, PIUs, and local governments should be targeted for awareness-raising
and capacity-building interventions. Leveraging project launch activities, supported by specific learning modules,
as an opportunity to strengthen ownership and awareness of risks can enhance country capacity to address SEA.
Project-level Grievance Redress Mechanisms, which are the responsibility of Government, should integrate pro-
tocols to track complaints related to SEA—ensuring confidentiality and anonymity—including a feedback system
for regular and timely feedback on actions taken to respond to complaints. These mechanisms should protect
confidentiality of individuals without compromising access to justice while also enabling links to referral pathways
and local organizations for support services. Finally, the Bank should support government efforts to broaden their
response to SEA and GBV by establishing linkages between project-level activities and existing national policies
and frameworks as an important opportunity to strengthen country-level, multi-sectoral coordination on GBV and
implementation of these initiatives. Country engagement instruments such as the Strategic Country Diagnostic
(SCD) and Country Partnership Framework (CPF) present important entry points for dialogue with government
partners on risks related to SEA and GBV. The Bank should also seek to build connections between High Risk proj-
ects and existing programmatic efforts to address GBV within the country portfolio.

THE WORLD BANK: RESPONSIBLE CHANGE AGENT

The World Bank has the obligation and institutional strength to serve as the link which brings all the actors—the
communities where projects are located, workers, contractors and consultants, and government clients—to-
gether to protect women, children and communities against SEA. This is a challenging and sensitive issue, how-
ever, that will require Bank leadership to provide positive incentives to sustain staff attention and rigor.

Recommendations. Change starts from the top, and senior management should designate a senior-level cham-
pion to articulate expectations, monitor performance and push for timely implementation to sustain attention
to this work. This will amplify and broadcast successes, including positive recognition of staff who proactively
report incidents and who adopt good practices and innovations for SEA prevention and response. There should
be continued focus on the link between prevention of SEA in Bank projects and the Bank’s core values using
non-conventional learning tools such as storytelling and films. “Walking the talk” can further be fostered through a
dialogue on expectations for Bank staff in preventing SEA both in the workplace and in Bank operations as part of




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  7
the ongoing Office of Business Ethics exercise to update the Bank’s Core Values and in discussions of the Bank’s
own staff Anti-Harassment policies.

Operational policies and practices for preventing and responding to SEA should be consolidated into a staff
guidance note. The Bank should further establish clear, confidential and timely internal reporting and response
protocols of allegations of SEA. Training to build staff skills on SEA, linked to ongoing learning programs, will be
essential, as will building a highly specialized “Master Class” of staff who can be deployed to support teams. Mon-
itoring and evaluation should include reviews of a sample of High Risk projects over a two- to three-year period to
capture lessons learned and improve processes. The Bank should also request an Independent Evaluation Group
(IEG) review of implementation of Task Force recommendations to be conducted after 4 years.

All these efforts will require funding. Dedicated one-time surge funds will be needed for training and knowledge
development for both staff and clients. The Bank should also establish a two-year, time-bound GBV Prevention
and Mitigation Fund to supplement High-Risk projects, existing project preparation and supervision coefficients as
needed. Thereafter, project cost coefficients should reflect actual cost experience developed during this transition
period. Finally, building a coalition of Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) working together to prevent SEA in
projects will contribute to building momentum for this agenda.

A FINAL WORD: LOOKING BACK TO LOOK FORWARD

The experience of the Uganda TSDP was a painful one for the survivors and the local community. It was also a
sobering moment for local and national partners in Uganda and for the World Bank as a development institu-
tion. Many lessons have been learned from this experience, and the World Bank has introduced several systemic
changes to help ensure that such events are not repeated and that there are adequate mechanisms to prevent
and mitigate social risk in the projects it supports, including the risk of sexual abuse. The Task Force has worked
to build on these lessons and to promote further action to prevent and respond to SEA in Bank projects. If im-
plemented, the recommendations can go a long way to learning from the past while looking forward to ways
in which social risks can be mitigated so that women and children can experience, without fear, the benefits of
development projects.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  8
INTRODUCTION:

Why and
Why Now




“
...large infrastructure projects—
including those supported by the
Bank...can expose women and girls to
risks of sexual exploitation and abuse
unless adequate measures are taken
to prevent and address such risks.

—Jim Yong Kim, World Bank President
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW



Imagine a girl who lives in fear of sexual violence. Imagine she lives in a community where the local government
has secured international funding to improve roads in the area. At first her family is happy, looking forward to how
the new roads will help the children get to school and give them access to markets to sell their produce or to the
community hospital in an emergency. But soon those feelings of happiness turn bitter. She begins to view this proj-
ect with fear. Men from outside the community have come to work on the roads and have begun to approach her
friends, both girls and boys, with promises and money. The men call out rudely to the girls and threaten the boys. It
feels menacing. The police do nothing to help, and the contractor has ignored complaints from community leaders.
The girl’s parents no longer allow her to go to school. She is not allowed to go outside the house on her own or
walk around with her friends. Now, instead of increasing her access to school, the project has sliced into the girl’s
potential and her ability to move around freely and safely. She hears that one of the girls in her class had to drop
out of school because she was pregnant. That girl’s parents disowned her, and the rumor is that she has turned to
prostitution. This former school friend is now at risk of more violence, depression, and suicide. Another friend has
found out that he is HIV-positive. The girl worries for her friends, for herself, and for her family but doesn’t know
how to protect herself or help others.

These children live in our imagination, but their stories are not unique. This Task Force is about changing their sto-
ries and the stories of many other women and children for whom this experience is a reality—to help World Bank
investment projects do what they are designed to do: extend development benefits to local communities.



In October 2016, World Bank President Jim Yong Kim constituted an indepen-
dent Task Force of external experts (Annex 1) to investigate and provide guid-




                                                                                                    “
ance on how to strengthen Bank systems, tools and processes to prevent and
mitigate against risk of sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA), as well as other
forms of gender-based violence (GBV), in World Bank-supported investment
projects. The Task Force was created in response to events that occurred during
implementation of the Uganda Transport Sector Development Project, which the                        T H I S TA S K F O R C E I S
Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA) implemented from 2013 onwards. Re-                           ABOUT CHANGING
habilitation for the road was awarded to an international construction company                      THEIR STORIES AND
that employed Ugandan workers, 80 percent of whom were from outside the                             THE STORIES OF
communities where construction took place. In December 2014, the Bank’s in-                         MANY OTHER WOMEN
dependent Inspection Panel received an anonymous complaint highlighting nu-                         AND CHILDREN
merous implementation problems with the project, including serious allegations                      FOR WHOM THIS
of sexual misconduct with minor girls by workers employed under the project. In                     EPERIENCE IS A
September 2015, the community filed an additional complaint with the Inspection                     R E A L I T Y—T O H E LP
Panel, reporting that neither the Uganda National Roads Authority nor the Bank
                                                                                                    WORLD BANK
had satisfactorily addressed the problems. Despite initial field visits and verifica-
                                                                                                    INVESTMENT
tion efforts, the Bank was not able to confirm the allegations until it engaged an
                                                                                                    PROJECTS DO
expert social scientist trained to address GBV in April 2015. Based on further Bank
                                                                                                    W H AT T H E Y A R E
follow-up, it was confirmed that road workers had sexually abused several young
girls, resulting in some instances in pregnancy and school drop outs, in addition to                DESIGNED TO DO.
a host of other unresolved implementation problems in the project. In response,
the Bank suspended disbursements of funding to the project in October 2015 and
cancelled the project in December 2015. The Inspection Panel issued its investi-
gation report detailing the numerous failings in August 2016 (World Bank 2016a).
More details of the Uganda Project are in Annex 2.

These events reflected a profound abrogation of responsibility by all parties involved, including by the Bank,
to protect the safety, dignity and well-being of communities affected by the project. World Bank President Jim



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                              10
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW



Kim’s statement on the project acknowledged that, “The multiple failures we’ve seen in this project—on the part
of the World Bank, the government of Uganda, and a government contractor—are unacceptable.” Following re-
lease of the Inspection Panel report, the World Bank Board released the Management Response to the Inspection
Panel’s report and conducted an in-depth review of the Uganda Transport case, culminating in a Lessons Learned
report outlining the Bank’s intended action plan to address the systemic challenges that the Inspection Panel iden-
tified. These reports also collectively recommended establishment of this Task Force to develop recommendations
to prevent and mitigate the impact of sexual exploitation and abuse in the context of World Bank–financed area
development projects.

Gender-based violence is a prevalent global challenge and manifestations of GBV likely exist in every environ-
ment where the Bank operates (Box 1). Violence against women and children takes many forms, including sexual,
physical, emotional and economic abuse. It occurs in the home and on the streets and in times of peace and in
conflict and crisis. Recent estimates by the World Health Organization (WHO) indicate that 35 percent, or one in
three women worldwide have experienced some form of physical or sexual assault. That amounts to 818 million
women worldwide, or nearly the entire population of Sub-Saharan Africa (WHO 2013). Perpetrators of violence are
more likely to be spouses or family members than strangers and are often authority figures who have power over
women and children. Data gathered from seven Sub-Saharan countries on sexual violence against children reveal
that in most countries surveyed, one in four girls experienced sexual violence (Sumner et al. 2015). Underreporting,
however, is one of the biggest challenges in data on child sexual abuse, particularly among boys, as well as other
forms of GBV more broadly. One study estimates that 30 to 80 percent of victims do not disclose experience of
childhood sexual abuse until adulthood and that many others remain silent forever (Alaggia 2005).




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                 11
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW




    Box 1: Understanding Gender-Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse

    Gender-based violence (GBV) is an umbrella term for                                ture, whether by force or under unequal or coercive
    any harmful act that is perpetrated against a person’s                             conditions” (IASC 2016). In the context of Bank-sup-
    will and that is based on socially ascribed (that is,                              ported projects, SEA occurs against a beneficiary or
    gender) differences between male and female indi-                                  member of the community.
    viduals. GBV includes acts that inflict physical, men-
                                                                                       Child Sexual Abuse is defined according to the age
    tal, or sexual harm or suffering; threats of such acts;
                                                                                       of the victim. It includes different forms of sexual
    and coercion and other deprivations of liberty, wheth-
                                                                                       violence, involves explicit force or coercion or cases
    er occurring in public or in private life (IASC 2015).
                                                                                       in which the victim cannot consent because of his or
    Manifestations of GBV includes, but is not limited to,
                                                                                       her age (GBV IMS Classification Tool). The UN con-
    physical violence, such as slapping, kicking, hitting,
                                                                                       siders all sexual activity with someone younger than
    and the use weapons; emotional abuse, such as sys-
                                                                                       18 to be sexual abuse (United Nations 2016).
    tematic humiliation, controlling behavior, degrading
    treatment, insults, and threats; sexual violence, which                            Sexual Harassment includes unwelcome sexual ad-
    includes any form of non-consensual sexual contact;                                vances, requests for sexual favors, and other ver-
    forced marriage, which is the marriage of an individ-                              bal or physical conduct of a sexual nature (United
    ual against her or his will; and denial of resources,                              Nations 2003). Sexual harassment occurs between
    services, and opportunities, also known as economic                                personnel and staff (IASC 2015).
    abuse, such as restricting access to financial, health,
                                                                                       Consent refers to when an adult makes an informed
    educational, or other resources with the purpose of
                                                                                       choice to agree freely and voluntarily to do some-
    controlling or subjugating a person (Arango et al.
                                                                                       thing (GBV IMS classification tool). There is no con-
    2013). Trafficking, abduction and coerced transac-
                                                                                       sent when agreement is obtained through:
    tional sex may also constitute forms of GBV.
                                                                                          •	 The use of threats, force or other forms of
    Sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA): Sexual ex-
                                                                                             coercion, abduction, fraud, manipulation,
    ploitation is a facet of GBV that is defined as any
                                                                                             deception, or misrepresentation,
    actual or attempted abuse of a position of vulnera-
    bility, differential power, or trust for sexual purpos-                               •	 The use of a threat to withhold a benefit to
    es, including but not limited to, profiting monetarily,                                  which the person is already entitled, or
    socially or politically from the sexual exploitation of
    another. Sexual abuse is further defined as “The ac-                                  •	 A promise made to the person to provide a
    tual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual na-                                    benefit.



GBV, including SEA, disproportionately affects women and girls and populations from minority or excluded
communities. Evidence indicates that excluded and marginalized populations, such as migrants or indigenous
women, face higher rates of violence, reflecting a wider context of discrimination and marginalization. Additional
dimensions of vulnerability, including poverty and disability, can compound risk of and exposure to violence. GBV
also affects men, boys and sexual minorities or those with gender-non-conforming identities. Disproportionately,
however, GBV affects women and girls throughout their lifecycle, with profound, long-term impacts on health,
agency, achievement and well-being.

GBV and other forms of exploitation and abuse can occur in all settings and contexts and are often exacerbated
in situations of displacement, natural disasters, or conflict. Rape and other forms of sexual assault, as well as
sexual exploitation and trafficking and intimate partner violence, are common forms of violence against women
and children in many settings, but the risks are much greater in the face of natural disasters and conflicts, when



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                               12
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW



houses are destroyed; traditional support structures are disrupted; and there are significant obstacles to securing
food, relief supplies and sanitation services. In acute emergencies, such as in situations of war and conflict, rape
and sexual violence are often condoned, or used as a weapon of war. The associated breakdown in rule of law,
including the deterioration in security and justice institutions that often occurs in fragile and conflict-affected set-
tings and in the context of disasters, contributes to a climate of impunity and minimizes potential for redress. For
girls and women, but also for boys and men, this can pose serious life-threatening consequences and profound,
long-term damaging effects.

Experiencing violence has direct and indirect impacts on the health and well-being of women and children, as
well as their families. GBV directly affects the physical and emotional health of those who have experienced it.
Adverse impacts include acute injuries, chronic pain, gynecological problems, depression, trauma and substance
abuse. It also can limit access to educational and economic opportunities, particularly for girls and women. For
adolescent girls, challenges such as early marriage and experience or fear of physical or sexual abuse en route
to or within schools contribute to high school dropout rates, curtailing educational advancement and future eco-
nomic opportunities. Witnessing or experiencing violence, exploitation or abuse in childhood also has detrimental
impacts and is often a strong predictor of future GBV (for girls) and of future experience or perpetration of vio-
lence (for boys) (Ehrensaft et al. 2003; Gomez 2010). Families of survivors suffer the consequences of the stigma
and rejection associated with violence, especially with rape and other forms of sexual abuse. Families, however,
can also be a source of stigmatization and are sometimes complicit in facilitating the sexual exploitation of their
children in exchange for food or money.

GBV is an expression of gender inequality that prevents women and their families from escaping poverty, drains
public resources and impedes human development and economic productivity. The economic costs of violence
for individuals, families and national economies are well documented. Global evidence has documented the costs
incurred by individuals and families from every incident of violence, including out-of-pocket expenditures on
health services, lower or foregone income for women and their families, decreased productivity and lower human
capital formation. A recent World Bank Group report examining GBV in five countries estimated the cost of inti-
mate partner violence alone to range from 1.2 percent to nearly 4 percent of GDP, equivalent to what many gov-
ernments spend on primary education (Klugman et al. 2014).

Global legal and policy measures have been established to protect women and children from sexual violence
and abuse. Over the past three decades, the international community has undertaken many measures to make the
world a safer place for women and children. The 1979 Convention to Eliminate All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAW) and the 1989 U.N. Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) stipulate various protections
against SEA for women and children, respectively.

One measure to protect children from SEA is to encode in law the age at which an individual can consent to sex-
ual activity and marriage. Although the legal age of consent varies substantially across and even within countries,
the Convention on the Rights of the Child defines a child as “every human being below the age of 18 years unless,
under the laws applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier,” and the CEDAW Committee recommends that
all states raise the minimum age of marriage to 18. More recently, however, in its articulation of Special measures
for protection from sexual exploitation and sexual abuse, the UN Secretary General’s Bulletin states that, “Sexual
activity with children (persons under the age of 18) is prohibited regardless of the age of majority or age of con-
sent locally.” The document also emphasizes that, “Mistaken belief in the age of a child is not a defence” (United
Nations 2016).

Finding solutions to reduce and respond to GBV in its many forms is a fundamental human rights imperative
and therefore a critical development priority, with implications for the productivity, agency and well-being of
individuals and communities globally. The Bank has an active and expanding portfolio of operations with explicit
focus on prevention of and response to GBV. It has further confirmed its commitment to increasing investments




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                     13
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW



to address GBV, articulating commitments under both IDA 17 and IDA 18 to increase the number of operations
addressing GBV, particularly in fragile and conflict-affected environments. The 2015 World Bank Group Gender
Strategy (World Bank 2015) emphasizes this commitment by highlighting support for the reduction and mitigation
of GBV as a critical feature of efforts to enhance women’s voice and agency.



The Task Force Mandate and Approach
Within this broader context, and in the wake of the experience in Uganda, the Task Force was asked to focus on
preventing SEA as one form of GBV against women and children resulting from Bank-supported infrastructure
and other area development projects and on strengthening the speed and effectiveness of the response should
such incidents occur. Projects that involve a large influx of workers into a community have been shown to be a
particular threat, but other kinds of projects could present similar risks. In consideration of these risks, the Task
Force work places a strong emphasis on prevention, with a focus on improved project risk assessments and on
design and monitoring processes and systems to provide adequate precautions to eliminate or minimize risk to
women, girls, and boys of exposure to SEA and other forms of violence. This requires World Bank Group opera-
tions teams to work with communities and governments to assess and understand the drivers of SEA—whether
related to pervasive harmful norms and community dynamics, external stressors such as conflict and fragility, or
unintended consequences of the development program itself. It also suggests robust response processes, with
well-functioning protocols and remedial actions to enable safe, confidential, ethical care of survivors should SEA
occur. Finally, effective prevention and response rest on building the capacity of all actors (Bank, Government,
Contractors, Communities) to take on their respective responsibilities for action while working together to protect
women and children at risk.

The Task Force’s efforts are designed to align with recent policy changes. In 2015, the Bank approved a new
approach to procurement and, in 2016, approved a new Environmental and Social Framework (ESF) that will go
into effect in 2018 (Box 2). Notwithstanding that the ESF will not come into full force until 2018, the Task Force
recommendations can be implemented as part of the existing safeguards framework, allowing for a transition be-
tween the two Frameworks. The Bank also issued a new directive, Addressing Risks and Impacts on Disadvantaged
or Vulnerable Individuals or Groups (World Bank 2016b), that sets out mandatory requirements for Bank staff to
identify disadvantaged and vulnerable groups and institutes measures to address the particular circumstances of
those groups. A note on Managing the Risks of Adverse Impacts of Communities from Temporary Project Induced
Labor Influx (World Bank 2016d)—hereafter referred to as the “Labor Influx Guidance Note”—responded to risks
linked to labor influx that were the proximate cause of these problems in Uganda. These evolving policies and
procedures provide structural entry points for embedding recommendations of the Task Force.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  14
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW




    Box 2: Evolving Bank Systems and Policies

    The World Bank is updating and introducing new                                        •	 ESS 1: Assessment and Management of Envi-
    policies and frameworks to guide preparation and                                         ronmental and Social Risks and Impacts
    implementation of World Bank investments.
                                                                                          •	 ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions
    In August 2016, the Bank finalized development
    of revised environmental and social standards as                                      •	 ESS 4: Community Health and Safety
    articulated in the new Environmental and Social
    Framework (ESF). This Framework re-emphasiz-                                          •	 ESS 10: Stakeholder Engagement and Infor-
    es the Bank’s commitment to the environmental                                            mation Disclosure
    and social sustainability of its investments and to
                                                                                       The Bank has also introduced a new Procurement
    enhancing positive outcomes of the Bank’s opera-
    tions while minimizing potential human and envi-                                   Framework. Approved in 2015, the Framework and
    ronmental harm. In particular, the ESF provides the                                associated reforms modernize the Bank’s procure-
    foundation for improved social risk management,                                    ment approach to accommodate and support the
    through which key social risks and associated mit-                                 use of modern procurement methods. The Frame-
    igation measures are identified. In addition, a new                                work recognizes procurement as both a develop-
    Bank Directive Addressing Risks and Impacts on                                     ment instrument and a strategic policy tool that can
    Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Individuals or Groups                                  support socioeconomic objectives and emphasizes
    outlines mandatory measures to ensure outreach                                     principles such as value for money, economy, effi-
    to and inclusion of disadvantaged or vulnerable                                    ciency, integrity, fit for purpose, transparency, and
    populations who might not otherwise have access                                    fairness. The new Procurement Framework provides
    to potential project benefits. The roll out and im-                                numerous opportunities to increase the legal ac-
    plementation of the new Framework is expected                                      countability of contractors under World Bank in-
    in 2018.
                                                                                       vestments for challenges related to SEA and GBV.
    The Bank has already begun to incorporate recom-                                   For example, in 2017, the Bank updated its standard
    mendations and guidelines for addressing SEA in                                    procurement documents (SPDs) specifically to im-
    alignment with a number of key ESF Environmental                                   prove addressing Environmental, Social, Health and
    and Social Standards (ESS) including:                                              Safety issues (ESHS).



The Task Force commends the Bank for its efforts to date to investigate and acknowledge its failings in the
Uganda case, as well as its willingness to expose itself to external scrutiny by the members of the Task Force.
The Bank was forthright in its assessment of its failings, and staff demonstrated willingness to engage with the
members of the Task Force to explore opportunities for improvement. The Task Force notes in particular the com-
mitment by senior management to examine and learn from the mistakes in Uganda and their candor in acknowl-
edging gaps in knowledge and understanding, as well as in institutional systems and processes.

The focus of the Task Force is on those GBV issues—specifically SEA—that have the potential to emerge in the
context of Bank-assisted investment projects. The analysis and recommendations center on addressing SEA as
exacerbated by project activities while also taking into account the prevalence and manifestations of other forms
of GBV in the country and communities where project activities are located. The Task Force acknowledges that
GBV is a widespread, serious problem in many countries. Addressing it more broadly requires multi-sectoral, coun-
try-focused strategies. This type of response is included in the Bank’s Gender Strategy, with commitments made
under IDA 18, and was therefore not the focus of the Task Force’s work.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                              15
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW



The Task Force work centered on a review of Bank actions and proposals, as well as external best practices for
addressing SEA. It reviewed Bank documents related to the response to the Uganda incident; reviewed relevant
documents that other institutions prepared (in particular, the United Nations); applied evidence from global re-
search; met with GBV, operational, policy, legal, budget and business ethics experts within the Bank, as well as the
Inspection Panel Chair and staff; and interviewed task managers who have introduced innovations aimed at pre-
venting and responding to GBV and SEA in their projects. The Task Force also received feedback from a group of in-
ternational civil society organizations and from the Bank’s external Advisory Council on Gender and Development.



The Framework: Actors Working Together
Task Force deliberations and recommendations were guided by the following principles:

  •	 Be people centered. Evaluate solutions through a survivor-centered lens, protecting the confidentiality
     of survivors, recognizing them as principal decision-makers, addressing the special needs and vulner-
     abilities of women and children (girls and boys), and respecting the dignity of workers. Build on the
     strength and resilience of communities, engage community leaders and civil society organizations, and
     keep the safety and needs of communities paramount.

  •	 Emphasize prevention by incorporating risk-based approaches.

  •	 Promote transparency to build trust with staff, partners and communities.

  •	 Be evidence-based, drawing on research and best practices as the basis for recommendations.

  •	 Look for innovative solutions, particularly for new tools from social media and communication technol-
     ogies that can make step changes.

  •	 Focus on organizational culture and individual behavior change, not only on new policies, procedures
     and processes.

  •	 Use accountability wisely, finding the right balance between well-defined accountabilities and shared
     solutions; balancing the need for personal accountability of staff with the need to avoid creating a cul-
     ture of risk aversion.

These principles led to the development of an overarching conceptual framework that recognizes that prevent-
ing GBV and SEA linked to World Bank projects requires many actors to work together. Figure 1 identifies the
key actors that World Bank projects influence and affect, highlighting in a widening circle of stakeholders those
ultimately engaged in protecting women and children from project-induced harm. In turn, the World Bank’s poli-
cies and approaches are depicted as a wedge, cutting across all these actors, reinforcing the capacities of each—
including the World Bank itself—to take on its responsibilities to prevent or respond to SEA in Bank-supported
projects.

At the center are the women and children most at risk, especially those who live in communities where the
drivers of GBV and risks of SEA are especially acute. They and their families deserve and expect protection from
the potential negative impacts of World Bank–supported projects. Communities can play a role in expanding the
circle of protection, providing monitoring, early warning, and support for survivors. Contractors and consultants
have, in the implementation of projects, a major responsibility to follow social and labor practices that prevent
abuse and violence by holding managers and workers to high standards of behavior through effective codes of
conduct, monitoring and sanctioning. They also have an obligation to provide for the dignity and rights of their
own workers. Governments, at central and local levels, must ensure social sustainability by expanding social risk



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                 16
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW



management to include SEA prevention and redress in project designs and by implementing functioning grievance
redress mechanisms and monitoring systems, as well as ensuring that support services for survivors are available.
Government partners also have an obligation to hold contractors accountable for abrogation of responsibility and
compliance with environmental and social standards. Intersecting with each of those actors is the World Bank,
with an obligation to establish the policies and systems to prevent such incidents from occurring. The World Bank
is responsible for setting the overall standards and expectations of performance; implementing due diligence pro-
cesses; and building capacity, knowledge and partnerships to allow each of these actors, including World Bank
managers and staff, to take on their respective roles and accountabilities to protect women and children from
grievous harm.

FIGURE 1: CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK: WORKING TOGETHER TO ADDRESS SEXUAL EXPLOITATION
AND ABUSE




                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                     or
                                                                                                          ld




                                                                                                               Ba
                                                                                                                nk


                                                                      Women and
                                                                      Children at
                                                                         Risk

                                                                    Co
                                                                         mm u n i t i e s



                                                                    Con t ra c to r s


                                                                 Gove r nmen t s
                                                              (Ce
                                                                  nt ral an d Local )




The next five sections in the report discuss, in turn, each of these actors and provide context for the Task Force
recommendations, which are directed to the World Bank but relate to the role, responsibility and accountability of
each actor. The penultimate section of the report maps out how the recommendations fit into the different stages
of a typical World Bank project cycle. Finally, the report concludes with a reflection on the Uganda case, looking
back to move forward.



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                    17
INTRODUCTION: WHY AND WHY NOW




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   18
AT THE CENTER:

Women and
Children
at Risk




“
Violence against women is perhaps
the most shameful human rights
violation, and it is perhaps the most
pervasive. It knows no boundaries
of geography, culture or wealth. As
long as it continues, we cannot claim
to be making real progress towards
equality, development and peace.

—Kofi Annan, Former Secretary
General of the United Nations
AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK



Identifying and understanding the risk to women and children of SEA and GBV




                                                                                                               “
is critical.1 At the same time, this can be challenging as there is no single driver of
GBV or SEA. Risk factors are myriad and cut across multiple spheres, including at
the individual, relationship, community, institutional and policy levels. Fundamen-
tally, incidence of GBV, particularly sexual abuse, is associated with and reinforc-
es norms perpetuating gender disparities and uneven power dynamics between                                     DEVELOPMENT
men and women. Key risk factors include sociocultural dynamics that maintain                                   PROJECTS,
male-dominated household decision-making, policies and laws that discriminate                                  DEPENDING ON
against women, cultural norms that justify or condone violence as a form of con-                               THEIR SCOPE,
flict resolution or discipline, and attitudes that find the use of violence against                            C A N E X A C E R B AT E
women and girls acceptable. Annex 3 outlines in greater detail a GBV Risk Frame-                               THE EXISTING
work that builds on an integrated ecological framework for identifying risk factors                            RISKS OF SEXUAL
that contribute to the use and acceptability of GBV.                                                           E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D

Development projects, depending on their scope, can exacerbate the existing                                    A B U S E O R C R E AT E
risks of SEA or create new risks. As the case in Uganda demonstrated, activities                               NEW RISKS.
linked to development projects may compound the broader contextual risks pres-
ent in a society, community or relationship (as listed in Annex 3). Project-related
risks are outlined in Table 1 and include the size and scale of a project, the scale of
labor influx, the extent to which a community has capacity to absorb labor influx
or requires separate camp facilities, and the geographic location of project activ-
ities (e.g., whether project activities occur in urban environments or in isolated
rural areas where mechanisms for prevention and redress may be less available).
Income in the hands of migrant workers can also create or worsen existing power
imbalances between workers and members of the community, in particular for
women and children. Identifying and understanding project-related risk factors
as they interact with other contextual risk factors is critical for development of
appropriate prevention measures in project design.




1	 While this report articulates a focus on women and children, Task Force consideration of those affected by GBV and SEA is intended to be
inclusive of wider populations, including of men, male youth and boys, as well as of individuals who are marginalized and at heightened risk due to
other personal characteristics, such as gender identity, sexual orientation, disability, or ethnic or racial minority status.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                               20
AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK



TABLE 1: PROJECT-RELATED RISK FACTORS FOR SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE

                                                                             MALE
         SOCIETAL                        COMMUNITY                                                       FAMILY             INDIVIDUAL
                                                                          PERPETRATOR

                                                          WORLD BANK PROJECT-RELATED

  National, regional                Project size                      Project workers               Working with only   Lack of information
  •	Higher levels of GBV            •	Geographic span                 •	Not local                   men or women in a   on how to report
    than regional average             of projects and                                               household           project-induced
                                      communities that                •	Lack of sanctions
                                                                                                                        grievances
  •	Low education levels              the project affects               for inappropriate
    of national labor force           (e.g., larger projects            behavior from
                                      intersect with more               employer
  •	Limited services;
    low capacity for                  communities and are             •	Increase in income
    service provision                 harder to monitor)                of workers distorts
    for survivors; in               •	Duration—longer term              power balance
    particular, limited or            projects increase risk            between workers
    no judicial or police                                               and communities
    services to facilitate
    redress for survivors           Project-affected                  •	Increase in income
                                    population                          enables transactional
  •	Lack of specific                                                    sex and exploitative
    legislation addressing          •	Small host community,             relationships
    incidence of GBV                  unable to absorb large
                                      influx of workers
                                    •	Rural host
                                      community lacking
                                      access to services
                                      and institutions,
                                      low capacity for
                                      absorption
                                    •	Unequal participation
                                      of community
                                      members in
                                      community
                                      consultations




In projects that are assessed to have many of the factors that contribute to risk of SEA, prevention measures
can and should be put in place. Explicit Codes of Conduct for workers, strengthened supervision systems, and
incentives for reporting inappropriate behavior combined with clarity on the consequences of such behavior are
some ways in which managers of projects can prevent SEA from occurring. Open, continuous and meaningful
engagement with communities, making them partners in risk reduction and providing the most-vulnerable individ-
uals with safe ways to speak up, can further strengthen prevention.

Should SEA occur, survivors must have access to multiple forms of support and services. It is critical that af-
fected women or children receive health services, psychosocial support, security and/or police support, shelter if
needed, and access to justice, whether through the formal justice system, where such systems exists, or through
other means. This support must be provided in line with global ethical guidelines for timely, confidential, survi-
vor-centered care that is responsive to survivors’ needs and preferences and seeks to protect survivors from stig-
ma, discrimination, retaliation or other harmful repercussions.2




2	 See the Violence Against Women and Girl’s Resource Guide at www.vawgresourceguide.org Accessed June 2016.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                             21
AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK




Recommendations

   STRENGTHEN RISK ASSESSMENTS AND USE THEM TO TRIGGER ACTION
1.	

  •	 Build a robust risk assessment methodology for SEA and GBV. Task Teams should seek to identify,
     through preliminary social risk analysis, critical markers to assess project-related risks of SEA in the
     context of broader risk factors in that location. These project-related risks are outlined in Table 1 above,
     while Annex 3 outlines a range of contextual risk factors. Questions that, at a minimum, should be asked
     to identify the risk of GBV in a given country context are highlighted in Box 3, with additional guidance
     provided in Annex 4. An SEA risk rating of “High” should trigger a series of due diligence requirements,
     as discussed further in the following sections on Community, Contractors and Consultants, Government
     and the World Bank. It is important to note that risk assessment is done not only by the Bank but is
     also conducted as part of project social assessments carried out by government partners. Bank due
     diligence should therefore also ensure that these assessments adequately reflect risk of GBV and SEA.

  •	 Embed a mechanism in the World Bank’s existing Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT) to
     flag projects with high risk of SEA.3 Findings of the SEA risk analysis will feed into the overarching risk
     rating for the project, as articulated in the project’s SORT. A “High Risk” rating should trigger the series
     of mandatory measures and considerations to be integrated into project design and implementation.
     For example, in contexts that are found to have a High Risk of SEA, the project should identify relevant
     government counterparts from, for example, health, law enforcement, justice, etc., as well as other key
     stakeholders (e.g. NGOs, community-based organizations) who need to be engaged in the case of an
     incident. High-risk contexts must also trigger mandatory inclusion of specialized staff with expertise in
     GBV prevention and response programming in the project.

  •	 Monitor risk of SEA continuously throughout the life of a project. Risks evolve and change during im-
     plementation of a project, necessitating continuous monitoring through the life of a project. If the risk
     of SEA increases during the course of a project, this escalation in risk should trigger concomitant action.




3	 SORT is a World Bank risk-screening mechanism that identifies key risks to operational activities by considering both i) risks to achieving the
intended positive outcomes as identified in the Project Development Objective (PDO) and ii) risks of adverse, unintended consequences to the cli-
ent or communities extending from operational activities. The SORT is intended to help project teams consistently assess and monitor risks across
operational instruments and country programs.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                              22
AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK




    Box 3: Assessing Project-Related Risks of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA)

    Indicative questions that should be asked to as-                                         empower women may be available across
    sess potential risks linked to SEA are outlined be-                                      a range of sources, including the World
    low. Ideally, the assessment, particularly the first                                     Values Survey, the Organization for Eco-
    three bullets, should be done at the country port-                                       nomic Cooperation and Development So-
    folio level, informing Task Teams as they proceed                                        cial Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI),
    to conduct project-level assessments.                                                    Gallup, or stakeholder consultations and
                                                                                             interviews, particularly with women’s
       •	 Are country-level rates of GBV higher                                              groups and organizations.
          than regional averages? This information
          may be available in country-level Demo-                                         •	 Will the project take place in a fragile or
          graphic and Health Surveys conducted                                               conflict-affected environment? Global ev-
          periodically by WHO or by other inter-                                             idence indicates that incidence of GBV of-
          national actors (http://dhsprogram.com/                                            ten increases before and during conflicts
          What-We-Do/Survey-Types/DHS.cfm). At                                               and persists even after conflict ends as,
          the same time, additional research should                                          among other factors, exposure to conflict
          be conducted in cases in which regional                                            may contribute to greater tolerance for vi-
          averages are already high and when coun-                                           olence (IASC 2015).
          try-level rates are in alignment with these                                  These questions should provide some basic in-
          high rates.                                                                  dication of the potential risk of GBV in a given
                                                                                       country context, which should then trigger fur-
       •	 What protections from violence does the
                                                                                       ther research and consultations. Additional ques-
          existing legal framework provide wom-
                                                                                       tions and potential resources are included in
          en and children in the country of focus,
                                                                                       Annex 4. These considerations should also be lay-
          particularly as related to i) child and early
                                                                                       ered against key risks associated with labor influx
          marriage; ii) domestic violence; iii) sexual
                                                                                       projects as detailed in the Labor Influx Guidance
          harassment; and marital rape? These data
                                                                                       Note.
          have been aggregated and are available in
          the Women, Business and the Law data-                                        Indicative questions from the work on labor influx
          set, a World Bank product that collects                                      include:
          data on laws and regulations constrain-
          ing women’s entrepreneurship, employ-                                           •	 Will the project take place in a rural or ur-
          ment and agency (http://wbl.worldbank.                                             ban environment?
          org/data/exploretopics/protecting-wom-
                                                                                          •	 What is the scale of labor influx?
          en-from-violence). It will also be import-
          ant to investigate the extent to which                                          •	 Does the local community have the ca-
          existing legal frameworks are applied in                                           pacity to absorb incoming workers, or will
          practice.                                                                          separate camp facilities be necessary?

       •	 Are there prevailing socio-cultural norms                                       •	 What is the geographic span of the proj-
          that minimize women’s roles or participa-                                          ect and how many communities will proj-
          tion in the public and private spheres? In-                                        ect activities affect? Will the project be
          formation on the prevalence or strength                                            able to monitor implementation over the
          of patriarchal norms that may serve to dis-                                        full span of the work?




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                            23
AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK



2.	 EDUCATE AND RAISE THE AWARENESS OF WOMEN, ADOLESCENTS AND CHILDREN ABOUT SEA

  •	 In project contexts that are assessed to be High Risk, the most vulnerable populations should be
     sensitized to the potential benefits and risks associated with a Bank-financed project. Women and
     adolescents should be made aware of potential socio-economic risks and impacts associated with de-
     velopment projects and, for example, the temporary influx of workers into their communities. They
     should be informed about the potential for SEA, as well as of their rights and the laws and services that
     can protect them or provide redress in case of an incident. Sensitization and awareness-raising efforts
     should align with consultation and information dissemination requirements for Bank teams and gov-
     ernment partners and should necessarily involve personnel with appropriate training to discuss such
     sensitive issues.

  •	 Identify and support appropriate expertise to educate and consult with children. This includes civil
     society organization (CSOs) with expertise in child abuse and sexual exploitation of children, as well as
     those with expertise in project-related risks. It is essential to reach out to a wide range of children, espe-
     cially those from minority and disadvantaged groups, children on the street and older children who are
     on their own. CSOs with expertise in child abuse can help educate children about the services available
     to prevent abuse and to respond to the needs of survivors; they can also identify gaps and bring these
     to the attention of project leaders for action.

3.	 IDENTIFY SERVICE PROVIDERS FOR SURVIVORS OF SEA

  •	 Locate the full range of service providers for survivors that may be needed in case of an incident.
     International guidelines for holistic multi-sectoral support articulate a minimum package of services for
     survivors of violence that includes case management support, health services, psychosocial support,
     shelter if needed, security and police support, and access to legal services. Services should be provid-
     ed as differentiated by age and gender. Child protection and other services offered to child victims of
     SEA must be made available immediately and guaranteed over time as part of case management and
     on-going care. Organizations in communities where Bank projects take place may already offer such
     services, and referral pathways may already exist; risk assessment and community consultation activi-
     ties (discussed in the next section) should be used to identify these providers. It should be ensured that
     mechanisms are in place for regular review of identified service providers during the life of the project
     to verify that they remain able to provide requisite services.

  •	 Provide adequate support for services not available locally. In environments where services are not
     available locally, it may be necessary to build local capacity to provide basic support services or to
     identify services in other communities and to provide survivors with resources—whether in-kind or fi-
     nancial—to enable travel and access (if needed). Project design and legal obligations with contractors
     should reflect consideration for these activities and financial implications if relevant.

  •	 Ensure that project design and obligations account for additional costs associated with incidence
     of SEA. In addition to enabling provision of services to survivors, resources may be needed to provide
     some form of compensation to survivors and/or their families to address lost productivity or income.
     During project design, funding sources, whether from loan or credit proceeds, government programs,
     emergency escrow accounts that contractors set up, or a combination of sources, should be identified
     and included in the appropriate legal agreements. Opportunities for longer-term support for survivors
     using linkages with existing livelihood or employment opportunities should also be investigated.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                     24
THE COMMUNITY:

A RISK
MANAGEMENT
PARTNER




“
World Bank–supported projects are
implemented at community levels. It
is therefore important to fully engage
the communities to own, protect,
and understand their benefits.

—Community Leader in Uganda
THE COMMUNITY: A RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER



Community settings and norms can contribute to the risk of SEA. The commu-




                                                                                                    “
nity context in which social relationships occur, such as families, schools, neigh-
borhoods and workplaces, influences incidence of and tolerance for violence. As
presented in Annex 3, key risk factors at the community level may include weak
community sanctions for GBV (or greater social acceptance of GBV), unemploy-
ment, poverty, population density, displacement, and presence of illicit or criminal                IN ADDITION TO
networks (e.g., local drug trade or gangs) and other situational factors. Prevalent                 SERVING AS A
unequal gender norms within families and communities may also encourage vio-                        RICH SOURCE OF
lence against women and girls.                                                                      I N F O R M AT I O N
                                                                                                    ABOUT THE
Nevertheless, the Community can and should be an integral part of prevention
                                                                                                    L O C A L C O N T E X T,
and response. Even in communities where acceptance of use of violence, particu-
                                                                                                    COMMUNITIES
larly in the home, is prevalent, trusted local actors or influencers such as women’s
                                                                                                    CAN BE CRITICAL
groups, clergy, teachers, and health care providers can often be identified, mo-
bilized, and provided with the resources to play a partnership role in preventing,                  PA RT N E R S TO T H E
reporting, and responding to SEA.4 Moreover, community members are often the                        G O V E R N M E N T, T H E
most knowledgeable about locally relevant risks and protective factors. Engag-                      IMPLEMENTING
ing with communities to identify and understand the interplay of those varying                      PA RT N E R A N D
factors is fundamental. Tapping into local knowledge and networks is especially                     THE BANK IN
important in cases of SEA as local actors are best positioned to build trust and                    THE DESIGN AND
to provide contextually appropriate care for those affected. Community-based                        I M P L E M E N TAT I O N
organizations and local NGOs also play an important role in identifying incidents                   OF PROJECTS.
and helping to support survivors. Indeed, in Uganda, community actors—most no-
tably the local NGO, Joy for Children—were the voice of the girls who were sexu-
ally abused by external construction workers, raising the alarm, providing support
to survivors, and persisting when the complaints were not heard.

The Community can play a positive role as a dynamic risk management partner.
In addition to serving as a rich source of information about the local context,
communities can be critical partners to the government, the implementing part-
ner and the Bank in the design and implementation of projects. For this reason,
it is important to go beyond traditional one-way communication mechanisms to
engaging, consulting and partnering with local communities. Doing so from the
beginning and throughout the project life cycle could help prevent SEA, and iden-
tify and respond to cases when they occur.

There are innovative ways to partner with the Community. Social media and
text-messaging platforms can be used to extend a project’s reach to community
members and engage in regular conversations with them in an economical and
effective way. For example, UNICEF, through its U-Report program, has mobilized
young people in communities as a source of feedback and information by lever-
aging text messaging (Box 4). Similar approaches could be used, for example,
to assess the effectiveness of community awareness campaigns of the grievance
and reporting mechanisms or to provide early warning of emerging problems
with construction workers.




4	 For example, see http://www.endvawnow.org/en/articles/1097-mechanisms-for-community-engagement-dialogue-and-outreach.html




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                26
THE COMMUNITY: A RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER




                                                                                                                    “
    Box 4: Leveraging Information and Communication Technology to Facilitate
    Community Engagement: U-Report

    Information and communication technology (ICT)                                     ic, identify users who had T   H I S to
                                                                                                                    been     TA   S K Foutbreak
                                                                                                                                these  ORCE IS
    has long presented innovative opportunities for                                    areas, and measure the effectiveness
                                                                                                                    ABOUT C        H radio
                                                                                                                                  of ANGI  cam-
                                                                                                                                             NG
    community feedback and interaction. UNICEF’s                                       paigns and the visibility of Community       Mobilization
                                                                                                                    THEIR STORIES AND
    U-Report is an example of an efficient tool to enable                                                           T H E day,
                                                                                       Coordinators (CMCs). In a single     STO  43,000
                                                                                                                                   RY OF people
                                                                                                                                            MANY
    community participation and outreach that could                                    participated in U-Report and    were    informed   of
                                                                                                                    O T H E R W O M E N the
    be adapted to support efforts to prevent SEA in                                    new outbreak. Another pollA   revealed
                                                                                                                      N D C H that
                                                                                                                                 ILDR   E N from
                                                                                                                                      data
    Bank-financed projects.                                                            26,000 responses was also F  received    within 24
                                                                                                                      OR WH      OM T    H hours
                                                                                                                                           IS
                                                                                       and was used to redirect resources to areas most in
    UNICEF has launched U-Report in 33 countries, pre-                                                              EPERIENCE IS
                                                                                       need, with increased focus on locations also report-
    dominantly in Africa, as a way for community mem-                                                               A REALITY - TO
                                                                                       ing the highest absences of CMCs.
    bers to share their opinions and to drive positive                                                              HELP WORLD BANK
    change. U-Report is a user-centered social moni-                                                                          TME
                                                                                                                    I N V E Sthe
                                                                                       In August 2015, Nigeria became               N T country
                                                                                                                                  first
    toring tool based on simple Short Message Service                                  to reach one million responders
                                                                                                                    PROJ    on
                                                                                                                             EC T S SMS-based
                                                                                                                               the   DO
    (SMS) messages—polling for opinions on issues that                                 U-Report platform. With the  WH   A T T Hin
                                                                                                                       support     EY   A R E of
                                                                                                                                     Nigeria
    affect communities and sharing useful information.
                                                                                       telecommunications service       S I G N E D Tengaging
                                                                                                                    D E providers,      O DO...
    It relies on volunteer community members, primarily
                                                                                       with U-Report is free, and it has grown into a vibrant
    comprised of young people who serve as U-Report-
                                                                                       tool to empower communities. The first poll ques-
    ers to provide information on issues that affect their
                                                                                       tion from the U-Report Nigeria platform was sent
    communities.
                                                                                       out in April 2014, and since then, nearly 70 polls on
    U-Report proved a particularly effective tool in dis-                              topics such as health, education, safety and security,
    seminating information and managing response to                                    internally displaced persons (IDPs), water and san-
    the Ebola outbreak in West Africa. In Liberia, new                                 itation, violence against children, and human traf-
    cases of Ebola emerged after the first declaration                                 ficking have been discussed on the platform, with
    of the end of the outbreak in May 2015. U-Report                                   results disseminated to Government and other rel-
    was deployed to alert people to the new epidem-                                    evant agencies.



Recommendations

1.	 IDENTIFY COMMUNITY PARTNERS

  •	 Integrate a scanning/mapping exercise into risk assessments for potentially high-risk contexts. Risk
     assessment activities should include scanning and mapping of the community in such contexts to assess
     the social dynamics and relationships between different segments of the community and the local risk
     factors for GBV. Such mapping can reveal important information about existing power structures and
     help identify segments of the community that are exposed to discrimination and marginalization or are at
     heightened risk of violence or exploitation. The mapping should be done as a participatory assessment,
     with full engagement of all segments of the community, to enable self-identification by the community of
     the best sources of information, influence and support. A participatory approach can also help establish
     rapport with the community.5 Mapping exercises must follow strict safety and ethical guidelines.6



5	 For safe and ethical approaches to mapping and community conversations on GBV, see Ellsberg and Heise 2005.
6	 See also World Health Organization 2001.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                  27
THE COMMUNITY: A RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER



  •	 Identify local partners and sources of support. The mapping should locate and provide information
     on available community resources, such as community-based or local organizations or leaders, includ-
     ing groups advocating for children’s rights, women’s groups, child- and youth-led organizations, key
     influencers and leaders who are accepted, trusted and known to the community, as referenced in the
     previous section. Such organizations and individuals may be identified across multiple levels: formal
     (e.g., NGOs, teachers, health workers, police officers); semiformal (e.g., local community-based groups,
     community leaders), or informal (elders, other influencers). Each can serve as a source of information
     or as a hub for disseminating information, as well as a source of support to provide timely services to
     survivors of violence. A mapping exercise is also a way to introduce the project to the community and
     begin to engage with them as active partners.

2.	 ENGAGE WITH COMMUNITIES TO BUILD TRUST AND TRANSPARENCY

  •	 Ensure engagement with communities is a continuous, two-way interaction. Use community engage-
     ment to listen to and learn from communities, as well as to share and feed information about project
     assessments and activities back into communities. Community engagement must be continuous, occur-
     ring throughout the life of the project and not just during project initiation and design. Continuous inter-
     action can inform communities regularly of project progress and about evolving or potential risks. Con-
     tinuous communication should also include information sharing on mechanisms for reporting problems,
     emphasizing both project-level grievance redress mechanisms and the independent Inspection Panel as
     a way for communities to appeal to the Bank when other channels fail.7 Active engagement with com-
     munities in this manner will increase the likelihood that problems will be reported before they evolve
     into actual cases of SEA. The World Bank’s new guidelines on community consultation, as described in
     Environmental and Social Standard (ESS) 10 (Table 3), provides guidance for stakeholder engagement.
     Those guidelines should be adapted for the special requirements for SEA and used as a part of ESS 10
     for borrowers and implementing partners, as well as adapted to serve as guidelines for Bank staff.




7	 The Inspection Panel is an independent complaints mechanism for communities and individuals who believe that World Bank–funded projects
have adversely affected them. More information about the Inspection Panel is available at http://ewebapps.worldbank.org/apps/ip/Pages/Home.
aspx




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                       28
THE COMMUNITY: A RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER



TABLE 3: REQUIREMENTS OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT IN ESS 10

            REQUIREMENTS                                                                            KEY ACTIONS

  Stakeholder identification and                   Identify both project-affected and other interested parties, particularly those who
  analysis                                         are most disadvantaged and vulnerable. Differentiate between groups in terms of
                                                   concerns and priorities about project impacts, as well as mitigation mechanisms
                                                   and benefits. Determine whether the groups require different or separate forms
                                                   of engagement.

  Stakeholder engagement plan                      Based on the analysis, describe timing and methods of engagement throughout
  (SEP)                                            the project cycle and the range and timing of information to be communicated to
                                                   each group, as well as measures to be taken to remove obstacles to participation.

  Information disclosure                           Share with stakeholders the purpose, nature and scale of the project; duration
                                                   of project activities; potential risks and impacts ways in which stakeholders can
                                                   be engaged; time and venue of public consultations; and process and means by
                                                   which grievances can be raised and addressed.

  Meaningful consultation                          Engage in a two-way process that begins early in the project planning process;
                                                   encourages input and feedback; is on-going; occurs in a culturally appropriate
                                                   format and in a locally understood language; responds to feedback; supports
                                                   active and inclusive engagement; is free of external manipulation, interference,
                                                   coercion, discrimination, and intimidation; and is documented and disclosed by
                                                   the Bank.



  •	 Design community interaction to build trust. This should include early, transparent disclosure of an-
     ticipated project activities and intended outputs and expectations for contractor and worker behavior,
     including reviewing the workers’ code of conduct with local leaders to solicit input and feedback on
     unacceptable behaviors.

  •	 Ensure that continuous engagement with communities informs project implementation and super-
     vision mechanisms. Supervision activities should include requirements for continuous community en-
     gagement. This may entail building it into contractor and supervisory engineer contracts, as well as
     ensuring it is included in Bank staff checklists on effective supervision for environmental and social
     issues. Benchmarks for continuous community engagement should be built into the project plans and
     milestones for project implementation.

3.	 USE INNOVATIVE COMMUNICATION CHANNELS FOR ENGAGEMENT AND FEEDBACK

  •	 Use social media and text messaging for continuous dialogue with communities. Extend the reach of
     traditional mechanisms for dissemination of information from the project in this way. Test understanding
     of key pieces of messages through tools such as UNICEF’s U-Report and use multiple communication
     channels to listen and learn about the impact of the project on the community.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                      29
THE COMMUNITY: A RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   30
CONTRACTORS AND
CONSULTANTS:

Accountable
Partners




“
Our company takes its social
responsibility seriously. When
developing our Codes of Conduct
we have learned that gender-based
violence, domestic violence and
violence against children is happening
in a lot of communities in the country.
The message from the highest level
of the organization is to ensure
that all our employees consider
the issue of utmost importance.

—from an international construction
firm working in East Asia.
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS



Construction companies and supervisory engineering firms play a central role




                                                                                                    “
in the implementation and management of project activities; their performance
is critical to strategies to prevent SEA in infrastructure and related projects. The
construction of civil works is the responsibility of construction firms contracted
by Government. The lead contractor often sub-contracts part of the works or
related services to other contractors. Supervisory Engineering firms, also con-                     CONSTRUCTION
tracted by Government, oversee the works and ensure that the contract is being                      C O M PA N I E S A N D
conducted in accordance with its provisions and sound engineering practices.                        SUPERVISORY
These assurances provide the evidence that triggers payment against the con-                        ENGINEERING FIRMS
tract or, in the case of default, triggers remedies. Together, the physical presence                P L AY A C E N T R A L
of these firms and their workers in local communities—including workers hired                       R O L E . . .T H E I R
to undertake construction and other activities—are the most immediate and visi-                     PERFORMANCE
ble manifestation of project implementation. As the Transport Project in Uganda                     IS CRITICAL TO
demonstrated, failure to carry out their obligations can have a significant impact                  S T R AT E G I E S T O
not only on the safety and well-being of communities, but also on the credibility
                                                                                                    PREVENT SEXUAL
and overall reputation of both the Government and the World Bank.
                                                                                                    E X P L O I TAT I O N
The World Bank does not have a direct relationship with contractors or con-                         AND ABUSE IN
sultants during project selection and implementation but instead manages the                        INFRASTRUCTURE
relationship through government implementing agencies. The Bank does, how-                          A N D R E L AT E D
ever, play a critical role in designing the base contractual obligations that gov-                  PROJECTS.
ernments adopt to ensure that contractors have the capacity to perform in ways
that are consistent with the social and environmental safeguards that have been
built into project designs and to hold contractors to account. Bank procurement
processes, including use of Standard Procurement Documents (SPDs) and Stan-
dard Bidding Documents (SBD), with which the Borrower agrees to comply for
international competitive bidding, provide the basis for ensuring that contractors
and consultants fulfill their obligations.

Sound management of labor influx into vulnerable communities is critical to
reduce the risk of SEA. Challenges related to temporary influx (which is not nec-
essarily short term and can last several years) into a vulnerable community that
might be rural, small, and remote are discussed and addressed in the World Bank
Labor Influx Guidance Note. The Uganda case demonstrated the increase in the
risk of SEA when outside labor enters a community. This can range from sexual
harassment to sexual abuse and exploitation of women and children. Other ad-
verse impacts can include increased demand for goods and services, which raises
prices and crowds out local consumers; increased traffic and road accidents; in-
creased demand on the ecosystem and natural resources; social conflicts; risk of
spread of communicable disease; and illicit behavior and crime.

Labor influx risks can be managed and good practices are emerging. Key prin-
ciples of the Labor Influx Guidance Note, which the Task Force supports, are
reduction of risk by tapping into the local workforce where possible, assessing
and managing labor influx risks and developing appropriate mitigation plans, and
building social and environmental mitigation measures into the civil works con-
tracts. Worker Codes of Conduct, such as those described in Box 5, are now man-
datory under the new Procurement Framework and will be an important part of
the prevention agenda. Bank guidelines for Contractor Codes of Conduct could




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                            32
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS



be more explicit on the expected treatment of SEA. Emerging practice (see Annex 5) shows that recent Codes of
Conduct outline expectations for behavior and conduct and often include articulation of sanction measures bol-
stered by awareness raising and training.



    Box 5: Developing and Implementing Codes of Conduct in World Bank Operations

    A number of World Bank operations have begun                                       tions to manage referrals and provision of services
    to explore how to ensure project activities guard                                  for those who experience GBV in the event an inci-
    against potential risks related to sexual exploitation                             dent occurs. This approach is being tested and mon-
    and abuse and other forms of GBV.                                                  itored to ensure rigorous learning on effective prac-
                                                                                       tices and holds the potential to offer a model for
    Under the Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project, pro-
                                                                                       implementation to be deployed across the region.
    visions have been embedded in bidding documents
    for runway civil works that stipulate contractor re-                               In the Great Lakes Region, the Great Lakes Trade
    sponsibility for the implementation, enforcement                                   Facilitation Project (GLTFP) attempts to address
    and monitoring of a Code of Conduct covering GBV.                                  pervasive incidence of GBV in small-scale cross-bor-
    Contractors are also responsible for development                                   der trade. The GLTFP intends to improve the effi-
    and implementation of a complimentary Action Plan                                  ciency, capacity, and security of border operations
    to ensure effective implementation of the Code of                                  in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda,
    Conduct. The project has consequently established                                  and Uganda through training, sensitization, policy
    The Codes of Conduct and Action Plan to Prevent                                    and procedural reforms, and infrastructural devel-
    GBV as well as Child Abuse and Exploitation, which                                 opment at targeted borders. The project seeks to
    introduces a set of key definitions and core Codes of                              introduce a Charter of Rights and Obligations for
    Conduct and guidelines that establish mechanisms                                   traders and officials, along with a Code of Conduct
    for reporting, addressing, monitoring and sanction-                                and Action Plan to prevent and mitigate GBV risks
    ing GBV and child abuse on the work site and in the                                in border construction projects. As part of the ob-
    immediate surrounding communities. The Codes of
                                                                                       ligations arising from signing a contract to devel-
    Conduct further establish that age of consent for en-
                                                                                       op infrastructure under the GLTFP, the Contractor
    gaging in sexual activity is 18, with censure measures
                                                                                       is obligated to develop a costed GBV Action Plan
    identified for those who do not comply. This measure
                                                                                       covering the duration of the project and a complete
    is notable given that, according to national law, age
                                                                                       Code of Conduct for the prevention of GBV. All com-
    of consent is 16. The Codes of Conduct aim to pre-
                                                                                       pany employees are required to abide by provisions
    vent and/or mitigate the risks of GBV within the con-
                                                                                       articulated within this Code of Conduct, while the
    text of the Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project and
                                                                                       Action Plan will include Standard Operating Proce-
    in Tuvalu and Samoa. The Codes articulate different
                                                                                       dures detailing reporting, response and sanctioning
    levels of accountability and responsibility, including:
                                                                                       protocol in case of incidents, an awareness raising
    i) the Company ii) the Managers of the Company;
                                                                                       strategy, a monitoring strategy, division of roles and
    and iii) the individual Construction workers. Samples
                                                                                       responsibilities between internal teams tasked to
    of the Codes are included in Annex 5.
                                                                                       manage GBV-related issues and a community-based
    Through the contractor, the project has also estab-                                GBV grievance and redress desk, and support mea-
    lished a working partnership with local organiza-                                  sures for employees affected by GBV.



Workers’ rights, health and welfare need to be addressed as well. As discussed in the Labor Influx Guidance
Note, camp accommodation with a range of services for worker health, safety and recreation may be a way to care
for the welfare and needs of workers in remote rural areas, particularly where there is limited local government
and law enforcement presence. Workers who are brought into urban settings can be accommodated more easily



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                               33
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS



in local housing, making separate worker’s camps less necessary. Workers brought in from other communities
should be given the opportunity for rest and recreation, supported by allowances, so that they can visit friends
and family outside of the host community. Workers, particularly women, can also be vulnerable to sexual harass-
ment, exploitation and abuse on the worksite. Contractors should be expected to have anti-sexual harassment
policies,8 provisions for reporting and responding to complaints, and whistleblower protections.

There have been significant efforts to create an enabling environment for sound contractor and consultant per-
formance on environmental and social risks through the new Procurement Framework. The aim is to integrate
these risks into procurement processes, contract provisions and legal documents so as to outline expectations,
accountabilities and requirements for contractor performance and behavior. These include:

  •	 Procurement Plans prepared based on assessment of risks, contractor capacity, and markets allowing
     contracts to be customized to respond to high environmental and social risks.

  •	 Strengthened specifications in bidding documents and contracts establishing clear expectations for
     contractor performance with respect to environmental or social safeguards; expectations included in
     pre-bid conference; and key performance indicators hard-wired into the contract.

  •	 Mandatory Codes of Conduct.

  •	 A portion (1-3 percent) of the contract price to be guaranteed by a performance security linked to
     environmental and social contractor performance, where the environmental, social, health, and safety
     (ESHS) risks are significant. The ESHS and normal performance security should not exceed 10 percent
     of the contract total.

  •	 Provisions in contracts for dedicated payments to contractors for SEA and GBV prevention activities
     (e.g., training) against evidence of completion.

  •	 Bank involvement in the bidding process in fragile and low-capacity environments is now permitted in
     exceptional circumstances.

  •	 Increased expectations for performance of Supervisory Engineers who the Government has hired to
     provide on-the-ground, real-time supervision.

While still nascent in many markets, the international contracting and consulting communities are increasingly
responding to demands for higher standards of social and environmental performance. This provides them not
only with a “license to operate” but also a broader focus on sustainable development that can drive business com-
petitiveness. Strengthening expectations for contractor and consultant performance can encourage a broader set
of firms to move in this direction, with an effect beyond World Bank-financed projects. One corporate partnership,
Building Responsibly, is made up of a coalition of international engineering consulting and construction firms. Its
mission is to “promote the rights and welfare of workers in the engineering and construction industry by develop-
ing common approaches and standards, sharing learning and tools, and engaging workers and other stakeholders
on the specific challenges companies face.”9 Corporate Codes of Conduct are common for international construc-
tion companies and are beginning to include language that includes assertive statements against use of forced or
child labor and prohibiting ill treatment or abuse of human rights of people in communities where they operate.10


8	 For an example of an Anti-Harassment Policy in other industries includes: http://www.gapinc.com/content/dam/gapincsite/documents/COBC/
COBC_english.pdf
9	 https://www.bsr.org/en/collaboration/groups/building-responsibly. Member firms are Amec Foster Wheeler, Bechtel, CH2M, Fluor, MULTIPLEX
Middle East, and Vinci.
10	The Amec Foster Wheeler Code of Business Conduct, page 19, is an example (https://www.amecfw.com/documents/downloads/about-us/
amec-foster-wheeler-code-of-business-conduct.pdf).




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                      34
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS



The Bank has already taken advantage of these new processes and requirements as they present an ideal op-
portunity to integrate strategies to prevent and respond to SEA. Many of the Task Force recommendations pre-
sented below focus on the link between the new Procurement Framework and ESF as a means of ensuring that
Contractors adhere to proper standards and that Supervisory Engineers expand their writ to include oversight of
this aspect of contractor performance. The recommendations build on the new Bank policy framework and on-
going actions already being taken in response to the Uganda Inspection Panel report and management’s review
of Lessons Learned. The Task Force recommendations below focus on the most critical of these, and focus on the
behaviors and capacity required to put the policies into effective action.



Recommendations

1. LINK PROCUREMENT PROVISIONS TO THE SEA RISK ASSESSMENT

  •	 For all civil works contracts, contractors must declare during pre- or post-qualification whether any
     contracts have been suspended or cancelled, or bid bonds called for incidents related to SEA and
     GBV. The Bank’s updated SPDs have already introduced this requirement for all ESHS issues. Firms are
     required to provide evidence that problems have been sufficiently resolved to provide confidence that
     they will not occur again. Disclosure of past incidents will trigger more-intensive due diligence by the
     government PIU to assess whether the firm has demonstrated sufficient capacity for prevention and risk
     management. If steps taken by the contractor are not satisfactory, the bid should be disqualified. Initial-
     ly, it is unlikely that this provision will yield evidence of poor contractor performance because it has not
     yet been the practice to include strong contract provisions designed to prevent SEA, nor have sanctions
     been levied. Nonetheless, requiring disclosure in the first instance sets a standard for accountability and
     puts firms on notice about the seriousness of this issue. As a track record of performance is established,
     such disclosure will become an important part of the selection process. A database to gather and track
     such disclosures should be established.

  •	 Codes of Conduct, which are already mandatory for all contracts under the new Procurement Frame-
     work, should include specific prohibitions against SEA. This should include, in particular, a prohibition
     of any sexual activity with children, defined as anyone under the age of 18, residing in the project area.
     While national standards, statutes and legal policies may have a different age of consent, for the pur-
     poses of guarding against exploitation of children in Bank-financed projects, this higher international
     standard—which is embedded in similar contracts for UN activities and in the initial Codes of Conduct
     prepared recently for Bank Projects (Box 5)—should be taken as the governing standard for the behav-
     ior of contractors, managers and workers. Codes of Conduct should further define a range of sanctions
     proportionate to the event, for example, warnings for incidents of community harassment, such as cat
     calling, versus dismissal for incidents of sexual abuse.

  •	 For High Risk Projects, Contractors bidding on civil works should demonstrate that they have the ca-
     pacity to manage SEA risks. The recent updates to the SPDs introduced ample flexibility within existing
     related requirements to include these specific provisions. The documents require bidders to provide
     management strategies and implementation plans and qualified key personnel to address the specific
     risks identified in the project. If the plans and personnel proposed are not suitable, the bidder is given
     the opportunity to comply with the minimum standards (e.g. substituting staff and strengthening plans)
     to remain responsive or face rejection. Contractor bid evaluation and selection processes that consider
     the strength of contractor environmental and social risk management plans, capacity and key personnel
     should be considered. Contractors should have GBV prevention and response Action Plans and should
     specify key staff with the technical skill and experience to monitor and manage risks related to GBV.



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                   35
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS



     Consideration should be given to piloting contractor-supported funding mechanisms, such as escrow
     accounts, to provide immediate support to survivors. The World Bank should further develop a template
     outlining the type of information required to demonstrate capacity to manage SEA risks. This template
     should provide guidance to bid evaluators as to which capacities are mandatory when the contract en-
     ters into force and which can be phased in over the life of the contract.

  •	 For High Risk Projects, Contractors must have plans in place for ensuring that staff at all levels, in-
     cluding managers, workers and day laborers receive SEA awareness and sensitization training, includ-
     ing reviews of expectations under the Code of Conduct. Provisions for dedicated oversight staff with
     the appropriate skills should be included. These costs should be budgeted and contractors reimbursed
     separately against unit costs as a means of providing an incentive and to level the playing field for bid-
     ders. The recent revisions to the SPDs allow for inclusion of these requirements, based on specific risks
     identified in the contract’s operating environment. These provisions should cascade into subcontracts.

  •	 For all contracts, Contractors should have sexual harassment policies governing conduct in the work-
     place. Policies on non-retaliation and protections for whistleblowers should be included in these pro-
     tocols. The revised SPDs require borrowers to set a clear ESHS policy including sexual harassment and
     GBV. These are also expected to be included, as minimum requirements, in the Contractor’s Code of
     Conduct. Illustrative templates should be developed for these policies.

  •	 For all contracts, contractors should be required to develop internal reporting and redress protocols
     in case of allegations of SEA. These should include provisions to protect confidentiality of those re-
     porting allegations. For transparency, incident reports and actions should also be reported to the Su-
     pervisory Engineer and logged into the project Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The revised SPDs
     require monthly reports of all grievances and instant reporting of any allegations including of sexual
     harassment, sexual misbehavior, child abuse, defilement, or other violations involving children.

2. ENSURE SUPERVISORY ENGINEERS PLAY A STRONG MONITORING ROLE FOR SEA

  •	 For High Risk Projects, Supervisory Engineers’ Requests for Proposals (RFPs) should set explicit
     expectations for the consultant’s role in monitoring Contractor performance of its SEA obligations.
     Consultant proposals should specify the dedicated personnel who have the qualifications, knowledge
     and capacity to work on SEA-sensitive issues (e.g., a sociologist trained to detect such challenges) and
     the approach they will take to fulfill these obligations. The revised RFP template for consultants requires
     that supervisory staff have the skills necessary to manage risks identified in the project.

  •	 For all projects, any SEA incidents and complaints that come to the attention of the Supervisory
     Engineer should be registered in the Project’s GRM. The protocol should include provisions to protect
     confidentiality. For egregious incidents (e.g., sexual assault) a protocol for immediate, timely mandatory
     reporting to the Government and to the World Bank should be developed and agreed with the Bor-
     rower and included in the Consultant contract. Requirements for instant and monthly reporting have
     been included in the standard RFP documents for consulting engineers, similar to those for contractors
     discussed above.

3.	 STRENGTHEN MONITORING

  •	 Third-Party Monitoring should be required for High Risk Projects. The Supervising Engineer will be a
     critical actor in monitoring contractor performance on SEA issues. A strong GRM system that provides
     confidentiality can also be the basis for detecting and resolving problems as they arise. Nonetheless,
     these mechanisms are not well understood or tested in the context of SEA. Because of the sensitive na-



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  36
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS



     ture of this issue, with possibility for grievous harm to women and children, High Risk Projects (including
     when the risk rating increases during project implementation) warrant an extra layer of monitoring. The
     Third-Party Monitor’s Terms of Reference (TORs) should be focused on ensuring that provisions to pre-
     vent and respond to SEA are in place and functioning. The Monitor should not be given an investigatory
     function but can ensure proper safeguards are being followed and provide early warning of problems
     that surface. Third-Party Monitoring of SEA should be included at least for High Risk Projects at least for
     projects entering the portfolio over the next three to four years. This should provide time for the Bank
     to assess the conditions under which Third-Party Monitoring should be used. After this phase, the Bank
     can fine-tune the criteria for cases that might require a Third-Party Monitor.

  •	 The selection of a Third-Party Monitor should respond to the project context, scope and reality on
     the ground. The feasibility of contracting with a local civil society organization or an international or re-
     gional NGO with local presence that the community perceives to be independent and trusts to provide
     on-the-ground, real-time monitoring should be strongly considered. Alternatives may include bringing
     in a specialized, independent technical expert with provisions for periodic visits to the site (e.g., quar-
     terly). Other possibilities include building on dispute board mechanisms provided under International
     Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) guidelines.11 While in most cases the Borrower will contract
     the Third-Party Monitor (costs can be covered under the loan or credit), in some limited cases—such as
     in conflict zones or disaster recovery projects with low government presence and capacity—the Bank
     might contract directly after evaluating the potential legal liability and reputational risks. In all cases,
     the role and reporting responsibilities should be specified in the Bank’s Legal Agreements, with timely
     availability of reports to the Bank.

4.	 WORK WITH INDUSTRY TO RAISE THE BAR

  •	 The Bank should partner with leading contractors, consultants and industry associations to develop
     an industry engagement and capacity building plan for SEA prevention. The goal is to build a coalition
     that will champion change, support development of best practices, and generate knowledge and asso-
     ciated learning tools. This coalition should be encouraged to support outreach and training for regional
     contractors and consulting firms, perhaps in collaboration with regional industry associations.

  •	 Bank-supported country and regional procurement training and awareness raising aimed at Industry
     should include a module on GBV and SEA. This training can leverage ongoing sessions aimed at dis-
     seminating the new Procurement Framework. Engagement on improving ESHS performance is already
     underway with industry and industry associations. For example, the Bank is engaging with FIDIC and
     the Chinese International Contractors Association (CHINCA), has conducted several workshops with
     contractors and consultants, and is conducting periodic webinars for the private sector.




11	 The International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC) is an international standards organization representing consulting engineering and
construction firms globally.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                               37
CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   38
THE GOVERNMENT:

COMMITTED
AND
PREPARED




“
I used to think that my job was about
building roads, but I have come
to realize that it is about so much
more. It is also my responsibility
to know what impact our project
is having on the communities
around the project site and seeing
how we can manage social risks,
especially for women and children.

—Government Engineer in Uganda
THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED



Governments—at the national, regional and local level—are essential actors in




                                                                                                    “
preventing and mitigating against the risk of SEA and other forms of GBV. They
should recognize the importance of their own role because, as mentioned earli-
er, the consequences and impacts of GBV, including SEA, have implications for
individuals, as well as household and communal stability, social cohesion, and
sustainable development more broadly. There are heavy economic costs associ-                        GOVERNMENTS—
ated with GBV, including impacts on productivity and costs to public resources.                     AT T H E N AT I O N A L ,
These impacts coalesce to impede wider efforts toward poverty reduction, social                     REGIONAL AND
inclusion and human resilience                                                                      LOCAL LEVEL—ARE
                                                                                                    ESSENTIAL ACTORS
Client governments, which are responsible for project implementation, need to
                                                                                                    IN PREVENTING
serve as the primary actors in preventing and responding to SEA and other forms
                                                                                                    A N D M I T I G AT I N G
of GBV at the project level. They need to be responsible for ensuring compliance
                                                                                                    AGAINST THE
with safeguard management plans and instruments, for introducing procurement
provisions to reduce risk, and championing approaches to ensure that survivors                      RISK OF SEXUAL
of SEA receive redress, including access to justice and social and health services.                 E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D
Governments should also be responsible for strengthening law enforcement to ad-                     ABUSE AND OTHER
dress the potential negative consequences of projects with a heavy influx of labor.                 F O R M S O F G B V.

Implementation of such measures to address risks related to SEA may require
strengthening of government capacity. Providing the resources and technical
support for such capacity building has the potential to benefit individual projects
and to strengthen Government leadership on GBV across a range of sectors. Such
systemic change, in turn, could yield benefits not only for World Bank-financed
projects, but also for the country’s broader development agenda.



Recommendations

1.	 BUILD GOVERNMENT COMMITMENT AND OWNERSHIP

  •	 Target technical ministries and Project Implementation Units (PIUs)
     as focal points for awareness raising and capacity-building interven-
     tions. As lead technical ministries responsible for management and
     oversight of project implementation, they are ultimately accountable
     for monitoring environmental and social risks and ensuring compliance
     with monitoring and reporting requirements articulated in the Bank’s
     environmental and social safeguard instruments. They are also respon-
     sible for procurement activities and contractor oversight and man-
     agement. Ensuring understanding of the relevance and importance of
     addressing SEA as a key facet of project design and implementation,
     including in procurement and ESF compliance, and as a central devel-
     opment objective in and of itself is critical. Interaction and engagement
     on SEA and GBV between the Bank and the relevant technical minis-
     tries should begin during project initiation and design and continue
     through the life of the project.

  •	 In High Risk contexts, include Local Governments and other relevant
     sub-national administrations in client engagement on project-related




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                 40
THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED



     risks of SEA and GBV. Although the Bank’s primary point of engagement with Government is most often
     at the central level, sub-national Government actors are critical partners for managing and monitoring
     risks related to SEA and GBV, particularly at the local level. Local officials are a primary point of access
     to communities affected by Bank projects and can be important sources of information on community
     dynamics and risks related to project implementation. Capacity-building and awareness activities must
     therefore seek to include Local Government.

2.	 BUILD COUNTRY CAPACITY TO ADDRESS GBV

  •	 Leverage project launch activities as an opportunity to strengthen ownership and awareness of the
     need to monitor and address risk of SEA and GBV. Client engagement and deliberation on risks relat-
     ed to SEA and GBV should begin during project identification and design, in alignment with social risk
     management requirements, so that any prevention or mitigation interventions can be integrated into
     the design of the project. At the same time, for projects deemed to be at Substantial or High Risk of
     SEA and GBV, project launch activities should include robust dedicated sessions to build awareness and
     understanding of provisions linked to SEA and GBV. When feasible, such sessions should include minis-
     try partners whose mandate is to address GBV, such as ministry-level gender or social welfare experts.

  •	 Develop specific SEA learning modules and guidance as part of the ESF and procurement reform
     roll out. The roll out of the new ESF includes capacity building for Government partners, including de-
     velopment of e-learning modules and in-person training to build understanding of requirements under
     the new Framework. It is imperative that a specific SEA learning module be included in e-learning and
     in-person trainings. Learning modules should also include the ways in which the Procurement Frame-
     work should be leveraged to prevent SEA, particularly for High Risk Projects. In turn, training on the
     new Procurement Framework (which is ongoing) should include a module on SEA- and GBV-related
     provisions. In addition, provisions will need to be made to ensure that the module on SEA reaches those
     who have already received training on the new Procurement Framework.

3.	 STRENGTHEN GRIEVANCE REDRESS MECHANISMS FOR SEA

  •	 Bolster the project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM). The Bank’s Grievance Redress System
     (GRS) has three tiers: project-level GRMs; the Grievance Redress Service, which is the corporate sys-
     tem that allows complainants to file complaints directly with the Bank; and the independent Inspec-
     tion Panel. GRMs are mandatory in the new ESF and are the focus of this series of recommendations.
     Mechanisms to track complaints specifically linked to SEA and GBV need to be incorporated into the
     project-level GRM system. GRM systems should ideally include multiple access options for communities
     (e.g., telephone hotlines, text messaging, in-person reporting). Efforts should be taken to develop best
     practices on ethical and confidential data collection for SEA and GBV, building on learning emerging
     from existing operations (e.g., Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project). There should also be a mechanism
     for immediate feedback on actions taken or in process to address a filed complaint. Regular and reliable
     feedback on actions taken—including any sanctions—is necessary to build trust in and credibility of a
     GRM system. These are good practices for GRMs generally, but they are of critical importance for cases
     of SEA-related complaints. Importantly, GRM systems should complement and align with existing com-
     plaint mechanisms, particularly the Inspection Panel, which remains a critical channel for community
     reporting and engagement.

  •	 Establish mechanisms to ensure confidentiality of individuals without compromising access to jus-
     tice. Because stigma, retaliation and fear are typically associated with SEA, it is critical for survivors of
     SEA to be guaranteed necessary protections, in particular ensuring that complaint and reporting mech-




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                    41
THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED



     anisms provide for confidentiality and anonymity, while also ensuring access to assistance and reliable
     recourse to justice, where available, or redress. This will require sensitive, reliable pathways for survivors
     or witnesses to file complaints, receive assistance and access the right processes for justice and/or
     redress, should they opt for those. Bringing in a third-party local actor to serve as an intermediary to
     register incidents in the GRM or to serve as the clearing house for all SEA-related complaints may help
     protect the identity of complainants overall. If acting as a clearing house, this intermediary actor should
     be linked to the project GRM to enable registration of information on the number and type of com-
     plaints within the GRM system without revealing the identity of the complainant. Ultimately, however,
     if the survivor chooses to seek redress, the implications for confidentiality must be fully explained, and
     the individual must receive assistance and support to access the appropriate processes after informed
     consent has been obtained.

  •	 Use intermediary, local organizations to provide timely support services. The intermediary could also
     provide immediate support services to the complainant or refer the complainant to appropriate locally
     available service providers identified during the risk assessment and mapping exercise. Community
     organizations can also play a more formal role as Third-Party Monitors, as discussed in the preceding
     section on holding contractors accountable.

  •	 Invest in building Bank GRM staff expertise on SEA to ensure their support for High Risk Projects.
     To have well-functioning GRM systems within projects for a sensitive issue such as SEA of children and
     women requires expertise. The Bank should be equipped to provide guidance and build capacity of Bor-
     rowers on the specialized nature of SEA. Invest in training of the Bank’s GRM staff to become experts in
     how to design SEA- and GBV-sensitive GRM protocols who can then develop the modules and guidance
     for projects to institute strong mechanisms for reporting and responding to complaints related to SEA.

  •	 Capture data from GRMs at a Bank-wide level to monitor functioning and for learning. Periodic review
     of emerging GRM design will be required to know whether the system is working. Such a review must
     assess indicators such as number of incidents reported, time taken to report and respond, and follow-up
     actions. Such periodic reviews would help identify where GRMs are failing but also find good practice
     examples of reporting and addressing GBV, which can be used to reward projects and promote further
     learning. Importantly, it should be noted that a measurable increase in numbers of reports may be indic-
     ative of improved reporting systems rather than of a surge in SEA or gross project failures.

  •	 Develop a protocol to ensure that the GRM triggers the right level of action. A protocol should be de-
     veloped for SEA complaints registered in a GRM that specifies, for each type of SEA, who should receive
     the information within the government and the Bank, within what period of time, and for what purpose
     (actions to be taken on the part of those receiving the complaints should be considered confidential
     information). The reporting protocol should be developed with consideration for the range of potential
     incidents, with adjustments in steps and actions taken depending on the severity of the case.

4.	 SUPPORT GOVERNMENT EFFORTS TO BROADEN ITS RESPONSE TO SEA AND GBV

  •	 In response to client-led requests, establish linkages between project-level responses and govern-
     ment strategies to build broader frameworks and action plans to address GBV. Many countries have
     committed in principle to international or regional conventions to prevent and address GBV. This may
     include, for example, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the International Convention on the
     Rights of the Child, and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Wom-
     en (CEDAW). Many countries similarly have developed national policies or comprehensive frameworks,
     such as National Action Plans (NAPs) to enable a coordinated, multi-sectoral approach to ending vi-




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                     42
THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED



     olence against women and children. Implementation of these initiatives, however, is often under-re-
     sourced and government capacity weak. Enabling linkages between project activities and existing na-
     tional policies and frameworks could present an important opportunity to strengthen multi-sectoral
     coordination on GBV and implementation of these initiatives where they exist.

  •	 Build connections with existing programmatic efforts to address GBV within the country portfolio.
     The Bank’s current Country Engagement Model, including such instruments as the Systematic Country
     Diagnostic (SCD) and the Country Partnership Frameworks (CPF) to inform Bank engagement with
     client countries, are important entry points to highlight the need to understand and address challenges
     linked to SEA and GBV by governments and across the Bank’s portfolio in a given country. The Bank
     has signaled a strong corporate commitment to increase the number of operations addressing GBV, as
     articulated for example in IDA 18 and in the 2015 Gender Strategy. The Bank’s portfolio of projects and
     expertise in addressing GBV has also expanded substantially in recent years, and a number of opera-
     tions across regions have initiated or increased policy dialogue with government partners on the issue
     with government partners. Moreover, the Bank has invested in developing a set of sectoral resources
     aimed at assisting Task Teams in identifying opportunities to address GBV within their operations.12
     Dedicated in-country GBV operations may provide additional valuable local knowledge of risks and
     drivers of violence, as well as of key partners and community actors and potential response services.
     Sectoral projects at high risk of GBV should therefore seek to build on any broader existing efforts and
     establish connections with ongoing country-level GBV operations.




12	See www.vawgresourceguide.org for additional guidance.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E               43
THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   44
          THE WORLD BANK:

          Responsible
          Change Agent




          “
          “It doesn’t matter what country or
          culture you are from, who doesn’t
          want to protect their children? In every
          country where we said we need to put
          in place a Code of Conduct to protect
          children, they said yes, let’s do it.

          —World Bank Task Team Leader




Photo courtesy of the United Nations, Stuart Price (photographer).
THE WORLD BANK : RESPONSIBLE CHANGE AGENT



GBV is a risk in almost every environment where the Bank works, and project




                                                                                                    “
activities have a real potential to influence or exacerbate this risk. The World
Bank, as part of its mission, has the obligation and the institutional strength to
serve as the link which brings all the actors—the communities where projects are
located, workers, contractors and consultants, and government clients—together
to protect women and children from SEA. This requires partnerships with clients                     THE WORLD BANK ,
and beneficiaries and strong efforts to build capacity; policies and processes that                 A S PA RT O F I T S
uphold the highest standards in preventing and responding to SEA; a focus on                        MISSION, HAS THE
building capacity in the contractor and consulting communities; and continual                       O B L I G AT I O N A N D
learning as all stakeholders wrestle with this challenge.                                           INSTITUTIONAL
                                                                                                    STRENGTH TO
Clarity of roles and responsibilities is important. The Bank has introduced an
                                                                                                    SERVE AS THE LINK
Environmental and Social Risk System that defines internal roles and responsibil-
                                                                                                    WHICH BRINGS
ities for managing risk. This includes specialized staff who conduct project due
diligence and review social assessments that project agencies conduct; a sepa-                      ALL THE ACTORS...
rate risk review by Operation Policy and Country Services (OPCS), which provides                    TOGETHER TO
a further check; OPCS involvement in all High Risk projects; Regional Portfolio                     PROTECT WOMEN
Risk Reviews to continually assess the portfolio to ensure that staffing, budgets,                  AND CHILDREN
and management attention are paid to high-risk projects (although as discussed                      FROM SEXUAL
below, current budget coefficients may still be inadequate to implement Task                        E X P L O I TAT I O N
Force recommendations) and to identify projects where unanticipated problems                        AND ABUSE.
arise during implementation; and an Environment and Social Review Committee
chaired by the Chief Environmental and Social Standards Officer that will provide
advice and guidance to staff and escalate problems to Senior Management as
needed. These mechanisms, along with clarity of policies, procedures and pos-
itive incentives, can provide assurances to staff that management is supporting
them as they take on this sensitive issue.

Incentives matter. Bank staff are committed to ensuring project interventions
minimize harm and extend broader positive benefits of project activities to tar-
geted communities. At the same time, the Uganda case highlights key challeng-
es that teams confront in drawing sufficient attention and urgency to sensitive
issues such as SEA and GBV. Supporting staff rigor and engagement on these
topics requires strong leadership from senior management. Key drivers include:
the tone from the top; strong organizational values; positive recognition for those
who report wrong-doing and for those who innovate; investment in knowledge
and skills; and an adequate budget. Without all of these, policies and processes
results will not change. The review of Lessons Learned from the Uganda project
showed that failures occurred on many fronts. Bank management wisely chose
to focus on learning from the failure rather than holding individuals accountable.
This is the right approach. Indeed, it is likely that, with increased effectiveness of
project reporting systems, the Bank will see an increase in the number of cases.
It is important to avoid setting a tone of fear, which might discourage report and
lead some staff to retreat into silence. Others might become risk-averse, avoid-
ing working on important yet high-risk projects, or start escalating even minor
problems instead of taking action when they can. An intentional approach, by
putting in place positive incentives, is required to counteract perverse incentives.
Combining a positive incentive framework with active managerial support will en-
courage the right behavior. With this framework in place, managers and staff can
be held responsible for their performance.


W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                              46
THE WORLD BANK : RESPONSIBLE CHANGE AGENT



Specialized skill sets need to be developed. The Bank has few staff with the depth of knowledge and experience
in preventing and addressing SEA in projects. All operational staff must become aware of the issue and the tools
that can be used to address it. Social development staff will need training to support project risk assessments. Task
Team Leader and procurement certification on SEA will help ensure that teams know the requirements. But in High
Risk environments, highly specialized staff should be available for just-in-time deployment to help in the design of
projects or to support response in cases of an incident.

The budget is critical. Budget increases to support the ESF and procurement reforms were included as part of
the approval of these new policies. But these increases do not take into account the one-time costs to support in-
troduction of the steps required to prevent and respond to SEA into Bank operations. This includes investment in:
staff development and training programs; guidance notes and continuous learning; and client capacity-building on
SEA. And while the budgets for project preparation and implementation support are scheduled to increase over
the next few years, the basis for project coefficients has not yet taken into account the additional work needed
to incorporate the new approaches to preventing GBV and SEA in Bank projects, especially during a transition
period. The Task Force expects that the first time introduction in a country of the provisions for assessing risk
and introducing GBV and SEA prevention and response mechanisms will require additional time and specialists.
Budget requirements will remain unclear until there is a longer track record of what it costs to address the issue
effectively. During an interim period, additional transitional funding, discussed in the recommendations below, will
be needed to support case-by-case management decisions to supplement high-risk project budgets when there
are exceptional needs that cannot be managed with the current budget coefficients given the nature of the project
and its risks.

The World Bank is not the only multilateral financial institution that must grapple with this challenge. Strong
World Bank action can provide the pathway for other international institutions, including Multilateral Development
Banks (MDBs). In turn, building a coalition of MDBs to prevent SEA in projects they finance will be important to
build momentum. Alignment of approaches and discovery of best practice can also help country partners respond
with greater efficiency and effectiveness.



Recommendations

1. CHANGE STARTS FROM THE TOP

  •	 The Bank’s President and Chief Executive Officer should empower a champion from the ranks of Se-
     nior Directors from the relevant infrastructure sectors. Clear and repeated communication about the
     President’s, the CEO’s and Senior Management’s expectations is critical; their messages to staff, clients
     and stakeholders, as well as strong actions to date, are encouraging. This effort needs to be sustained.
     The selected senior management champion should lead a group from across the Bank to monitor per-
     formance and push for timely implementation, ensure institutional learning and fine-tuning of actions as
     lessons emerge, and act as a focal point to identify and reward strong staff performance.

  •	 Amplify and broadcast success and recognize staff who proactively report incidents and who adopt
     good practices and innovations. Success begets success. If Task Teams see evidence that good work
     is rewarded, this will promote replication of best practice. Particular care should be taken to recognize
     country office staff. In line with the expectations that risks should be continuously monitored and proj-
     ects adjusted accordingly, staff recognition should focus on how teams are supervising projects, how
     they address problems as they emerge, and how they collaborate with civil society. The Champion
     should focus on staff recognition, broadcasting good practice and ensuring that managers incorporate
     positive feedback on exceptional performance into staff performance appraisals.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  47
THE WORLD BANK : RESPONSIBLE CHANGE AGENT



  •	 Once guidance, processes and tools are in place; staff are trained; and budgets are available, send
     a message of managerial and staff accountability, but do so carefully. Staff and managers cannot be
     held accountable for sexual misconduct of others or for performing the roles (law enforcement, investi-
     gation, redress) of the government. But they can be held accountable for ensuring effective supervision,
     including a focus on government and contractor compliance with Bank requirements and recommend-
     ing management action for non-compliance. The Bank’s response will require managerial judgment.
     Best practice still needs to be developed as new questions arise, and many of the practices that the Task
     Force suggests will need to be reviewed as these initiatives evolve. As such, the Bank in the first instance
     should place particular emphasis on promoting Practice Managers’ accountability. Practice Managers
     should not simply devolve responsibility to Task Teams but should instead provide them the support
     needed to do an effective job.

2. SPEAK TO VALUES TO BUILD COMMITMENT FOR ACTION

  •	 Introduce the link between prevention of SEA in Bank projects and the Bank’s core values. Staff and
     managers join the Bank because they believe in the Bank’s mission and want results that benefit people.
     But behavior change will be needed to maintain traction. This will require an emphasis on promoting
     the message that prevention of GBV and SEA is critical to development and to promoting human dig-
     nity and safety. Measures should include building understanding of the links between projects, SEA,
     and development outcomes using unconventional approaches to build understanding (e.g., storytelling,
     films on individual cases). “Walking the talk” can also be fostered through dialogue on expectations for
     Bank staff in preventing SEA in the workplace and in Bank operations as part of the ongoing Office of
     Business Ethics exercise to update the Bank’s Core Values and in discussions of the Bank’s own staff
     Anti-Harassment policies.13

3. CLARIFY OPERATIONAL POLICIES AND PRACTICE

  •	 Prepare a Staff Guidance Note, linked to the ESF, that consolidates the policies and processes that
     have been developed, including as applicable, the Task Force recommendations. The response to the
     Uganda incident has resulted in a plethora of guidance memos and notes. These need to be consolidat-
     ed and linked to the broader ESF and Procurement systems. This should include a clear accountability
     framework that specifies the role of different actors (Government, Contractors, Bank, including for re-
     sponse in case of an incident).

  •	 Establish a clear protocol for Bank Staff reporting of serious project-related allegations and incidents
     in a timely manner to the right level of management, as well as a protocol for recommended internal
     response measures. While prevention is the focus, active reporting and response protocols that pro-
     vide practical guidance on when and where to report incidents and what actions should necessarily
     follow need to accompany this. An example of the components of such a reporting protocol, based on
     a model developed by UNICEF, is provided in Annex 6. Additional resources should be made available
     to develop a timely response protocol to guide staff in responding to egregious incidents (e.g., initially
     from the GBV Prevention and Mitigation Fund—discussed below—and thereafter from regular budget
     mechanisms).




13	 For an example of an Anti-Harassment Policy in other industries includes: http://www.gapinc.com/content/dam/gapincsite/documents/COBC/
COBC_english.pdf




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                      48
THE WORLD BANK : RESPONSIBLE CHANGE AGENT



4. BUILD STAFF CAPACITY AND SKILLS

  •	 Embed SEA and GBV training modules into existing staff training systems. This should include:

     »» Incorporating SEA modules into ESF, Safeguards and Procurement Training for specialists

     »» Incorporating GBV and SEA requirements into Task Team Leader (TTL) accreditation through e-learning
        modules, face-to-face learning and testing

     »» Training OPCS GRM specialists on GBV and SEA

     »» Holding sessions on GBV and SEA in Sector Weeks and associated training

	Importantly, any training materials developed should highlight the different approaches to identifying
  and responding to risks of SEA and other forms of GBV affecting children, as well as varying tools for
  address SEA and GBV affecting women and other at-risk groups.

  •	 Quickly increase the number of highly specialized staff who can be deployed to support teams in
     a dedicated “Master Class.” This class should aim to include approximately 20 (roughly 10 percent
     of social development staff) high-performing social development staff or other staff with appropriate
     skills who will be provided with high-quality training from leading experts, as well as opportunities for
     experiential learning (for example one week per staff to support GBV and SEA project activities out-
     side of their normal work assignments). These staff members should expect to contribute to the Bank’s
     knowledge base (e.g., development of best practice notes). These staff should also be available to be
     deployed, once trained, for quick engagement in High Risk projects.

5. SUPPORT CONTINUOUS LEARNING THROUGH MONITORING AND EVALUATION

  •	 Conduct reviews of a sample of High Risk projects over a two- to three-year period. Given that prac-
     tice in this area will evolve over the next few years, an evaluation and learning process should be imple-
     mented to capture lessons learned on how risks are managed and to understand new risks that were
     not anticipated; to understand how policies and processes are being implemented and whether they
     are yielding results; and to understand the skill and budget dynamics. A review in 2018 can be relatively
     light given that there is currently a limited number of projects with SEA prevention features and that
     management is already following these projects closely. By 2019, a broader portfolio will have been
     established, making a more-thorough desk review timely. These reviews should feedback into staff and
     client guidance and help fine-tune processes.

  •	 Request a review by the Independent Evaluation Group after 4 years. The independent evaluation
     can help assess what is working and where there are gaps and identify success stories and examples of
     good practice.

6. RECOGNIZE THE TRANSITION COSTS AND PROVIDE ADEQUATE FUNDING

  •	 Allocate dedicated one-time surge funds to training and knowledge development for staff and cli-
     ents. A two-year budget to cover the incremental costs associated with introducing new SEA preven-
     tion and response measures is estimated at $615,000. This includes provisions for staff capacity building
     ($340,000); Guidance notes and knowledge ($115,000); Borrower, Community and Contractor toolkits
     and communications ($165,000).




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                 49
THE WORLD BANK : RESPONSIBLE CHANGE AGENT



  •	 Establish a two-year, time-bound GBV Prevention and Mitigation Fund. This would be an internal bud-
     get supplement fund, managed by a Vice President (with the advice of the Environmental and Social
     Risk Committee) who would allocate additional resources to High Risk projects where the normal budget
     flexibilities built into the system are not sufficient. If an average of $50,000 were allocated per High Risk
     project that required additional support, a fund of $1 million could cover 20 projects. After two years, the
     fund mechanism would cease, with the expectation that cost experience from these two years will be
     translated into project coefficients in the normal course of operational budgeting. During the course of
     each of the two years, the responsible Vice President could release funds back to the broader budget if
     it appears that funds will not be used. The Fund would also provide flexibility to respond to changing risk
     profiles during project implementation. This will set the incentives for continuous monitoring of risks to
     enable teams to feel assured that funds will be available if the risk rating needs to be heightened.

  •	 Ensure funds are available for country capacity building. Clarify that Project Preparation facilities are
     available for SEA project-related capacity-building work. Work to establish a coalition with industry that
     could support SEA training and capacity building for regional contractors and consultants.

6. BUILD MOMENTUM BY WORKING WITH OTHER MDBS

  •	 Build a coalition of like-minded MDBs using existing Working Groups. Strategies, policies, and ac-
     tions to address SEA in MDB operations should be put on the agenda for the MDB Working Group on
     Safeguards and Working Group on Procurement, with the goal of working toward alignment of goals,
     policies and procedures.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                    50
BRINGING IT ALL
TOGETHER:

SEA Prevention
and Response
In the World
Bank Project
Cycle




“
The World Bank is committed to be
a global leader in Environmental
and Social Standards in the
development sphere, and part of
that critical responsibility is to
watch projects closely and ensure
that risks are properly addressed.

—Jim Yong Kim, World Bank President
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE



The Project Cycle—from project concept to identification to preparation and appraisal to implemen-
tation—provides the main guideposts for actions to prevent and respond to SEA in Bank-financed
projects. The recommendations can be mapped against the Project Cycle to show Bank staff and
partners in the Government, Communities and Industry the steps that need to be taken to address this
issue. Table 4 presents the Task Force recommendations throughout the Project Cycle. The main audi-
ence is Bank staff so that they have clarity on what is expected as part of Bank due diligence.

TABLE 4: BANK ACTIONS TO PREVENT SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE (SEA) THROUGHOUT
THE PROJECT CYCLE

                                               PROJECT CONCEPT                         PROJECT PREPARATION                 PROJECT
     RECOMMENDATION
                                              AND IDENTIFICATION                          AND APPRAISAL                IMPLEMENTATION

                                              AT THE CENTER: WOMEN AND CHILDREN AT RISK

  Strengthen risk                           Conduct SEA risk                           For High Risk: ID            Continuous monitoring
  assessments and use to                    screening and assessment                   specialized agencies         over project life
  trigger action                            in conjunction with social                 (health, law, justice,
                                            risk assessment                            psychosocial support,        If higher-than-expected
                                                                                       safe houses/shelters) that   SEA risks emerge, upgrade
                                            SEA risk rating in                         should be included in SEA-   risk rating and trigger
                                            Systematic Operations                      related project design       mitigation action
                                            Risk-Rating Tool “High”
                                            triggers action (budget;
                                            team skills; specialized
                                            project provisions and
                                            Bank due diligence,
                                            including OPCS Oversight)

  Educate and raise                         Identify women and                         Organize awareness           Organize awareness
  awareness of women,                       children most at risk in                   raising and education        raising and education
  adolescents and children                  communities                                sessions for women and       sessions for women and
  on SEA                                                                               children on legal rights     children on legal rights
                                            Identify and support                       and services available to    and services available to
                                            appropriate expertise to                   them                         them
                                            educate and consult with
                                            children

  Identify service providers                Conduct scanning and                       Identify full range of       Monitor efficacy of service
  for survivors of SEA                      mapping exercise to                        service providers: case      arrangements
                                            identify available service                 management, health,
                                            providers for survivors                    psychosocial, shelter,
                                            of SEA; if none locally                    security, legal services,
                                            available, identify                        police, security
                                            opportunities for capacity
                                            building or provision of                   Provide adequate support
                                            external support                           for services not available
                                                                                       locally

  Identify modalities to                                                               Pilot inclusion in project   Monitor effectiveness of
  enable compensation or                                                               design of mechanism to       funding mechanism or
  longer-term economic                                                                 enable financial support     associated activities if
  support to survivors                                                                 if required to survivors     deployed
                                                                                       and opportunities for
                                                                                       engagement in livelihood
                                                                                       or employment activities




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                 52
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE




                                               PROJECT CONCEPT                         PROJECT PREPARATION                 PROJECT
     RECOMMENDATION
                                              AND IDENTIFICATION                          AND APPRAISAL                IMPLEMENTATION

                                               THE COMMUNITY: RISK MANAGEMENT PARTNER

  Engage community                          Integrate community                        High Risk projects: When     Continuous two-way
  partners                                  scanning and mapping into                  designing Third-Party        engagement with leaders
                                            risk assessment for SEA                    Monitoring, strongly         and partner organizations
                                            of potentially High Risk                   consider use of community
                                            Projects                                   organizations with local
                                                                                       presence with expertise in
                                            Identify local leaders and                 SEA and GBV
                                            potential community
                                            partners

  Build trust and                                                                      Ensure early, transparent    Use project launch to set
  transparency                                                                         disclosure of SEA-related    expectations for project
                                                                                       project provisions,          SEA provisions, contractor
                                                                                       including contractor and     behavior, continuous
                                                                                       worker expectations          community engagement

                                                                                                                    Disseminate GRM
                                                                                                                    protocols, including
                                                                                                                    confidentiality provisions

                                                                                                                    Establish milestones for
                                                                                                                    engagement on SEA
                                                                                                                    to be included in Bank
                                                                                                                    supervision plans

  Use innovative                                                                                                    Use social media and
  communication channels                                                                                            text messaging for early
                                                                                                                    warning, feedback, and
                                                                                                                    dialogue and to protect
                                                                                                                    confidentiality




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                53
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE




                                               PROJECT CONCEPT                         PROJECT PREPARATION                 PROJECT
     RECOMMENDATION
                                              AND IDENTIFICATION                          AND APPRAISAL                IMPLEMENTATION

                                   CONTRACTORS AND CONSULTANTS: ACCOUNTABLE PARTNERS

  Link procurement                                                                                                  Prequalification: Require
  provisions to SEA risk                                                                                            contractors to disclose
  assessment                                                                                                        SEA issues and actions
                                                                                                                    taken to address them,
                                                                                                                    with information used to
                                                                                                                    determine qualification

                                                                                                                    Require contractors to
                                                                                                                    have Codes of Conduct
                                                                                                                    that include: SEA
                                                                                                                    prohibitions, (including
                                                                                                                    under 18 language);
                                                                                                                    sanctions; anti-harassment
                                                                                                                    policies

                                                                                                                    High Risk Projects:
                                                                                                                    Require contractors to
                                                                                                                    demonstrate capacity to
                                                                                                                    manage SEA risk; plan for
                                                                                                                    SEA training and oversight
                                                                                                                    funded under contract

                                                                                                                    Require contractors to
                                                                                                                    develop and implement
                                                                                                                    SEA incidence reporting
                                                                                                                    and action protocols; link
                                                                                                                    to GRM

  Ensure supervisory                                                                                                Use RFP/Contract for
  engineers play strong role                                                                                        High Risk Projects to
  in monitoring SEA                                                                                                 set expectations for
                                                                                                                    Supervisory Engineer’s
                                                                                                                    role in oversight of
                                                                                                                    contractor obligations in
                                                                                                                    preventing and responding
                                                                                                                    to SEA

                                                                                                                    Ensure contract includes
                                                                                                                    provisions for mandatory
                                                                                                                    reporting of incidents; link
                                                                                                                    to GRM

  Enable Third-Party                                                                   High Risk Projects: Build    Select Third-Party Monitor;
  Monitoring                                                                           Third-Party Monitoring       Third-Party Monitoring
                                                                                       into design; agree on        throughout
                                                                                       type (community?
                                                                                       expert?); develop Terms of
                                                                                       Reference (TOR)




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                  54
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE




                                               PROJECT CONCEPT                         PROJECT PREPARATION                   PROJECT
     RECOMMENDATION
                                              AND IDENTIFICATION                          AND APPRAISAL                  IMPLEMENTATION

                                              THE GOVERNMENT: COMMITTED AND PREPARED

  Build commitment,                         High Risk Projects: Target                 High Risk Projects: Target     High Risk Projects: Hold
  ownership capacity                        technical ministry and                     local, relevant sub-national   robust, dedicated sessions
                                            Project Implementation                     governments for SEA            on SEA provisions at
                                            Unit for SEA awareness                     awareness raising and          project launch
                                            raising and capacity                       capacity building
                                            building

  Strengthen SEA Grievance                                                             Establish SEA reporting        Monitor efficacy of GRM
  Redress Mechanisms                                                                   and redress mechanisms         and reporting protocol
                                                                                       in Project GRM to ensure
                                                                                       confidentiality without
                                                                                       compromising justice

                                                                                       Use intermediary, local
                                                                                       organizations to refer
                                                                                       to services and provide
                                                                                       timely support to
                                                                                       complainant

                                                                                       Develop reporting protocol
                                                                                       consistent with severity of
                                                                                       incident




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                  55
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE



In addition, the overarching enabling environment—Government, Community and Contractor capacity—needs
to be in place to support action at the project level. Some of the actions that the World Bank needs to take to
build this enabling environment, particularly for the community where the project takes place, are conducted as
part of the Project Cycle. Others can best be tackled at the level of the institutions responsible for action or require
building new coalitions. These actions go beyond a single project. Yet the success of project efforts depends on
their implementation. The Task Force recommendations that support building the enabling environment are sum-
marized in Table 5.

TABLE 5: STRENGTHEN SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE BY CREATING AN ENABLING
ENVIRONMENT

                                                                                                     PROVIDE POLICY         STRENGTHEN
 RECOMMENDATION                      BUILD CAPACITY                    DEVELOP SKILLS
                                                                                                      AND GUIDANCE           INCENTIVES

                                             FOCUSING ON BUILDING WORLD BANK CAPACITY

  Change starts from                President and CEO                                                                     Reward staff who
  the top                           to empower a                                                                          raise issues or
                                    Champion to lead a                                                                    concerns
                                    group for sustained
                                    effort                                                                                Focus on managerial
                                                                                                                          accountability,
                                                                                                                          reinforced by
                                                                                                                          capacity, skills,
                                                                                                                          budget and guidance

                                                                                                                          Reward staff who
                                                                                                                          develop innovative
                                                                                                                          solutions and attend
                                                                                                                          specialized GBV and
                                                                                                                          SEA training

  Speak to Values                                                     Motivate staff using          Clarify that Bank’s   Engage in dialogue
                                                                      nontraditional                Anti-Harassment       on GBV prevention
                                                                      approaches to                 Policy applies to     as part of Bank’s
                                                                      show link between             staff interactions    upcoming Core Value
                                                                      project-level SEA             with clients and      refreshing process
                                                                      and GBV prevention            beneficiaries         and in discussions
                                                                      and development                                     of the Bank’s Anti-
                                                                                                                          Harrassment Policy

  Strengthen Bank’s                 Continuous learning               Embed SEA and                 Consolidate           Create two-year
  ability to respond                via periodic reviews              GBV training into             Project-level SEA     GBV Prevention and
                                    of High Risk Projects             existing staff                requirements          Mitigation Fund
                                                                      programs                      into a single Staff
                                    Independent IEG                                                 Guidance Note         Fund Task Force
                                    Evaluation after 4                Create “Master                                      Recommendations
                                    years                             Class” of highly
                                                                      skilled SEA experts
                                                                      to become roster of
                                                                      staff easily deployed
                                                                      when SEA has
                                                                      occurred




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                56
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE




                                                                                                     PROVIDE POLICY          STRENGTHEN
 RECOMMENDATION                      BUILD CAPACITY                    DEVELOP SKILLS
                                                                                                      AND GUIDANCE            INCENTIVES

  Embed SEA                         Capture SEA and                   Train Bank GRM                Develop internal
  considerations into               GRM best practice                 experts on SEA-               Bank Management
  project-level GRMs                                                  sensitive provisions          Protocol to ensure
                                                                                                    incidents trigger
                                                                                                    action

  Build collaboration                                                                               Build coalition
  with MDBs to                                                                                      of MDBs to align
  address SEA                                                                                       SEA prevention
                                                                                                    and response
                                                                                                    measures using
                                                                                                    existing Safeguard
                                                                                                    and Procurement
                                                                                                    Working Groups

                                                   FOCUS ON BUILDING COUNTRY CAPACITY

  Build country                     Support government                SEA learning                  Clarify that Project
  capacity to address               efforts to broaden                modules and                   Preparation Facilities
  GBV                               response to SEA and               guidance                      are available for
                                    GBV, leveraging such              incorporated into             SEA project-related
                                    client engagement                 country ESF/                  activities
                                    instruments at SCD                Procurement
                                    and CPF exercises                 Trainings
                                    to highlight country-
                                    and portfolio-wide
                                    risks

                                    Build connections
                                    between Project
                                    and broader
                                    programmatic
                                    efforts to address
                                    GBV

                                                   FOCUS ON BUILDING INDUSTRY CAPACITY

  Work with industry                Build a coalition of              Country and regional
  to raise the bar                  industry players to               procurement training
                                    champion change                   targeted at industry,
                                    and develop best                  including module on
                                    practices, learning,              SEA and GBV
                                    and tools for
                                    contractors and
                                    consultants




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                          57
BRINGING IT ALL TOGETHER: SEA PREVENTION AND RESPONSE IN THE WORLD BANK PROJECT CYCLE




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   58
A FINAL WORD:

Looking
Back to Look
Forward




“
This is a long-term process
that requires continuous
learning and evaluation,
adaptation and adjustment.

—GBV Task Force Member
A FINAL WORD: LOOKING BACK TO LOOK FORWARD



The World Bank’s responsibility to prevent and mitigate SEA in the projects it




                                                                                                    “
supports is fundamental to its mission: poverty alleviation and shared prosper-
ity. To succeed on this agenda, management and staff need to commit to ensur-
ing project activities and services minimize risks to human health and well-being,
protect the environment, and actively contribute to the greater public good. The
World Bank’s willingness to confront the challenges of Uganda by admitting insti-                   THE WORLD BANK’S
tutional failures and committing at the highest level to improve how it functions as                RESPONSIBILITY
an institution is emblematic of the aspirations of Bank staff to uphold these values.               TO PREVENT AND
                                                                                                    M I T I G AT E S E X U A L
The issues that surfaced in Uganda showed institutional failure across many
                                                                                                    E X P L O I TAT I O N
dimensions, so the response will need to be multifaceted as well. Ongoing re-
                                                                                                    AND ABUSE IN
views of risks of GBV and SEA in the current Bank portfolio and new risk as-
                                                                                                    THE PROJECTS
sessment criteria for new projects are likely to recognize a higher degree of risk
                                                                                                    IT SUPPORTS IS
than was known before the Uganda failure surfaced. The challenge will be height-
ened as the Bank expands its portfolio under IDA 18 to environments affected by                     F U N D A M E N TA L
conflict and fragility, where institutions and mechanisms for security and justice                  TO ITS MISSION:
are already weak, and social norms protecting against GBV are weak at best.                         POVERTY
An expected larger, ongoing and future at-risk portfolio will collide with multiple                 A L L E V I AT I O N A N D
demands, requirements, and obligations that Bank staff already confront in the                      S H A R E D P R O S P E R I T Y.
daily execution of their responsibilities. The Bank has undergone considerable
change in recent years in terms of organizational structure and of fundamental
policies and processes, including ongoing implementation of the new Procure-
ment Framework and the roll out of the new ESF. Repeated organizational change
can contribute to general fatigue toward new initiatives. Together these present
obstacles to building an effective response.

These barriers to change are compounded by the sensitive nature of the issue.
The Bank’s social development staff are motivated by the opportunity to use their
skills to tackle challenges linked to GBV and SEA, but many technical staff and
managers are not comfortable discussing sexual conduct and abuse and do not
feel prepared to handle the challenge in a professional capacity. Yet the Uganda
case has devastated staff. They worry that they will discover something similar on
their own watch and want to be equipped to respond effectively. Staff want to do
the right thing, but some are fearful of the unknown repercussions, are concerned
about country buy-in on this issue, and worry about whether they have the capac-
ity to respond appropriately.

The experience of the Uganda TSDP has been a painful one for the survivors and
the local community. It was also a sobering moment for local and national part-
ners in Uganda and for the World Bank as a development institution. Many les-
sons have been learned from this experience, and the World Bank has introduced
several systemic changes to help ensure that such instances are not repeated and
that mechanisms exist to prevent and mitigate social risk in the projects it sup-
ports, including the risk of sexual abuse. The experience has also shown that, when
measures are taken to assess, identify and address such problems systematically,
based on a strong coalition between local communities, government institutions
and NGOs supported by international development organizations, grave risks can
be avoided, and conditions for positive empowerment of girls and women can be
created so that they can be a part of sustainable development.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                60
A FINAL WORD: LOOKING BACK TO LOOK FORWARD



The Task Force has worked to build the case for action to prevent and respond to SEA in Bank projects. If imple-
mented, the recommendations can go a long way to support learning from the past while looking forward to ways
in which social risks can be mitigated so that sustainable development can be achieved. A critical ingredient for
success is changing the hearts and minds of all of those who work together to fight the scourge of sexual abuse
and exploitation.

Keeping in mind the life of the girl described at the outset of this report should help to motivate change be-
cause that imagined story is in fact a reality for many girls and women around the world living in communities that
should be benefiting from large infrastructure investments. What if together we could change that narrative so
that women and children do not have to live in fear but instead can look forward to a world where good roads and
infrastructure mean a life of increased opportunity? That can be a reality, too.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                61
A FINAL WORD: LOOKING BACK TO LOOK FORWARD




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   62
ANNEXES




1.	   Task Force Terms of Reference

2.	 The Uganda Transport
      Development Project –
      What Happened

3.	 Risk Factors for Gender-
      Based Violence Based on
      the Ecological Model

4.	 Gender-Based Violence and
      Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
      Risk Assessment Guidance

5.	 Sample Code of Conduct—Vanuatu
      Aviation Investment Project

6.	 Draft Protocol for World Bank Staff
      Reporting to Bank Management on
      Allegations of Sexual Exploitation
      and Abuse by Personnel Associated
      with a World Bank–Financed
      Investment Operations
Annex 1: Task Force Terms of Reference
World Bank Group President Jim Yong Kim has formed a Global Gender-Based Violence Task Force intended
specifically to strengthen the institution’s capacity to identify, mitigate and prevent risk of sexual exploitation and
abuse (SEA), as a manifestation of gender-based violence (GBV), and to respond in a survivor centered manner
should incidence of SEA occur.

This task force will advise the institution on best practices for reducing risks to community safety in connection
with our development projects, and in particular for preventing sexual exploitation and abuse in area development
projects. Comprised of leading experts on sexual exploitation and abuse, relevant sectoral experts, and supported
by a small Secretariat composed of World Bank staff, the task force will build on ongoing World Bank Group work
to tackle GBV and sexual exploitation and abuse, specifically focusing on strengthened approaches to identifying
threats and applying preventive actions in Bank-funded operations.

 As a financier of development projects, the World Bank now supports millions of dollars in development projects
aimed at addressing violence against women and girls across many different sectors, from health and education to
infrastructure and public services. This work builds on evidence and lessons learned in these sectors accumulated
by UN agencies such as the World Health Organization and UNICEF, as well as from academics and many civil
society organizations. At the same time, recent experience has demonstrated the critical importance of strength-
ening the capacity of WB teams across sectors, particularly infrastructure investments that involve a large influx
of workers into a community, to take adequate precautions to prevent or minimize risk of exposure of women and
girls to sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as other forms of GBV. Similarly, there is need to improve clarity on
and knowledge of response protocols and remedial actions to enable safe, confidential and ethical care of survi-
vors should sexual exploitation and abuse occur.

The two main objectives of the Task Force are (i) to enhance the way World Bank Group operations teams assess
and understand the drivers of and conditions for sexual exploitation and abuse – whether related to pervasive
norms and dynamics, external stressors such as conflict and fragility, or as unintended consequences of develop-
ment investments; and (ii) to build in measures into World Bank Group operations to prevent and remedy situa-
tions that may arise in the course of a project.

TERMS OF REFERENCE

The Task Force will be asked to:

    1.	 Develop a set of actionable recommendations for the President and the Bank’s Management on ways
        to strengthen prevention, design, reporting, and supervision interventions in the context of WBG op-
        erations aimed at area development (including infrastructure development, e.g. energy, roads, water/
        sanitation, slum upgrading etc.)

         More specifically, key activities of the Task Force will include:

     »» Advice on policies, processes and instruments linked to Bank operations that can be strengthened to
        improve Bank capacity to identify and prevent risk of sexual exploitation and abuse, as well as other
        forms of gender-based violence. This will include consideration of legal covenants, procurement pro-
        cesses, grievance redress mechanisms, codes of conduct, consultations and citizen engagement inter-
        ventions, social assessments, training requirements and other relevant processes and tools.

     »» Advice on tools, instruments or capacity building that may help improve the ability of task teams to as-
        sess risk of sexual exploitation and abuse during project design and to develop appropriate prevention
        or mitigation measures. Similarly, guidance will include identification of tools or instruments that may
        facilitate reporting of sexual exploitation and abuse. The tools identified will also serve as a monitoring
        mechanism during project supervision.


W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                     64
ANNEX 1: TASK FORCE TERMS OF REFERENCE



     »» Guidance on remedial measures and procedures to be implemented in the event that incidence does
        occur. This includes:

            i.	 Identification of response measures and systems of care for survivors or communities re-
                porting sexual exploitation and abuse;

            ii.	 Development of reporting and response protocols to help guide WB staff should cases
                 arise. These protocols may include articulation of steps project teams should follow to en-
                 able the safe, confidential and ethical review of reported incidence; identification of report-
                 ing lines both internally as cases occur (e.g. to Bank management), as well as externally.

     »» Identification of mechanisms for improved client engagement on sexual exploitation and abuse, includ-
        ing policy dialogue, training and other requirements to ensure effective implementation and monitoring
        of tools or systems developed to track potential incidence.

    2.	 Identify effective ways for the Bank to increase coordination with multiple stakeholders -- locally, na-
        tionally, and internationally -- to prevent and respond to gender-based violence.

Recommendations will be informed in part by a review, facilitated by the supporting WB Secretariat, both of exist-
ing WB tools, processes and mechanisms to help identify appropriate entry points for engagement, as well as by a
review of findings of existing and ongoing research and experience, to identify best practices involving prevention
and response that help communities tackle sexual exploitation and abuse.

While this Task Force will focus recommendations for improved prevention of and mitigation against sexual ex-
ploitation and abuse in area development operations, particularly infrastructure investments involving large influx
of workers to communities, consideration will also be given for relevance of recommendations for WB operations
across other sectors as well.

MODUS OPERANDI

  •	 The Task Force will have a 6-9 month tenure and will meet up to four times.

  •	 The WBG will cover expenses of Task Force members to Task Force meetings, to be held in Washington,
     D.C.

  •	 The Task Force will be supported by a small WBG secretariat which will organize meetings (prepare
     agendas, minutes, logistics), compile relevant background materials and issue notes, respond to re-
     quests from panelists for information, and other tasks as appropriate.

  •	 Based on the recommendations of the Task Force, an action plan will be prepared by WBG staff to
     strengthen the Bank’s work. The World Bank will commit to implement the Action Plan.

  •	 The names of Task Force members and their report/recommendations will be public.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  65
ANNEX 1: TASK FORCE TERMS OF REFERENCE



TASK FORCE MEMBERS:

Ms. Geeta Rao Gupta (Co-Chair), Executive Director, 3D Program for Girls and Women, United Nations Foundation

Ms. Katherine Sierra (Co-Chair), Former VP Sustainable Development, World Bank (retired)

Ms. Fatoumata Ndiaye, Deputy Executive Director, UNICEF

Ms. Kathleen Cravero, President, Oak Foundation

Mr. Atul Khare, Under-Secretary General for the United Nations

Most Reverend Bernard Ntahoturi, Representative of the Archbishop of Canterbury to the Holy See

Mr. Ntenga Moses, Founder and Director, Joy for Children

Ms. Ewa Werner Dahlin, Assistant Director General, Department of Asia, Middle East Humanitarian Assistance, and
Human Security and Conflict at SIDA

Ms. Aisha Nadar, Head of Infrastructure, Procurement and Dispute Resolution, Advokatfirman Runeland AB

Ms. Laura Tuck, Vice President, Sustainable Development for the World Bank

Mr. Hart Schafer, Vice President, OPCS for the World Bank




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E            66
Annex 2: The Uganda Transport Sector Development Project — What Happened
The Uganda Transport Sector Development Project (TSDP), Additional Financing, involved rehabilitating a 66-km
road from Fort Portal to Kamwenge in Western Uganda. The project, implemented by the Uganda National Roads
Authority (UNRA), was approved in 2011 and initiated in 2013.

The road rehabilitation contract was awarded to a Chinese construction company, which employed Ugandan labor
from within and outside the community to work on the roads. The majority of workers (at least 80 percent) were
from outside the community. In December 2014, the Bank received an anonymous complaint that there were a
number of problems with project implementation, including serious allegations related to sexual abuse of minor
girls by the workers employed by the road project. In September 2015, the community filed a complaint with the
Bank’s Inspection Panel, reporting that UNRA and the Bank had not satisfactorily addressed the problems de-
scribed in its December 2014 complaint. Initial attempts to probe the issue with the community did not yield any
information related to sexual abuse until the Bank engaged a social scientist trained in gender-based violence
issues in May 2015. Based on further follow-up by the Bank on this complaint, which confirmed that road workers
had sexually abused a number of young girls. In particular the Bank determined that road workers sexually abused
13 girls in the Bigodi community along the road. Seven of the 13 became pregnant and have since delivered, and
two were found to be HIV positive. The investigation also found a host of other, unresolved implementation prob-
lems in the project. As a result, the Bank suspended disbursements of funding for the project in October 2015 and
canceled the project in December, 2015.

The Inspection Panel issued its investigation report in August 2016. The World Bank Board discussed the Man-
agement Response to the Inspection Panel’s report, as well as an internal report on the Lessons Learned from the
project, in November 2016. The Lessons Learned report also contained an Action Plan to address the systemic
issues identified. This Action Plan has been under implementation since November 2016.

Upon identification of the first victims of assault, the Bank developed an Emergency Child Protection Response
(ECPR) program in December 2015 to provide immediate medical, psychosocial, legal, and livelihood support to
the victims of the abuse and to raise awareness of problems related to child abuse in local schools and communi-
ties in the area. The ECPR coverage also extended beyond the 13 girls affected by the roads project. The Bank en-
gaged BRAC, a reputable International NGO with a strong track record in Uganda, to help organize Empowerment
and Livelihood Assistance (ELA) clubs for young girls in the project area. These clubs have been open not only
to the girls sexually abused by road workers, but also to girls who suffered similar abuse from other perpetrators
not linked to the Bank project (134 in all) and to other interested girls in the communities; 1034 girls have bene-
fitted from these clubs since June 2016. These clubs provide overall life skills training, including assertiveness and
leadership training and livelihood support, including financial literacy and access to apprenticeship opportunities,
vocational training, and preparation for reintegration into formal schooling. BRAC and the local government’s child
protection services (District Probation and Welfare Office) also helped refer the girls to other service providers
who provide specifically tailored forms of support (e.g., specialized psychosocial assessment and follow-up sup-
port, medical assistance, legal redress, school reintegration support) to girls based on a comprehensive assess-
ment of each girl’s circumstances. Early results show that the victims and other girls participating in ELA clubs
have benefitted from this approach and have been able to begin recovery from their traumatic experiences. Some
of them are also playing leadership roles in sensitizing their peers and the community on issues related to violence
against children (VAC) and GBV.

Sensitization activities have been extended to the wider Bigodi community on challenges linked to GBV and sexual
abuse, and these issues are now openly discussed in various community forums, including talk shows on the local
radio. The community has also expressed interest in working with other, similar communities around the country
to help raise awareness and establish community mechanisms to prevent and address GBV and violence against
children. The community has not reported any cases of child sexual abuse—related to the transport sector devel-
opment project or otherwise—since October 2016.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                   67
ANNEX 2: THE UGANDA TRANSPORT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — WHAT HAPPENED



The support being provided to the victims under the ECPR will be continued as part of a $1 million “Rapid Social
Response” trust fund grant, which is also helping strengthen the capacity of local governments and communities
to prevent and address GBV and violence against children, including strengthening grievance redress mechanisms
to receive and refer complaints related to violence against children and GBV. In addition, based on a request
from the Government of Uganda, the Bank has supported the preparation of a $40 million project to prevent
and address more effectively GBV in the country and help implement the National Policy on the Elimination of
Gender-Based Violence issued in 2016. The project will increase the capacity of national institutions such as the
Ministry of Gender, Labor and Social Development (MoGLSD); the district-level agencies responsible for GBV in
13 districts of Uganda; and community-level organizations to help them prevent and address GBV. The project will
also support a major national campaign to influence norms, values, and behaviors that condone GBV.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E              68
Annex 3: Risk Factors for Gender-Based Violence (GBV) Based on the
Ecological Model14

       SOCIETAL
   Broad factors that
                                        COMMUNITY                                                                                INDIVIDUAL
   reduce inhibitions                                                                                     FAMILY
                                       Neighborhoods,                        MALE                                           Personal factors that
     against use of                                                                                 With family, intimate
                                        schools, and                      PERPETRATOR                                        influence personal
    violence against                                                                                partner, and friends
                                         workplaces                                                                                behavior
  women and reinforce
   gender inequality

                  RISK FACTORS FOR GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE BASED ON THE ECOLOGICAL MODEL

  Legal context                     Norms                             Violence in                   Interaction             Demographic
  •	Barriers to economic            •	Social acceptance               childhood                     •	Non-egalitarian       characteristics
    participation                     of wife beating                 •	Experiences of harsh          decision-making       •	Being a woman or
                                                                        physical punishment                                   part of sexual or
  •	Absence of                      •	Male right to                                                 •	Poor communication
                                                                                                                              gender minority group
    legal framework                   discipline and control          •	Witnessing
    addressing GBV                    female behavior                                               •	High relationship
                                                                        parental violence                                   •	Age
                                                                                                      conflict
  •	Weak justice and                •	Tolerance of harsh              •	Physiological                                       •	Level of educational
    criminal investigation            physical punishment               dysfunction, antisocial                               attainment
                                                                                                    Situational triggers
    systems                           of children                       behavior, adult
                                                                        attachment issues           •	Sex, infidelity       •	Disability
  •	Discriminatory laws             •	Stigma against
                                      divorced or                                                   •	Power imbalance       •	Displacement
  •	Ease of divorce                   single women                    Attitudes                       within relationship
    for women                                                                                         related to money,
                                    •	Male honor linked               •	Acceptance of
                                                                                                      distribution of
                                                                                                                            Childhood violence
                                      to female purity                  violence as a means                                 •	Child sexual abuse
  Societal norms                                                                                      family resources
                                                                        to resolve conflict
  •	Emphasis on                     •	Social isolation of                                           •	Stress produced by    •	Childhood trauma
                                      women, girls, and family        •	Acceptance of
    women’s purity                                                                                    children or in-laws
                                                                        partner violence                                    •	Witnessing GBV
    and family honor
                                    •	GBV taboo topic                                               •	Alcohol use
                                      of discussion                   •	Men hold attitudes
  •	Women and girls                                                                                                         Attitudes
                                                                        of superiority              •	Economic stress
    less valued then
                                    •	Acceptance of                     over women                                          •	Tolerance of
    men and boys
                                      significant spousal                                                                     wife beating
                                      age differences                                               Patriarchal triggers
  •	Masculinity linked                                                Alcohol abuse
    to aggression and                                                                               •	Female challenge      •	Low social support,
    dominance                                                                                         to male authority       lack of networks
                                    Lack of sanctions                 Delinquent peers
                                    •	Lack of legal and                                             •	Failure to meet       •	Lack of sufficient
  Economic factors                    moral sanctions                 Socio-demographic               gender role             personal income
  •	Level of development              for violence; lack              •	Young                         expectations
    according to varying              of enforcement of
                                                                      •	Low educational level       •	Assertions of
    development indices               existing sanctions
                                                                                                      female autonomy
  •	Poverty (economic               •	Other community
    stress)                           members do
                                      not intervene
  National
  •	Fragile, conflict or
                                    Neighborhood
    post-conflict setting           •	Male idleness

  •	Conditions of forced            •	Community violence
    displacement
                                    •	High underemployment
  •	Sexist media
                                    •	Lack of safety in
                                      public places
                                    •	Inadequate victim care;
                                      lack of institutions
                                    •	Prevalence of
                                      transactional sex




14	 The Ecological Model is a conceptual framework that consolidates three decades of thought and scholarship from multiple sectors on GBV risk
identification. The model reflected here builds on the work of Lori Heise “What works to prevent partner violence: An evidence overview.” STRIVE
Research Consortium, 2011.


W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                                    69
Annex 4: Gender-Based Violence and Sexual Exploitation and Abuse Risk As-
sessment Guidance15
Key considerations guiding gender-based violence (GBV) risk assessment should include:

  •	 What data already exist? Data on demographic and other characteristics of communities, including
     prevalence of GBV and services available, can be found in demographic health surveys and administra-
     tive statistics that police, hospitals, and judicial and social service agencies collect. Examples are listed
     in the table below.


                SOURCES FOR OBTAINING GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE (GBV)-RELATED INFORMATION16

  Prevalence of GBV                                •	Demographic health surveys (DHS)
                                                   •	Quantitative and qualitative surveys


  GBV Context (norms, attitudes,                   •	Demographic health surveys (DHS)
  legal context)                                   •	Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
                                                     Social Institutions and Gender Index (SIGI)
                                                   •	Qualitative data from NGOs
                                                   •	Policy and legal context data (see World Bank database Women, Business and the Law)
                                                   •	Perception surveys (e.g., World Values Survey, Gallup)
                                                   •	Local women’s organizations and key informants
                                                   •	International Men and Gender Equality Survey (IMAGES)
                                                   •	Quantitative and qualitative studies
                                                   •	Participatory data collection activities


  Services available for GBV                       •	Qualitative data from NGOs
  survivors                                        •	GBV Information Management System IMS
                                                   •	Local women’s organizations and key informants
                                                   •	Resource mapping activities



Because such data often already exist, new data collection efforts, formal or informal, should not be initiated to
assess GBV levels in a community affected by a World Bank project. The cost of safely and ethically collecting
representative data is high, and the effort is time consuming. Teams should try to identify the evidence regarding
the epidemiology of violence against women, children, and other vulnerable groups, including data on prevalence,
types of violence, patterns, and consequences of GBV, disaggregated according to sex (of survivor and perpetra-
tor) where possible.

  •	 What is the legal framework at the national and local levels affecting women’s rights? Examine pro-
     cedures for enforcing laws and how those laws are applied in practice. This analysis should include
     property and inheritance rights, as well as customary laws. Relevant information for this analysis is easily
     accessible through the World Bank Women Business and the Law.

  •	 What are the national, provincial, and local plans and policies related to prevention of and response
     to GBV? Current sectoral responses (e.g., health, education, justice, social) to GBV, along with any coor-
     dination mechanisms and existing budgets, should be identified and understood.


15	 Adapted from VAWG Resource Guide Integrate http://www.vawgresourceguide.org/integrate accessed June 2016
16	 As adapted from Care International. 2014. “Guidance for Gender-Based Violence (GBV) Monitoring and Mitigation within non-GBV Focused
Sectoral Programming.” http://www.care.org/sites/default/files/documents/CARE%20GBV%20M%26E%20Guidance_0.pdf




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                                          70
ANNEX 4: GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE RISK ASSESSMENT GUIDANCE



  •	 What services or programs are in place for women who experience violence? These can include med-
     ical, legal, psychological or social services for women. Teams should particularly try to assess the level
     of coordination between them.

  •	 Might the project contribute to reinforcing gender stereotypes and traditional roles? These can lead
     to greater inequalities between men and women in access to resources and economic dependence of
     women on men, thereby increasing GBV risk factors. The Task Team should add the actions required to
     prevent or mitigate this risk.

  •	 Who is already working on this issue? Potential partners and allies could include government ministries,
     civil society organizations, and other key organizations working on GBV and gender and human rights
     in the country or region. Mapping the projects they are executing and their areas of expertise may help
     inform a future referral network for the project in case of incidents. Task Teams should also endeavor to
     include the work of other World Bank sectors in mapping, particularly the Social, Urban, Rural and Re-
     silience Global Practice and Health Global Practice, which may have activities related to GBV underway.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                 71
Annex 5: Sample Codes of Conduct—Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project
Note: The following Codes of Conduct were developed for the World Bank Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project
(VAIP) currently under development, as adapted from Codes of Conduct developed by the United Nations. Three
Codes are presented here: one for the Contracting Firm, one for firm Managers, and one for individual workers.
These Codes provide a useful model for adaptation and inclusion in other projects, although there is more to learn
to assess the effectiveness of the respective tools.

     COMPANY GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILD PROTECTION CODE OF CONDUCT

The company is obliged to create and maintain an environment which prevents gender based violence (GBV)
and child abuse/exploitation (CAE) issues, and where the unacceptability of GBV and actions against children are
clearly communicated to all those engaged on the project. In order to prevent GBV and CAE, the following core
principles and minimum standards of behavior will apply to all employees without exception:

    1.	 GBV or CAE constitutes acts of gross misconduct and are therefore grounds for sanctions, penalties
        and/or termination of employment. All forms of GBV and CAE including grooming are unacceptable be
        it on the work site, the work site surroundings, or at worker’s camps. Prosecution of those who commit
        GBV or CAE will be pursued.

    2.	 Treat women, children (persons under the age of 18), and men with respect regardless of race, color,
        language, religion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth
        or other status.

    3.	 Do not use language or behavior towards women, children and men that is inappropriate, harassing,
        abusive, sexually provocative, demeaning or culturally inappropriate.

    4.	 Sexual activity with children under 18—including through digital media—is prohibited. Mistaken belief
        regarding the age of a child and consent from the child is not a defense.

    5.	 Sexual favors or other forms of humiliating, degrading or exploitative behavior is prohibited.

    6.	 Sexual interactions between contractor’s and consultant’s employees at any level and member of the
        communities surrounding the work place that are not agreed to with full consent by all parties involved
        in the sexual act are prohibited (see definition of consent above). This includes relationships involving
        the withholding/promise of actual provision of benefit (monetary or non-monetary) to community
        members in exchange for sex – such sexual activity is considered “non-consensual” within the scope
        of this Code.

    7.	 All staff, volunteers, consultants and sub-contractors are highly encouraged to report suspected or
        actual GBV and/or CAE by a fellow worker, whether in the same contracting firm or not. Reports must
        be made in accordance with Standard Reporting Procedures.

    8.	 All employees are required to attend an induction training course prior to commencing work on site to
        ensure they are familiar with the GBV and CAE Code of Conduct.

    9.	 All employees must attend a mandatory training course once a month for the duration of the contract
        starting from the first induction training prior to commencement of work to reinforce the understand-
        ing of the institutional GBV and CAE Code of Conduct.

    10.	 All employees will be required to sign an individual Code of Conduct confirming their agreement to
         support GBV and CAE activities.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                        72
ANNEX 5: SAMPLE CODES OF CONDUCT—VANUATU AVIATION INVESTMENT PROJECT



I do hereby acknowledge that I have read the foregoing Code of Conduct, do agree to comply with the standards
contained therein and understand my roles and responsibilities to prevent and respond to GBV and CAE. I under-
stand that any action inconsistent with this Code of Conduct or failure to take action mandated by this Code of
Conduct may result in disciplinary action.



		                      FOR THE COMPANY

		                      Signed by ____________________

		Title: _________________________

		Date: _________________________




     MANAGER’S GENDER BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILD PROTECTION CODE OF CONDUCT

Managers at all levels have particular responsibilities to create and maintain an environment that prevents GBV
and CAE. They need to support and promote the implementation of the Company Codes of Conduct. To that end,
they must adhere to the Manager’s Codes of Conduct and also sign the Individual Codes of Conduct. This commits
them to support and develop systems that facilitate the implementation of this action plan and maintain a GBV-
free and child-safe work environment. These responsibilities include but are not limited to:

Mobilization

    1.	 Establish a GBV and CAE Compliance Team (GCCT) from the contractor’s and consultant’s staff to
        write an Action Plan that will implement the GBV and CAE Codes of Conduct.

    2.	 The Action Plan shall, as a minimum, include the

            i.	 Standard Reporting Procedure to report GBV and CAE issues through the project Griev-
                ance Response Mechanism (GRM);

            ii.	 Accountability Measures to protect confidentiality of all involved; and,

            iii.	 Response Protocol applicable to GBV survivors/survivors and perpetrators.

    3.	 Coordinate and monitor the development of the Action Plan and submit for review to the VPMU and
        TFSU safeguards teams, as well as the World Bank prior to mobilization.

    4.	 Update the Action Plan to reflect feedback and ensure the Action Plan is carried out in its entirety.

    5.	 Provide appropriate resources and training opportunities for capacity building so members of the
        GCCT feel confident in performing their duties. Participation in the GCCT will be recognized in employ-
        ee’s scope of work and performance evaluations.

    6.	 Ensure that contractor, consultant and client staff are familiar with the VAIP GRM and that they can use
        it to anonymously report concerns over GBV and CAE (See Section 4.2 in the Action Plan).

    7.	 Hold quarterly update meetings with the GCCT to discuss ways to strengthen resources and GBV and
        CAE support for employees and community members.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  73
ANNEX 5: SAMPLE CODES OF CONDUCT—VANUATU AVIATION INVESTMENT PROJECT



    8.	 In compliance with applicable laws and to the best of your abilities, prevent perpetrators of sexual
        exploitation and abuse from being hired, re-hired or deployed. Use background and criminal reference
        checks for all employees.

    9.	 Ensure that when engaging in partnership, sub-grant or sub-recipient agreements, these agreements
        a) incorporate this Code of Conduct as an attachment; b) include the appropriate language requiring
        such contracting entities and individuals, and their employees and volunteers to comply with this Code
        of Conduct; and c) expressly state that the failure of those entities or individuals, as appropriate, to
        take preventive measures against GBV and CAE, to investigate allegations thereof, or to take corrective
        actions when GBV and/or CAE has occurred, shall constitute grounds for sanctions and penalties.

Training

    1.	 All managers are required to attend an induction manager training course prior to commencing work
        on site to ensure that they are familiar with their roles and responsibilities in upholding the GBV and
        CAE Codes of Conduct. This training will be separate from the induction training course required of all
        employees and will provide managers with the necessary understanding and technical support needed
        to begin to develop the Action Plan for addressing GBV and CAE issues.

    2.	 Provide time during work hours to ensure that direct reports attend the mandatory VAIP facilitated
        induction GBV and CAE training required of all employees prior to commencing work on site.

    3.	 Ensure that direct reports attend the monthly mandatory refresher training course required of all em-
        ployees to combat increased risk of GBV and CAE during civil works.

    4.	 Managers are required to attend and assist with the VAIP facilitated monthly training courses for all
        employees. Managers will be required to introduce the trainings and announce the self-evaluations.

    5.	 Collect satisfaction surveys to evaluate training experiences and provide advice on improving the ef-
        fectiveness of training.

Prevention

    1.	 All managers and employees shall receive a clear written statement of the company’s requirements
        with regards to preventing GBV and CAE in addition to the training.

    2.	 Managers must verbally and in writing explain the company and individual codes of conduct to all di-
        rect reports.

    3.	 All managers and employees must sign the individual ‘Code of Conduct for GBV and CAE’, including
        acknowledgment that they have read and agree with the code of conduct.

    4.	 To ensure maximum effectiveness of the Codes of Conduct, managers are required to prominently
        display the Company and Individual Codes of Conduct in clear view in public areas of the work space.
        Examples of areas include waiting, rest and lobby areas of sites, canteen areas, health clinics.

    5.	 All posted and distributed copies of the Company and Individual Codes of Conduct should be translat-
        ed into the appropriate language of use in the work site areas (ex. Bislama, French, English).

    6.	 Managers will explain the GRM process to all employees and encourage them to report suspected or
        actual GBV and/or CAE.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                  74
ANNEX 5: SAMPLE CODES OF CONDUCT—VANUATU AVIATION INVESTMENT PROJECT



    7.	 Mangers should also promote internal sensitization initiatives (e.g. workshops, campaigns, on-site
        demonstrations etc.) throughout the entire duration of their appointment in collaboration with the
        GCCT and in accordance to the Action Plan.

    8.	 Managers must provide support and resources to the GCCT to create and disseminate the internal sen-
        sitization initiatives through the Awareness-raising strategy under the Action Plan.

Response

    1.	 Managers will be required to provide input, final decisions and sign off on the Standard Reporting Pro-
        cedures and Response Protocol developed by the GCCT as part of the Action Plan.

    2.	 Once signed off, managers will uphold the Accountability Measures set forth in the Action Plan to
        maintain the confidentiality of all employees who report or (allegedly) perpetrate incidences of GBV
        and CAE (unless a breach of confidentiality is required to protect persons or property from serious
        harm or where required by law).

    3.	 If a manager develops concerns or suspicions regarding any form of GBV or CAE by one of his/her
        direct reports, or by an employee working for another contractor on the same work site, s/he is highly
        encouraged to report the case using the identified reporting mechanism.

    4.	 Once a sanction has been determined, the relevant manager(s) is/are expected to be personally re-
        sponsible for ensuring that the measure is effectively enforced, within a maximum timeframe of 14 days
        from the date on which the decision was made.

    5.	 Managers failing to comply with such provision can be in turn subject to disciplinary measures, to be
        determined and enacted by the company’s CEO, Managing Director or equivalent highest-ranking man-
        ager. Those measures may include:

            i.	 Informal warning

            ii.	 Formal warning

            iii.	 Additional Training

            iv.	 Loss of up to one week’s salary.

            v.	 Suspension of employment (without payment of salary), for a minimum period of 1 month
                up to a maximum of 6 months.

            vi.	Termination of employment.

    6.	 Ultimately, failure to effectively respond to GBV and CAE cases on the work site by the contractor’s
        managers or CEO may provide grounds for legal actions by authorities.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                 75
ANNEX 5: SAMPLE CODES OF CONDUCT—VANUATU AVIATION INVESTMENT PROJECT



I do hereby acknowledge that I have read the foregoing Code of Conduct, do agree to comply with the standards
contained therein and understand my roles and responsibilities to prevent and respond to GBV and CAE. I under-
stand that any action inconsistent with this Code of Conduct or failure to take action mandated by this Code of
Conduct may result in disciplinary action.



		                      FOR THE EMPLOYER

		                      Signed by ____________________

		Title: _________________________

		Date: _________________________



     INDIVIDUAL GENDER BASED VIOLENCE AND CHILD PROTECTION CODE OF CONDUCT

I, ______________________________, acknowledge that preventing gender based violence (GBV) and child
abuse/exploitation (CAE) are important. GBV or CAE activities constitute acts of gross misconduct and are there-
fore grounds for sanctions, penalties or termination of employment. All forms of GBV or CAE are unacceptable
be it on the work site, the work site surroundings, or at worker’s camps. Prosecution of those who commit GBV or
CAE will be pursued as appropriate.

I agree that while working on the VAIP project, I will:

  •	 Consent to police background check.

  •	 Treat women, children (persons under the age of 18), and men with respect regardless of race, color,
     language, religion, political or other opinion, national, ethnic or social origin, property, disability, birth
     or other status.

  •	 Not use language or behavior towards women, children or men that is inappropriate, harassing, abusive,
     sexually provocative, demeaning or culturally inappropriate.

  •	 Not participate in sexual activity with children—including grooming or through digital media. Mistaken
     belief regarding the age of a child and consent from the child is not a defense.

  •	 Not engage in sexual favors or other forms of humiliating, degrading or exploitative behavior.

  •	 Not have sexual interactions with members of the communities surrounding the work place and work-
     er’s camps that are not agreed to with full consent by all parties involved in the sexual act (see definition
     of consent above). This includes relationships involving the withholding or promise of actual provision
     of benefit (monetary or non-monetary) to community members in exchange for sex—such sexual activ-
     ity is considered “non-consensual” within the scope of this Code.

  •	 Attend and actively partake in training courses related to HIV/AIDS, GBV and CAE as requested by my
     employer.

  •	 Report through the GRM or to my manager suspected or actual GBV and/or CAE by a fellow worker,
     whether in my company or not, or any breaches of this code of conduct.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                     76
ANNEX 5: SAMPLE CODES OF CONDUCT—VANUATU AVIATION INVESTMENT PROJECT



With regard to children under the age of 18:

  •	 Wherever possible, ensure that another adult is present when working in the proximity of children.

  •	 Not invite unaccompanied children into my home, unless they are at immediate risk of injury or in phys-
     ical danger.

  •	 Not sleep close to unsupervised children unless absolutely necessary, in which case I must obtain my
     supervisor’s permission, and ensure that another adult is present if possible.

  •	 Use any computers, mobile phones, or video and digital cameras appropriately, and never to exploit or
     harass children or to access child pornography through any medium (see also “Use of children’s images
     for work related purposes”).

  •	 Refrain from physical punishment or discipline of children.

  •	 Refrain from hiring children for domestic or other labor which is inappropriate given their age or devel-
     opmental stage, which interferes with their time available for education and recreational activities, or
     which places them at significant risk of injury.

  •	 Comply with all relevant local legislation, including labor laws in relation to child labor.

Use of children’s images for work related purposes

When photographing or filming a child for work related purposes, I must:

  •	 Before photographing or filming a child, assess and endeavor to comply with local traditions or restric-
     tions for reproducing personal images.

  •	 Before photographing or filming a child, obtain informed consent from the child and a parent or guard-
     ian of the child. As part of this I must explain how the photograph or film will be used.

  •	 Ensure photographs, films, videos and DVDs present children in a dignified and respectful manner and
     not in a vulnerable or submissive manner. Children should be adequately clothed and not in poses that
     could be seen as sexually suggestive.

  •	 Ensure images are honest representations of the context and the facts.

  •	 Ensure file labels do not reveal identifying information about a child when sending images electronically.

I understand that it is my responsibility to use common sense and avoid actions or behaviors that could be con-
strued as GBV or CAE or breach this code of conduct. I do hereby acknowledge that I have read the foregoing Code
of Conduct, do agree to comply with the standards contained therein and understand my roles and responsibilities
to prevent and respond to GBV and CAE. I understand that any action inconsistent with this Code of Conduct or
failure to take action mandated by this Code of Conduct may result in disciplinary action and may affect my ongo-
ing employment.



		                      Signed by ____________________

		Title: _________________________

		Date: _________________________



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                 77
Annex 6: Draft Protocol for World Bank Staff Reporting to Bank Management
on Allegations of Sexual Exploitation and Abuse by Personnel Associated with
a World Bank-Financed Investment Operations
NOTE: Reporting measures are illustrative and based on reporting tools developed by UNICEF. Comprehensive
guidance on sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) reporting to be developed.

ALLEGATIONS MUST BE REPORTED TO WORLD BANK MANAGEMENT

  •	 All World Bank staff have a duty to report to their World Bank manager and, depending on severity of
     the incident, senior management any allegations of sexual exploitation and abuse by personnel affil-
     iated with a World Bank investment operation. Reports must be made urgently once an allegation is
     received. The Report may come from the Government’s project grievance redress mechanism (GRM),
     the community, the contractor, the Supervisory Engineer, or directly from the complainant. The steps for
     staff reporting are set out below.

  •	 Reporting allows World Bank management to ensure that the Borrower, using the systems embedded
     in the project, is taking appropriate steps to help affected individuals involved, to stop any on-going
     exploitation and abuse, and to trigger appropriate investigations and possible referrals to law enforce-
     ment.

WHO MUST REPORT WHAT, WHEN, AND TO WHOM?

  •	 Who must report? “World Bank Staff” means, for these purposes, all World Bank staff members and any
     individuals with short-term consultancy contracts with the Bank. Project-affiliated Personnel means, for
     these purposes, government partners responsible for project implementation and any consultants and
     contractors hired under Bank-financed investment operations.

  •	 What must be reported? Allegations of SEA by Project Personnel of any members of communities
     affected by World Bank operations, including target beneficiaries; wider project-affected populations
     in surrounding communities; and any individual workers or any contractors hired under Bank-financed
     operations must be reported. Given the nature of the actions involved, all allegations should be report-
     ed. However, making an allegation in bad faith against someone or embellishing an allegation is strictly
     prohibited; appropriate steps will be taken against anyone who does so.

     »» “Sexual exploitation and abuse” is a form of GBV, defined as any actual or attempted abuse of a position
        of vulnerability, differential power, or trust for sexual purposes, including, but not limited to, profiting
        monetarily, socially, or politically from the sexual exploitation of another. Acts of SEA may involve actual
        or threatened violence or inducements such as protection, food, shelter, or the like in exchange for sex.
        An analysis of whether such conduct meets the technical definitions can occur at a later phase of the
        process.

     »» “Child sexual abuse” is defined according to the age of the victim. It includes different forms of sexual
        violence, including explicit force or coercion and cases in which the victim cannot give consent because
        of his or her age. The United Nations considers all sexual activity with someone younger than 18 to be
        sexual abuse (United Nations A/70/729). Allegations involving sexual activities of Project-affiliated Per-
        sonnel with someone who appears or claims to be younger than 18 must be reported.

  •	 When Must the Allegations Be Reported? Allegations must be reported urgently once they are re-
     ceived. The maximum time frames for reporting are set out in the box below.

  •	 To Whom Must the Report Be Made? The GRM reporting protocols should ensure that initial reports are



W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                      78
ANNEX 6: DRAFT PROTOCOL FOR WORLD BANK STAFF REPORTING TO BANK MANAGEMENT ON ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL
EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE BY PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH A WORLD BANK-FINANCED INVESTMENT OPERATIONS


     made directly to the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and to the Project Task Team Leader (TTL). The
     TTL has an obligation to then report to the TTL’s Practice Manager and to inform the Country Manage-
     ment Unit(CMU). Depending on the severity of the allegation, a decision should be made whether to es-
     calate the report to higher levels of senior management to develop an appropriate response. Depending
     on the nature of the incident, the TTL and PIU should also report to appropriate Borrower focal points.
     The Bank Management reporting protocols from there are set out in the matrix below.

  •	 What Actions Should Follow Reporting? A reporting protocol should be developed to guide Task Teams
     and Country Management Units in working with the Borrower on immediate and follow-up actions to
     ensure timely, confidential, survivor-centered care for survivors if desired and appropriate; to provide
     adequate protection for survivors or those submitting reports; and to involve law enforcement if appro-
     priate. As a guiding principle, global best practice advocates that access to medical support services be
     provided to sexual assault survivors within 72 hours of the incident. Response protocols should adhere
     to global best practices.

SPECIAL NOTES:

  •	 If teams are in doubt about whether something must be reported, it should be reported.

  •	 The World Bank expects that its Government partners and donors, civil society implementing partners
     (local and international), vendors and suppliers, and organizations with corporate consulting contracts
     for Bank-financed activities and the employees of all of these will also report such allegations to the
     World Bank.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                79
ANNEX 6: DRAFT PROTOCOL FOR WORLD BANK STAFF REPORTING TO BANK MANAGEMENT ON ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL
EXPLOITATION AND ABUSE BY PERSONNEL ASSOCIATED WITH A WORLD BANK-FINANCED INVESTMENT OPERATIONS



                                                                      REPORTING STEPS

  STEP 1

  Immediately after receiving an allegation of actual, attempted, or threatened, sexual exploitation and
  abuse by personnel associated with a World Bank-financed Project, Personnel must inform the PIU and the
  Project TTL.
  •	Ideally, the allegation or complaint will be recorded in the GRM system to
    trigger the appropriate response protocol for survivors.
  •	Within 24 hours of receiving notification, PIU and World Bank should initiate the protocol for survivor-
    centered care for significant incidents with identified implementing partners; if partners have not been
    identified, a technical expert will be consulted or deployed to identify entry points for access to services.

  STEP 2

  Within 24 hours after he or she receives the report, the TTL must report the allegation to the Practice
  Manager, copying the Sector Director, as well as to the Country Management Unit, including the Country
  Director, Country Manager/Representative, and the senior operations officer.
  •	The report must be made in writing and make available all relevant information except the names and
    identifying information of the survivor or reporter, which must be removed from all written documents
    and communications; the TTL is to retain that information (if known) under strict confidentiality.
  •	The TTL should also inform the social development specialist or other designated staff
    with technical expertise (e.g., Senior GBV Advisor within the Gender CCSA) to provide
    guidance on potential steps for investigation that the Borrower must take.

  STEP 3

  Within [24 hours] after he or she receives notification of incidence of SEA, the Sector Director reviews
  the information and decides, using his or her best judgment, whether to inform World Bank Senior
  Management and the associated Vice President. The Sector Director should consider the severity and type of
  the incident when making this decision. Cases requiring immediate VP-level notification include:
  •	Any incidence of physical or sexual assault, including rape, involving a child (i.e. anyone younger than 18)
  •	Any incidence of rape
  •	Any incident resulting in severe physical injury, harm or death

  The Sector Director and Practice Manager, upon advice of and with specific guidance of the World Bank Country
  Director, informs appropriate Government authorities and, when relevant, contractors or implementing partners.

  STEP 4

  The TTL should confer with the Practice Management team, the Project’s Social Development Specialist,
  with the CMU and other relevant staff as appropriate to identify steps for investigation.
  •	Depending on the severity of the allegation, an appropriate technical expert should be identified for deployment
    to ensure appropriate investigation of the reported incident within [two weeks of receiving the report].
  •	For severe allegations, particularly those involving rape and sexual assault,
    a technical expert should be identified [within 48 hours].
  •	World Bank and PIU staff should not under any circumstance attempt to investigate allegations or
    interview survivors or reporters directly. Interviews should be conducted only by technical specialists with
    background and expertise in the ethical and confidential investigation of incidence of SEA and GBV.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E                      80
BIBLIOGRAPHY




Bibliography
Alaggia, R. 2005. Disclosing the Trauma of Child Sexual Abuse: A Gender Analysis. Journal of Loss and Trauma:
International Perspectives on Stress and Coping 10 (5): 453–470.

Arango, Diana J., Matthew Morton, Floriza Gennari, Sveinung Kiplesund, Mary Ellsburg. “Interventions to Prevent
or Reduce Violence Against Women And Girls: A systematic Review of Reviews.” Women’s Voice and Agency Re-
search Series 2014 No. 10. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ehrensaft MK, P Cohen, J Brown, E Smailes, H Chen, JG Johnson. 2010. Intergenerational Transmission of Partner
Violence: A 20-Year Prospective Study. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 71: 741–753.

Ellsberg M, L Heise. 2005. “Researching Violence Against Women: A Practical Guide for Researchers and Activ-
ists.” World Health Organization, PATH, Washington DC.

Gómez E, B Cifuentes, MI Ross. 2010. Previniendo el maltrato infantil: Descripción psicosocial de usuarios de pro-
gramas de intervencion breve en Chile. Universitas Psychologica 9 (3): 823–839.

Heise, Lori. 2011. “What Works to Prevent Partner Violence: An Evidence Overview.” Geneva: STRIVE Research
Consortium.

Inspection Panel and World Bank. 2016. “Transport Sector Development Project—Additional Financing (P121097):
Investigation Report.” INSP/106710-UG. World Bank, Washington, DC.

IASC (Inter-Agency Standing Committee). 2015. “Guidelines for Integrating Gender-Based Violence Interventions
in Humanitarian Actions: Reducing Risk, Promoting Resilience and Aiding Recovery.” IASC,

——. 2016. “Protection Against Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (PSEA): Inter-Agency Cooperation in Community
Based Complaint mechanism. Global Standard Operating Procedures.” IASC,

Klugman, J., L. Hanmer, S. Twigg, T. Hasan, J. McCleary-Sills, and J. Santa Maria. 2014. Voice and Agency: Empow-
ering Women and Girls for Shared Prosperity. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Sumner, Steven A., James A. Mercy, JanetSaul, Nozipho Motsa-Nzuza, GideonKwesigabo, Robert Buluma, Louis
H. Marcelin, Hang Lina, MaryShawa, Michele Moloney-Kitts, Theresa Kilbane, ClaraSommarin, Daniela P. Ligiero,
Kathryn Brookmeyer, Laura Chiang, VeronicaLea, Juliette Lee, Howard Kress, Susan D. Hillis. 2015. Prevalence of
Sexual Violence Against Children and Use of Social Services—Seven Countries, 2007-2013. Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report 64 (21): 565 –569.

World Bank, Inter-American Development Bank, Global Women’s Institute at George Washington University and
International Center for Research on Women. 2014. “Violence Against Women and Girls Resource Guide.” www.
vawgresourceguide.org

World Bank. 2015. World Bank Group Gender Strategy (FY16-23): Gender Equality, Poverty Reduction and Inclusive
Growth. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2016a. Management Report and Recommendation in Response to the Inspection Panel Investigation Report
of the Uganda Transport Sector Development Project—Additional Financing (P121097). Washington, DC: World
Bank.

———. 2016b. “Addressing Risks and Impacts on Disadvantaged or Vulnerable Individuals or Groups.” Bank Direc-
tive. World Bank, Washington, DC.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E               81
BIBLIOGRAPHY



——. 2016c. Uganda Transport Sector Development Project—Additional Financing: Lessons Learned and Agenda
for Action. Washington, DC: World Bank.

———. 2016d. Managing the Risks of Adverse Impacts of Communities from Temporary Project Induced Labor In-
flux. OPCS and ESSAT. Washington, DC: World Bank.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Putting Women First: Ethical and Safety Recommendations for Research
on Domestic Violence Against Women. Geneva: WHO.

———. 2013. Global and Regional Estimates of Violence Against Women: Prevalence and Health Effects of Intimate
Partner Violence and Non-Partner Sexual Violence. Geneva: WHO.

United Nations. 2016. Special Measures for Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse: Report of the
Secretary General. A/70/729. New York: United Nations General Assembly.

———. 2003. Special Measures for Protection from Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse. Secretary-Generals Bul-
letin ST/SGB/2003/13. New York: United Nations.




W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E           82
W O R K I N G T O G E T H E R T O P R E V E N T S E X U A L E X P L O I TAT I O N A N D A B U S E   83
              Working Together to Prevent
            Sexual Exploitation and Abuse:
                    RECOMMENDATIONS FOR WORLD
                       BANK INVESTMENT PROJECTS




Report of the Global Gender-Based Violence Task Force

                                             JULY 31, 2017




                           T H E W O R LD B A N K G R O U P

                                            1818 H ST NW
                       WA S H I N G T O N , D C 2 0 4 3 3 U S A
                                       W O R LD B A N K . O R G
