I  4r
PH ILIPPIN E-DiSWSiTER _RISKf
FINANCE COUNTRYYNOTE
CONTEXT AND BACKGROUND
Located within the Pacific Ring of Fire-a region     growth in the country. The poor suffer from disasters
of the Pacific Ocean where most of Earth's volcanic  more than any other segment of the population. Not
eruptions and earthquakes occur-and within the       only do disasters destroy struggling households' sparse
Pacific Typhoon Belt, the Philippines is highly prone  assets and livelihoods; they make it harder for them
to devastating natural hazards. It is estimated that on  to afford essentials and hence more likely to resort
average the country is hit by 20 typhoons each year,  to negative coping strategies, such as cutting back on
and earthquakes are common as well.                  food or pulling children out of school. These practices
The financial impact of these disasters hurts efforts  lea    to     which dircl      ate     with
to reduce poverty and promote sustainable economic   luearning     slatio                        o
Typhoon Yolanda
Typhoon Yalanda hit the Philippines in November 2013. It killed 6,200 people, left 1,700 missing, and cost the country an
estimated P571.1 billion (around US$12.9 billion in December 2013) in damage and economic losses. The government
estimates that Yolanda pushed some 2.3 million people (nearly half a million households) below the poverty line, raising
the poverty rate from 41 percent to approximately 56 percent in the worst-affected areas.
Yolanda is not an isolated incident. Since 2009, the Philippines has experienced multiple highly destructive weather events.
Storms Ondloy, Pepeng, Sendlong, and Pablo claimed over 3,000 lives, affected more than 10 million people, and caused
economic damages and losses amounting to approximately US$5.7 billion.
G.GFDRR &W                                             BM3ANKGROUP
UKaid


﻿GOVERNMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES'
DISASTER RISK FINANCING
STRATEGY
The Philippine government is among the first to
develop a strategy for comprehensively managing the
costs of disasters. In 2010, through the Disaster Risk
Reduction and Management Act and the Strategic
National Action Plan for Disaster Risk Reduction,
the government adopted a proactive approach to
understanding and managing the risks faced by the
country. This includes efforts to increase its financial
resilience to disasters.
In 2015 the Department of Finance identified three  I To develop sustainable financing mechanisms
strategic priorities that would strengthen the country's  for local government units, necessary to provide
ability to absorb the financial impact of disasters across  immediate liquidity at the onset of a disaster
society:                                           III To reduce the impact on the poorest and most
I To maintain sound fiscal health at the national    vulnerable and prevent them from falling into a
government level, necessary to support long-term   cycle of poverty, while also shielding the near-poor
rehabilitation and reconstruction needs           from slipping into poverty.
OBJECTIVE: Improve the financing of post-disaster emergency response, recovery, and reconstruction needs.
WHAT: Access to immediate liquidity is crucial to support relief and early recovery operations, whereas the
financing of reconstruction usually starts several months after a disaster, giving the government more time to
mobilize the required resources. To minimize the cost of funding and optimize efficiency and timing, different risk
financing instruments should be combined to protect against events of different frequencies and severities.
HOW: To carry out this strategy, the Department of Finance is working toward the following key steps:
*  Quantify and clarify the contingent liabilities facing the government. This is done by gathering and
developing the necessary risk information to analyze likely government spending for future disasters.
*  Set up access to contingent financing to protect against moderate disasters. This provides rapid financing
when a disaster exceeds the capacity of calamity fund reserves. Pre-negotiated rates and conditions ensure
that such loans are cost-effective and immediately available when needed.
*  Use risk transfer to access international private reinsurance and capital markets. This step improves
the government's disaster response capacity by providing immediate liquidity following rare but potentially
devastating disasters.
4i* FrDRR GWOMRLBANKGROUP
2 UK aid


﻿OBJECTIVE: Provide local governments with predictable and rapid funds for post-disaster recovery and
reconstruction efforts.
WHAT: Local governments often absorb a significant share of the public cost of disaster recovery and reconstruction.
Yet often they find themselves unable-or without the appropriate incentives-to finance this share, and the national
government has to bridge the resulting funding gaps. The Department of Finance and the Department of Interior are
working with local governments to better address both their immediate and longer-term post-disaster financing needs.
HOW: Two key steps are being taken as part of this strategy:
*  Establish Local Disaster Insurance Fund. The government is currently working with provinces to establish
a catastrophe risk insurance facility to improve access to quick liquidity for emergency response and early
recovery. This approach could significantly reduce the cost of premiums for catastrophe risk insurance, and by
accumulating financial reserves over time, it would allow participating local government units to finance first
losses from regional reserves. A pilot is currently being finalized.
*  Insure public assets to help transfer risk to specialized risk carriers. Local government units are legally
required to purchase insurance from the state-owned Government Service Insurance System, but currently
only around 30 percent of local government properties are actually insured. To improve compliance, the
government is providing local government units with standardized policies to be adopted by all public
agencies.
OBJECTIVE: Empower poor and vulnerable households and small and medium enterprises to quickly restore their
livelihoods after a disaster
WHAT: The poor are hit hardest by disasters, and the private sector often bears the brunt of the financial impact
in absolute terms. It is mostly micro, small, and medium enterprises-those with limited or no access to the formal
financial sector-that suffer the financial impact of major disasters like Typhoon Yolanda.
HOW: The government will work toward two priorities:
*  Link the disaster risk financing and social protection agendas. The government is working to establish a
post-disaster emergency income support program by integrating a post-disaster scalability component in the
national conditional cash transfer program.
*  Through public-private partnerships, expand private property catastrophe risk insurance and broaden
agricultural insurance and micro-insurance. The government will investigate appropriate policies and
regulations to incentivize the uptake of insurance, including establishing standard insurance terms and
conditions. It may also create a facility to manage catastrophe risk insurance policies for the retail sector.
GFDRR &W                    MIaKOROUP
UKaid


﻿RISK ANALYTICS TO SUPPORT                         Markets (GFDRR-GFMDR) Disaster Risk Financing
DECISION MAKING ABOUT                             and Insurance team. Contributions from   donors
FINANCIAL PROTECTION                              like GFDRR and the Department for International
Development (DFID), and close collaboration with
The development of the national disaster risk financing  partners like the Japan International Cooperation
strategy and its implementation require well-informed  Agency (JICA) and Asian Development Bank (ADB),
decisions based on risk data and sound analysis.  have provided important technical and financial
In 2014, with the assistance of the World Bank, the  support for the government of Philippines' disaster
government of the Philippines completed its first
nationwide catastrophe risk assessment. Offering an  In particular the WBG is supporting the government of
overview of potential disaster losses to public and  the Philippines through:
private assets, this assessment provides the necessary
foundation for the government's national disaster   financing servismincludecontige     Risk
risk financing and insurance strategy, and makes it  Management Development Policy Loan with a
possible to analyze the costs and benefits of various  Catastrophe Deferred Drawdown Option (CATDDO)-
risk financing instruments as well as their optimal  in the amount of US$500 million was approved by
combination.                                        the board in December 2015. This mechanism
The government will continue to invest in risk analytics  and o e e an direc or   effrts foling
through three priorities:a major disaster. And a 2017 catastrophe risk
" Build an improved asset exposure database and     insurance program providing US$206 million in
historical loss database. This will provide better  coverage against losses from major typhoons and
information on the exposure to natural disasters of  2articip ati p ove    nst lsses fro
public and private buildings and infrastructure. In
particular, the databases will be expanded to include
local government assets and their associated loss data.  t  loca  ser  inue  fun  asmento
* Refine the catastrophe risk model that was
developed for the national level. This will allow  above, together with acting as reinsurance carriers
for catastrophe risk assessment below the provincial  marts  thrgh  the o l Bn   Treasury,
level to inform disaster risk finance at the local level.  inteti  o  te inrfiscal k m agm  t,
* Develop financial and actuarial tools to inform   stegtin      catasters insuransu      eio
future disaster risk financing and insurance      adregtin, andspprtinuthe establismn
decisions.
of the post-disaster emergency income support
program through the country's conditional cash
WORLD BANK'S ROLE                                   transfer program. The Bank is also supporting Risk
The World Bank has a strong, comprehensive          Analytics informing the other priorities.
engagement with the government of the Philippines    Convening  services  include  support to the
on disaster risk finance and insurance. It offers   Department of Finance in shaping DRF as a key
support through advisory and financial services, led  welia under the 'unrabl 20' cliencha
by the joint Global Facility for Disaster Reduction  i  e   a  iredd  the  Pline ite firste
and  Recovery-Global Practice for Finance and                      y                        y
an4Isuane                                            em.CotrbuinsfrmPonr
ieGFDRR         andteDaMKRment fo     7nentoa
Devlomet DFD) an  cos cllbaionwt
pateslk4h                                               aa    nentoa       oprto


