        NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE
        SUMMARY DOCUMENT
        Environmental & Social Characteristics of a Key River Basin
        in Lao PDR




 ກຊສ
MONRE
 NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE
   SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Environmental and Social Characteristics of a Key River Basin
                       in Lao PDR
About IFC
IFC, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global
development institution focused on the private sector in emerging
markets. Working with more than 2,000 businesses worldwide,
we use our capital, expertise, and influence to create markets
and opportunities in the toughest areas of the world. In FY16, we
delivered a record $19 billion in long-term financing for developing
countries, leveraging the power of the private sector to help end
poverty and boost shared prosperity. For more information, visit
www.ifc.org.




© International Finance Corporation 2017. All rights reserved.
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20433
Internet: www.ifc.org

The material in this work is copyrighted. Copying and/or
transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may
be a violation of applicable law. IFC encourages dissemination
of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce
portions of the work promptly, and when the reproduction is for
educational and non-commercial purposes, without a fee, subject
to such attributions and notices as we may reasonably require.

IFC does not guarantee the accuracy, reliability or completeness
of the content included in this work, or for the conclusions or
judgments described herein, and accepts no responsibility or
liability for any omissions or errors (including, without limitation,
typographical errors and technical errors) in the content
whatsoever or for reliance thereon. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement
or acceptance of such boundaries. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or
the governments they represent.

The contents of this work are intended for general informational
purposes only and are not intended to constitute legal, securities,
or investment advice, an opinion regarding the appropriateness
of any investment, or a solicitation of any type. IFC or its affiliates
may have an investment in, provide other advice or services to,
or otherwise have a financial interest in, certain of the companies
and parties.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights,
should be addressed to IFC’s Corporate Relations Department,
2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20433.

International Finance Corporation is an international organization
established by Articles of Agreement among its member
countries, and a member of the World Bank Group. All names,
logos and trademarks are the property of IFC and you may not
use any of such materials for any purpose without the express
written consent of IFC. Additionally, “International Finance
Corporation” and “IFC” are registered trademarks of IFC and are
protected under international law.
                                    Table of Contents


    LIST OF TABLES															4
    LIST OF FIGURES															4
    LIST OF BOXES															4
    ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS													5
    MESSAGE FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCE (DWR)								6
    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS														7
	
    THE NAM OU HIGHLIGHTS														8



    1.0 THE NAM OU JOURNEY: AN INTRODUCTION											11                           	
    	1.1 NAM OU IN BRIEF														12
    	1.2 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NAM OU IN THE MEKONG									14


    2.0 METHODOLOGY FOR DEVELOPMENT OF THE NAM OU RIVER BASIN Profile						   17   	
    	NAM OU FISH															20


    3.0 RIVER BASIN CHARACTERISTICS (BASELINE DATA)										25                    	
    	3.1 PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS & GEOGRAPHIC SETTING									26
    	     Physical characteristics													26
    	     Climate & Meteorology													27
    	     Nam Ou Water Resources												28
    	     Wetlands & Associated Waterbodies											30
    	3.2 BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES													31
    	     Ecological Characteristics of the River											                  31
    	     Habitat Surveys														31
    	     Fisheries & Aquatic Resources												33
    	     Terrestrial Resources													38
    	3.3 PEOPLE & LIVELIHOODS													41
    	     People of the Nam Ou Basin												                              41
    	     Livelihoods														46


    4.0 WATER RESOURCE USE & MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES									49                      	


    5.0 THE FUTURE OF THE NAM OU BASIN												55                               	
    	5.1 CHANGES IN WATER FLOW PATTERNS											56
    	5.2 CHANGES IN LAND USE & SOIL EROSION										56
    	5.3 CHANGES IN SEDIMENT TRANSPORT											58
    	5.4 CHANGES IN FISHERIES RESOURCES & AQUATIC HABITATS								58
    	5.5 WATER QUALITY														62
    	5.6 CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON WATER RESOURCES									62
    	   5.7 CHANGES IN LIVELIHOODS FOR PEOPLE LIVING ON THE RIVER								     63


    6.0 RIVER BASIN GOVERNANCE & MANAGEMENT										67                            	

    	   6.1 INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE NAM OU BASIN’S MANAGEMENT						   68
    	6.2 THE ROLE & CAPACITY OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES 										68

                                                                                   	
    7.0 CONCLUSIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS											71


    8.0 REFERENCES															75                                                	



                                                                                       3
                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
LIST OF TABLES

Table 1: Catchment area (km²) and estimated average annual flow rate (m³/s) for the Nam Ou Basin and its main tributaries.			         29
Table 2: Distribution of fish species by fish guilds in the Nam Ou Basin.										                                                   34
Table 3: Number of fish species reported at 8 villages from the Nam Ou and associated tributaries. 						                             34
Table 4: Stream health assessment –  littoral macro-invertebrate sampling (miniSASS) conducted on the Nam Ou Basin and tributaries. 	 36
Table 5: The Nam Ou Basin demographics – Phongsaly, Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang.							                                               41
Table 6: Main livelihood activity of working-age population by zone in the Nam Ou Basin.							                                       46
Table 7: Number of fishing households in the Nam Ou Basin.											47
Table 8: Specifications for the 7 Sinohydro hydropower projects in the Nam Ou Basin. 								                                         51
Table 9: Key biological assets in the Nam Ou Basin which will be impacted by hydropower developments.					                            64
Table 10: Key social assets in the Nam Ou Basin which will be impacted by hydropower developments.					                               64




LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1: The Nam Ou Basin, including provincial and district boundaries, and location of existing and planned hydropower dams.		  13
Figure 2: Villages selected within a 5-km corridor in Zones 1 to 5 for developing the Nam Ou River Basin Profile.				              23
Figure 3: Elevation and river width profile of the Nam Ou.												26
Figure 4: Long term mean monthly rainfall at Luang Prabang, Phongsaly and Oudomxay.							                                         28
Figure 5: Average monthly water temperature and pH at Ban Hatkham since 1985 (Source MRC).						                                   30
Figure 6: Google Earth image, overlay of aquatic habitats, bank type, and bank vegetation types on island upstream of Ban Pak Ou.	 32
Figure 7: Population by sub-catchment in the Nam Ou Basin.											43
Figure 8: Poverty rate, infant mortality rate, and child malnutrition by province.									                                        45
Figure 9: Ecologically sensitive reaches in the Nam Ou River Basin.										60
Figure 10: Existing and Planned Pressures on Nam Ou River Basin.										61




LIST OF BOXES

Box 1: What is a River Basin Profile?															12
Box 2: Significance of the Nam Ou in the Mekong													14
Box 3: The Nam Ou Fish Poster															19
Box 4: Case Studies & Zones in the Nam Ou Basin													22
Box 5: Karst & Caves in the Nam Ou Basin														27
Box 6: Flood Events & other Disasters														28
Box 7: Hydrology – Key characteristics (HKEC 2009) 												29
Box 8: Ecological Characteristics of the Nam Ou Basin												31
Box 9: Habitat survey – Ban Vangle, Pak Ou														31
Box 10: Fisheries Resources in the Nam Ou Basin													33
Box 11: Littoral macroinvertebrates bio-survey													35
Box 12: Freshwater Prawn Fishery in the Nam Ou Basin												37
Box 13: River Weed in the Nam Ou															37
Box 14: Animals of Conservation Significance (Endangered Species) in the Nam Ou Basin							 39
Box 15: Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP) in the Nam Ou Basin											39
Box 16: National protected areas															40
Box 17: People in the Nam Ou Basin															42
Box 18: Environmental Flows in the Nam Ou Basin													57
Box 19: Mapping ecologically sensitive areas & human pressures on the Nam Ou Basin								   59




4
                                                NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
ACRONYMS & ABBREVIATIONS

ADB			     Asian Development Bank
CIA			     Cumulative Impact Assessment
COD			     Chemical Oxygen Demand
DESIA			   Department of Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
DO			Dissolved Oxygen
DONRE 		   District Natural Resources and Environment Offices
DWR			     Department of Water Resources
ESIA 			   Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESL			     Earth Systems Lao
FCZ			     Fish Conservation Zone
FGD			     Focus Group Discussions
FIPD			    Forest Inventory and Planning Department
GIS			     Geographic Information Systems
GOL			     Government of Lao PDR
HKEC			    Hydrochina Kunming Engineering Corporation
IBA			     Important Bird Areas
IDOM			    IDOM SA. Construction engineering company
IFC			     International Finance Corporation
IUCN			    International Union for the Conservation of Nature
IWRM 			   Integrated water resources management
KBA			     Key Biodiversity Area
kW			Kilowatt
LECS			    Lao Expenditure and Consumption Survey
Masl			    Metres above sea level
MONRE 		   Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
MRC			     Mekong River Commission
Mt			Million tons
MW			Megawatt
NPA			     National Protected Area
NTFP 			   Non-timber Forest Products
NUOL 			   National University of Laos
OAA			     Other Aquatic Animals
PONRE 		   Provincial Natural Resources and Environment Offices
SI 			     Sinuosity Index
Total N			 Total Nitrogen
Total P			 Total Phosphorous
UNECE			   United Nations Economic Commission for Europe
WWF			     World Wide Fund for Nature




                                                                                   5
                                   NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
    MESSAGE FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF WATER RESOURCES (DWR),
    MINISTRY OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ENVIRONMENT (MONRE)


    The Nam Ou Basin Profile is a collective effort among various stakeholders at the central, provincial,
    district, and village levels. The Department of Water Resources (DWR) and the Provincial Offices of
    Natural Resources and Environment (PONRE) in Phongsaly, Oudomxay and Luang Prabang see the
    importance of properly managing this resource-rich river basin. We worked together with relevant
    stakeholders at all levels to study the physical, economic, and social characteristics of the Nam
    Ou Basin and its potential. We hope this Profile will be used as a reference and baseline data for
    the sustainable development of the Nam Ou Basin to protect its natural resources, support socio-
    economic development in the country, and improve the livelihoods of people living around the
    basin.

    The DWR, a Secretariat of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) responsible
    for water resources management nationwide, PONRE, and the District Offices of Natural Resources
    and Environment (DONRE) in Phongsaly, Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang have agreed with the
    data, information, and approaches set out in this Profile. We expect that relevant stakeholders
    will use this Profile for the planning, management, and development of the Nam Ou Basin. The
    primary data of this Profile were collected through a field survey between January and February
    2016, while the secondary data and information were collected from relevant sectors at all levels
    between 2013 and 2016.

    We would like to sincerely thank the consultants and technical experts from different sectors at
    both the central and local levels for sharing their knowledge, data, information, time, and efforts
    in the preparation of this Profile. Special thanks to the International Finance Corporation for its
    technical assistance and support, and the Australian and Japanese governments for their financial
    assistance in its development.




                                               Director General, Department of Water Resources
               Phongsaly Head of PONRE, Oudomxay Head of PONRE, Luang Prabang Head of PONRE




6
                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This Profile of the Nam Ou River Basin is the result of the collaborative effort of many people. The
two principal authors of this Nam Ou River Basin Profile were the IFC consultants, Dr. Lilao Bouapao,
who covered the socio-economic and water governance aspects and Mr. Peter-John Meynell, who
covered the biophysical aspects. They were supported and guided by Mr. Thomas Boivin who was
the first international consultant to IFC initiating the Profile development process in 2013, and
who reviewed the document as it progressed, and who prepared the Synthesis document from
this more detailed Profile.

The process of developing this Profile was guided by the Core Team with the lead of Mr.
Chanthanet Bualapha, Director General, Mr. Phonesay Simmalavong, Deputy Director General,
and Ms. Sengphasouk Xayavong, Project Coordinator, and the IFC staff Ms. Kate Lazarus and Ms.
Amphavanh Sisouvanh.

There are many staff from the Provincial and Districts Offices of Natural Resources and Environment
provided important contribution throughout the process of Profile development, including
planning, primary and secondary data collection. These include Mr. Phonexay Leck (Phongsaly),
Vixay Boualaxin (Oudomxay), and Doungvut Phonthajuck (Luangprabang). The full list of members
of the team are provided at the end of the report.

There were five teams for the household and village surveys in each of the provinces and these
included the government staff from DWR, PONRE, DONRE. Five independent enumerators
contributed to the surveys and data entry, providing important inputs into the quality control and
quality assurance.

Fisheries information was derived from original research carried out by Dr. Phouvin Phousavanh of
the National University of Laos (NUOL), who developed the Guide to the Nam Ou Fish species and
the Fish Poster used in discussions with villagers, during the field surveys. Geographic Information
System (GIS) analysis and mapping was provided by Ms. Penroong Bamrungrach, Mr. Inthanongxay
Haungbundit (DWR) and Mr. Philip Knight for the mapping of ecologically sensitive areas in the
Nam Ou. We would also like to thank Pierre Dubeau for his assistance with preparation of this
summary Profile.

Without the participation of local people of the sample villages, this Profile would not have been
completed. 1,500 villagers responded in detail to the long questionnaires. Many villages chiefs,
representatives of village mass organizations, fishers, farmers, traders and ordinary villagers
participated in focus group discussions.

Funding for this Nam Ou River Basin Profile came from the Australian Government and the
Japanese Government and the overall process was implemented and managed by IFC with the
Department of Water Resources.




                                                                                                        7
                          NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
THE NAM OU                                                              The Nam Ou Basin is located within the boundaries of

   HIGHLIGHTS                                                           3 Provinces: Phongsaly, Oudomxay and Luang Prabang.
                                                                        However, not all areas of the 3 provinces fall within the
                                                                        hydrological boundaries of the Nam Ou Basin. There are
                                                                        17 Districts within the Nam Ou basin, 7 in Phongsaly, 6
                                                                        in Oudomxay and 4 in Luang Prabang. All districts in
                                                                        Phongsaly are in the Nam Ou Basin, as well as nearly all
                                                                        villages in the province. Phongsaly and Luang Prabang
                                                                        Provinces include the mainstream Nam Ou and territory




              11
                                                                        within the 5km corridor of the river; only tributaries of
                                                                        the Nam Ou are in Oudomxay Province.




                                                        3
                                                        Consists of


     Major tributaries                                                provinces of the Lao PDR:
                                                                      Phongsaly, Oudomxay and Luang Prabang.
                                                                      In 2015, the total population in these 3 provinces was 885,200.




     5,554 ha
     of water bodies
     (total area estimated)                                                                     404,094
                                                                                                people (45.7%)
                                                                                                 live        within the basin
                                                                                                             boundaries




                                                             Nam Ou
    139                                                       basin
species of fish




                              112,409 ha of agricultural land
                              over 39,000 cattle, 37,000 buffalo, and 121,000 pigs




                              14,596 km                                         2
                              of combined natural forest lands


8
                                         NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
  Field survey of
1,500                                    75                                                     Zone 1




households in villages                                                                                     Zone 2




8   case study villages,
    selected along a 5-km corridor of the
    Nam Ou River in 5 Zones
                                                                                                 Zone 5
                                                                                                                    Zone 3




                                            70%
                                                                                                      Zone 4




                       of the sampled households
                        are fishing in the Nam Ou
                       or one of its tributaries in the previous 12 months before the survey.




                              90%
                              in Zone 1
                                                                 80%
                                                                 in Zones 2 and 3




     > 5% of household heads
                           are females




                                                     Just over half of the villages surveyed in Phongsaly
                                                     (53.9%) had access to electricity. Although access is
                                                     much higher in Oudomxay (74.0%) and Luang Prabang
                                                     (71.0%), the electrification rate in these provinces is
                                                     among the lowest in the country.




                                                                                                                             9
                                  NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
We need to know more about its
[the Nam Ou’s] environment. We have
a limited knowledge of the river’s
characteristics at this point.

Phonexay Lek,
Head of Provincial Office for Natural Resources
and Environment in Phongsaly Province
               THE NAM OU JOURNEY:
                                       1.0
                 AN INTRODUCTION
The main objective of the Nam Ou River Basin Profile is to compile and present available background
information on the Nam Ou Basin, one of the most important river systems in Lao PDR. It aims to provide
baseline data for monitoring changes and comparing past and future trends for the planning and
management of: (i) water resources allocation, (ii) hydropower development, (iii) community livelihoods,
and (iv) emergency responses. The Profile was developed in collaboration with Government of Lao PDR
water resource managers at the national, provincial and district levels.

This compilation of data and information will further our understanding of the Nam Ou in relation to the
Mekong River and the knowledge gained may be applied to other river basins and sectors in Lao PDR.
Water basin managers around the country can use this Profile as a tool for developing a management plan
for the Nam Ou Basin in the future.

In addition to providing a comprehensive Profile of the Nam Ou River Basin, this document also includes
conclusions and recommendations for further action. The full version of the Profile, including all data
and information collected and analyzed, case studies, and the Nam Ou fish poster, may be obtained from
IFC’s website: ifc.org/hydroadvisory.




                                                                                                           11
                          NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
1.1                                   NAM OU IN BRIEF
The Nam Ou is one of the most important and significant tributaries
of the Lower Mekong Basin. Lying in the far north of Lao PDR with
its source near the Lao-Chinese border (Figure 1), the Nao Ou is 485                                                    Nam Ou Basin
km1 long and flows from north to south through three provinces –                Phongsaly
Phongsaly, Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang. It meets the Mekong
River about 25 km upstream from Luang Prabang city.

The Nam Ou has the largest catchment area in Lao PDR, which
includes nearly 26,000 km² of mountainous terrains and uplands,
flowing through a mostly rocky channel in a relatively narrow river
valley. There are 11 major tributaries that enter the Nam Ou along
its length, the largest of which are the Nam Phak, the Nam Bak,                       Oudomxay      Luang Prabang
and the Nam Nga; one of the tributaries, the Nam Noua, arises in
Vietnam near the town of Dien Bien Phu. Thus, the Nam Ou is a                                         Lao PDR
transboundary river of both national and international importance.
Its flow contribution to the Mekong has been estimated at
610 m3/sec, making it the third most important tributary of the
Mekong in Lao PDR.
                                                                                                 Vientiane
Over 500,000 people live in the Nam Ou Basin, the third-largest
in Lao PDR after the Xebang Hieng and Nam Ngum basins. The
river has been home to a number of cultures for several centuries,
including the Khmu, Akha, Songsiri, Hmong, Lue, and Lao ethnic
groups. Local people rely on the Nam Ou for their livelihoods,
including water supply, agriculture, fisheries, and navigation.


1
 The Nam Ou River’s length based on GIS measurements from the source, carried
out by this Profile.




             Box 1


     What is a River Basin Profile?                                              The hydropower potential of the river is being developed. Out
                                                                                 of a cascade of seven large hydropower projects, three became
     A River Basin Profile provides baseline information on                      operational during 2016 and the remaining four will be completed
     the physical, biological, social, and cultural aspects of a                 by 2020. The projects will have a combined reservoir length of
     river basin; such information can be used for the future                    350 km and an installed capacity of 1,272 megawatts (MW). The
     management and conservation of natural resources within                     Nam Ou hydropower cascade and other planned developments
     the basin. For the Nam Ou, its Profile includes a compilation               will result in significant changes to the natural state of the river,
     of available information on the river supplemented with                     which will impact the livelihoods and cultures of people in the
     primary data collected through field and household                          basin. The Nam Ou River Basin Profile is a timely effort to document
     surveys as well as case studies conducted between                           the current status of the river and provide the required baseline
     January and February 2016. The Profile provides analysis of                 information for future river basin planning and management.
     environmental and social trends in the Nam Ou over time
     and recommendations on how to address management
     challenges from ongoing and planned hydropower,
     irrigation, and other water-resource developments.

     The purpose of developing the Nam Ou River Basin Profile
     is to:

          Provide a greater understanding of the characteristics
          of the whole basin, including sub-basins.

          Provide documentation for river-basin planners.

          Enable the Government of Lao PDR, the private sector,
          local authorities, and communities to better manage
          the river and its resources for future generations.




12
                                                          NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
    Figure 1   The Nam Ou Basin, including provincial and district boundaries,
               and location of existing and planned hydropower dams.




                                                                                                                                         Code       Su b -c at c h m en t Nam e
                                                                                                                                          GO        Gnot Ou
                                                                                                                                          LGO       Lower Gnot Ou
                                                                                                                                           A        Mainstream catchment A




                                                 Nam Kha ng
                                                                                                                                           B        Mainstream catchment B

               GO                       NK                                                          VIET NAM                               C        Mainstream catchment C
                                                                                                                                           D        Mainstream catchment D
                                                                                                                                            E       Mainstream catchment E
                    (
                    !
                                                                                                                                            F       Mainstream catchment F

                                  Na m O
                                         u
                                                                     !
                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                           NB
                                                                                                                                          NBk
                                                                                                                                          NH
                                                                                                                                                    Nam Ban
                                                                                                                                                    Nam Bak
                                                                                                                                                    Nam Houn
                                  LGO
                                                                             Na                                                          NHb        Nam Hub
                                                                         A    m Ou
                                                                                                                                           NK       Nam Khang
                                                                                                                                           NL       Nam Leng
                                                                                                                                          Nna       Nam Noua
                                   NNy                                                                                                    NNg       Nam Nga


   CHINA                                             B
                                                       !
                                                       (      !
                                                              (
                                                                                            NH                                            Nny
                                                                                                                                           NP
                                                                                                                                                    Nam Ngay
                                                                                                                                                    Nam Pok
                            N                                                         Nam Houn                                            NPk       Nam Phak
                            am




                                                              g
                    a                                    en
                                  Len




                                        NL                                                              NB
                  N




                        m
                                                L




                                                                                  C
                                                                                                 Ban
                                  g




                            Hoi
                                            m




                                        Na                                                                                                    m

                                                                             !
                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                       Yo
                                                                                                    m




                                                                             !
                                                                             (
                 N am L a n


                                                                                                                                                  Ngam
                                                                     k
                                                                                                 Na




                              n                                    Po                                                              Nam
                          g eu                    NP                                                                       ua
                        N                                                    D                                        No
                                                          m




                                                                                                                                              Nam
                                                     Na
                           m
                        Na




                                                                                                                                NNa
                                                                                                                 am
                                                                                           Nam




                                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                              Na



                                                                                          !
                                                                                          (
                                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                               Ou




                            Nam
                                                                   k




                                                                                                                                               No
                                                              m Pa




                                                                                                                                                 ua




                                                Pa
                                        !
                                        (
                                                     k                       NPk
                                                                                                                               m
                                                                                                             E              Na            b
                                                                                                                                       Hu
                                                              Na




LAO PDR                                                                                                                 NHb
                                             K o




                                                 (
                                                 !
                                            m
                                                                                                         !
                                                                                                         (
                                                                                   N am




                                    Na
                                                                                                                                LEGEND
                                                                   NBk                    Bak
                                                                                                                                   (     0 -10 MW
                                                                                                                                   (     11 - 30 MW

                                                                                            Ou                                   ( 31 - 100 MW
                                             NNg
                                                                                      Na
                                                                                      (
                                                                                      !
                                                                                        m
                                                                                                    F
                                                                                                                                ( 101 - 300 MW
                                                     Ng
                                                              a
                                                              (
                                                              !                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                   (     Existing plant
                                             m
                                        Na                                                                                         !
                                                                                                                                   (     Future plant
          !
          (                                                                                                                              Main tributaries

                                ko
                                   ng
                                                                       !
                                                                       (                                                                 Nam Ou
                            e                                                                                                            Sub-catchment boundary
                    M




                                                                                                                                         Country boundary
                                                                                                                                Source:
                                                                                                    0   5 10     20
                                                                                                                                 Mekong River Commission Secretariat
                                                                                                                  km.

                                                                                                                                                                                  13
                                                         NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
1.2                                 SIGNIFICANCE OF THE NAM OU
                                    IN THE MEKONG


          Box 2


     Significance of the Nam Ou in the Mekong

     In 2009, the Mekong River Commission (MRC) initiated a series of studies to consider the significance of the tributaries of the
     Mekong. The findings confirmed the importance of the Nam Ou based on the following criteria:

     •	 Catchment size and transboundary nature – The Nam Ou, with a total area of nearly 26,000 km2, is the 10th largest river basin
        in the Lower Mekong. Approximately 95% of the river basin lies in Lao PDR and the remaining 5% is in Vietnam on the Nam
        Noua, a tributary of the Nam Ou. The source of the Nam Ou arises in Lao PDR very close to the Chinese border.

     •	 Geology – The Nam Ou has the fifth-highest proportion of limestone among Mekong tributaries, after the Nam Suong, the
        Nam Khan, the Nam Kading, and the Se Bang Fai. It also has a very high density of cave formations.

     •	 Flows – Its mean annual flow ranks seventh among Mekong tributaries, contributing about 3.5% of the Mekong’s total flow,
        including 3.5% during the wet season and 2.5% during the dry season.

     •	 Sediment load – The Nam Ou contributes about 4.8% of sediments in all the catchments of the Lower Mekong Basin, second
        in Lao only after the Nam Ngum.

     •	 Aquatic health – According to the MRC’s aquatic health index, the Nam Ou is in the top 80th percentile in terms of overall river
        health, second only to the Nam Khan and above the Nam Ngum.

     •	 Aquatic ecology – The Nam Ou ranks eighth in terms of protected areas with more than 7% its catchment within the Phou
        Den Din and Phou Hiphi National Protected Areas (NPA). It is a recognized biodiversity hotspot with a variety of endemic
        and threatened fish species and serves as an important migration corridor providing key fish spawning, nursery, and feeding
        grounds.

     •	 Hydropower potential – Its hydropower potential, in terms of gigawatt hours produced per year, ranks fourth among the
        Mekong tributaries, after the Sekong, the Nam Kading, and the Nam Ngum. It represents 7.8% of the potential installed capacity
        of the Mekong tributaries.

     •	 Fisheries yield – The Nam Ou places 13th in terms of fisheries and other aquatic organisms (OAA) yield per year. However, this
        may be the result of a lack of accurate fish harvest data and relatively lower numbers of people in the basin compared to other
        major river systems in Lao PDR; expected fish and OAA yields are likely much higher than currently reported.

     •	 Land use – The Nam Ou ranks fourth in terms of natural land cover, after the Sekong, the Tonle Sap, and the Nam Mun. Its
        percentage of agricultural land is 14th among all the Mekong tributaries.

     •	 Navigation – The Nam Ou ranks second in terms of navigation importance, after only the Sekong. Local residents can transport
        up to 2,000 kg per boat in the wet season and 500 kg per boat in the dry season.

     Sources: MRC (2007), MRC (2009), Meynell (2012).




14
                                                        NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
               Mekong River




                              Mekong Basin




                                               Nam Ou Basin




                                       Tonle Sap lake



Indian Ocean




                                                              South China Sea


                                                                          15
Five kilometers from the river does
not sound remote, but in some cases
it was very challenging for our team
to access target villages. Getting the
information needed to understand
these communities’ water resource
needs means walking up to three
days in mountainous terrain.

Sitthasone Luanglath,
lead Nam Ou Profile surveyor
     METHODOLOGY
                 2.0
    FOR DEVELOPMENT
OF THE NAM OU RIVER BASIN
         PROFILE




                                                     17
     NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
The Profile was developed in 6 steps:


      1
                                                                         while meter readings for pH, temperature (°C), dissolved oxygen
                                                                         (DO; mg/L), and electrical conductivity (μS/cm) were taken at the
                                                                         habitat survey sites. Benthic macroinvertebrates were collected
                                                                         and analyzed based on the South African miniSASS system (http://
                                                                         www.groundtruth.co.za/river-health-and-water-quality.html); the
                                                                         sensitivity of different taxonomic groups – ranging from the least
                                                                         sensitive such as the Diptera, worms, and leeches to the most-
                                                                         sensitive mayflies, caddisflies, and the stoneflies – was used to
                                                                         determine overall general health of the river.
Establishing the team comprising representatives from the




                                                                               4
national, provincial, and district water resource management
agencies as well as IFC and its consultants.




      2
 Background (desktop) research and review of available literature
                                                                         Field survey of 1,500 households in 75 villages along a five-
                                                                         kilometer corridor of the Nam Ou in five zones, and detailed case
                                                                         studies of eight villages.




                                                                               5
 from relevant agencies and organizations at both the central and
 local levels.

 This Profile was developed based on information presented in
 the Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIA) and
 Cumulative Impact Assessment (CIA) that Earth Systems Lao (ESL)
 carried out for the seven hydropower projects in 2010 on behalf
 of Sinohydro Corporation (HKEC 2009, ESL 2011). It has also drawn
 on a number of publications prepared by the MRC, including
 MRC (2015), MRC (2009), and MRC (2007). Additional data were
 obtained from the Government of Laos National Statistics Bureau
 under the Ministry of Planning and Investment, including the
 Lao Expenditure and Consumption Survey 4 and 5 (LECS4, 5), Lao          Data analysis and reporting, including review and interpretation
 Population Census (2015), Agricultural Census (2011), Statistical       of the field data collected to determine trends in aquatic resource
 Year Book (2014), and other sources.                                    use over time, and writing the Profile document.




      3
Designing tools for primary data collection, including: developing
questionnaires, household surveys, and habitat surveys; water-
quality analysis; collection of benthic invertebrates; and, GIS/
                                                                               6
                                                                         Review and approval of the Profile by key Government of Lao
                                                                         PDR (GoL) stakeholders at the national, provincial and local levels
                                                                         through consultation workshops, discussions, and meetings.
mapping.                                                                 Capacity building for GoL staff was an integral part of the Profile
                                                                         development process. IFC provided on-the-job training to the
The Nam Ou was mapped using GIS techniques and Google Earth              central, provincial, and district water resources departments on
imagery to identify the key geomorphological features of the basin,      how to collect and analyze data and information for river basin
according to the method developed by Baran (2014) and Meynell            Profile development. IFC also produced a video to describe the
(2014) for the Sesan and Sekong Rivers. Livelihood dependence            methodology used in developing the Profile: https://www.youtube.
on water resources was mapped within a 5-, 10- and 15-km                 com/watch?v=sg7-jjN-GVs&feature=youtu.be
distance from the river. Key features such as river length, width,
depth, habitat types, and vegetation were mapped and verified in
rapid-river surveys and habitat surveys during the field program
and case studies. Water samples were collected at eight water
monitoring sites on the Nam Ou established by PONRE and DWR,

18
                                                  NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Household surveys and case studies were conducted between
December 2015 and February 2016. A total of 1,500 households
were randomly selected from 75 sample villages within 5 km of the
Nam Ou and the Nam Phak (15 villages per zone, 20 households
per village for a total of 300 households per zone). Focus group
discussions (FGD) with village heads and key local representatives
were held in eight villages as case studies to obtain general
information on communities, livelihoods, and trends in resource use.
Social issues examined included: history of change in livelihoods in
the village; livelihood dependency on water resources, including
fisheries and OAA; water sources for agriculture and domestic uses;
resilience (livelihood options); and local extreme events (floods
and drought).

Staff members from the DWR, three provincial PONREs, and 17
district DONREs participated in all field activities and stakeholder
consultations. These organizations played key roles in the
preparation of the Profile, including training, data collection, data
entry, data review, analysis, and report writing.




           Box 3


    The Nam Ou Fish Poster

    Dr. Phouvin Phousavanh from the NUOL compiled an
    illustrated book and poster to introduce fishes of the Nam
    Ou as a supporting document to the Profile. This book
    and poster was based on a series of fisheries surveys he
    conducted on the Nam Ou between 2007 and 2011.

    A total of 139 species found in the Nam Ou and its
    tributaries were identified and photographed An analysis
    of all 139 species recorded in the Nam Ou and represented
    in the Fish Poster shows that they fall into nine orders
    and 24 families. Thirty-five of these species are endemic
    to the Mekong basin, 86 are native, and five are exotic or
    introduced species.

    Five species (6% of the known fish fauna of the drainage)
    are known from no other drainage and are possibly
    endemic to the Nam Ou river basin. The highest numbers
    of endemic species were reported in the upper reaches
    (Ban Nagnao, Ban Pakban, and Ban Bouamsom [Nam
    Phak]), and fewer species were found in the downstream
    reaches such as Ban Paknga and Ban Pak Ou.

    The team showed the poster to villagers in the case studies
    to help them identify fish species from their part of the
    river and the types that were most commonly captured.
    The poster was also used in discussions about fisheries
    resources and other issues with local communities.




                                                                        19
NAM OU FISH




20
              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
                                                21
NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
          Box 4


     Case Studies & Zones in the Nam Ou Basin

     To understand the dynamics of the river and its use, the Nam Ou Basin is divided into four key mainstream zones and one large
     tributary zone to represent the different geographic and biophysical features of the river and to better manage the case studies.
     These five zones are described below:

     •	 Zone 1: Headwaters and upland river from the source to the confluence with the Nam Ngay, with a protected area covering the
        eastern tributary, the Nam Khang.

     •	 Zone 2: Medium-sized, fast-flowing upland river, geologically-coherent sandstone, ecologically similar, from the confluence of
        the Nam Ngay to Muang Khoa, the confluence with the Nam Phak.

     •	 Zone 3: Large, fast-flowing river with transition from sandstone to limestone, including the area from Muang Khoa (the Nam
        Phak) to the Nam Bak (Nong Khiaw); includes the tributary from Vietnam (the Nam Noua).

     •	 Zone 4: Large, low-lying river flowing through mainly limestone karst landscape, from the Nam Bak confluence (Nong Khiaw)
        to the Pak Ou confluence with the Mekong.

     •	 Zone 5: The Nam Phak, the largest tributary flowing through Oudomxay to Muang Khoa.

     The field visits conducted in January and February 2016 aimed to familiarize the core team with the hydrological, environmental,
     and social conditions along the entire length of the Nam Ou and its main tributaries. The visits also helped validate the statistical
     and geographic information to be used in developing the Profile. The eight villages selected for case studies, along with their cor-
     responding zones, were as follows (see also Figure 2):

     •	 Zone 1: Ban Nagnao and Ban Phoumouang (now Ban Homsang).

     •	 Zone 2: Ban Pakban and Ban Bouamsom (the Nam Phak, also in Zone 5).

     •	 Zone 3: Ban Sobnao (the Nam Noua) and Ban Sopkong.

     •	 Zone 4: Ban Paknga (the Nam Nga) and Ban Pak Ou.




22
                                                  NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
    Figure 2   Villages selected within a 5-km corridor in Zones 1 to 5 for developing
               the Nam Ou River Basin Profile.




                                                                   VIET NAM




   CHINA




LAO PDR



                                                                                         LEGEND
                                                                                             Studied village
                                                                                             Village

                                                                                         Zone (5-km)
                                                                                              Zone 1
                                                                                              Zone 2
                                                                                              Zone 3
                                                                                              Zone 4
                                                                                              Zone 5

                                                                                               Main tributaries
                                                                                               Nam Ou
                                                                                               Sub-catchment boundary
                                                                                               Country boundary
                                                                                         Source:
                                                                   0   5 10    20
                                                                                          Mekong River Commission Secretariat
                                                                                km.

                                                                                                                                23
                                      NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
This is all new information for us,
a real learning experience. Local
knowledge is key to understanding
people’s relationship to and reliance
on water resources. We are learning
that in northern Lao PDR most people
are still very reliant on the Nam Ou
River and its tributaries for food
security and livelihoods.

Lilao Bouapao,
IFC’s consultant on social development
                  3.0
RIVER BASIN CHARACTERISTICS
       (BASELINE DATA)




                                                      25
      NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
             3.1                                               PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS &
                                                               GEOGRAPHIC SETTING
                          Physical characteristics                                                             The river falls consistently from 527 masl at the Nam Khang
                                                                                                               confluence to 279 masl at Pak Ou. This is equivalent to a fall of
                                                                                                               0.75 m per kilometer of the river. Changes in the river width shows
                          The Nam Ou Basin lies in three provinces of Lao PDR: Phongsaly,                      a trend of widening with passage downstream from the confluence
                          Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang. The basin is characterized by                           with the Nam Khang. The sites of the hydropower plants have been
                          rugged, hilly, and sometimes mountainous terrain with steep-                         built near some of the narrowest points in the river.
                          sided river valleys and fast-flowing rivers over rocky river bed and
                          banks. In a classification of the watersheds of the Mekong, the
                          MRC estimated the slopes and watershed classes of the Nam Ou as
                          follows: 10% of the basin is very steep (>60% slope), 48.5% is steep
                          (30-60% slope), and 24.3% is medium steep (15-30%). Only 2.2% of                     The Nam Ou is characterized by its rapids interspersed with deep
                          the basin is flat (0-2% slope) (MRC 2001).                                           pools, which are present for more than a third of its total length.
                                                                                                               The sinuosity of a river (SI) is a measure of the extent to which the
                          The Nam Ou rises in the mountains of northern Lao PDR in                             channel bends and turns. Alluvial rivers tend to be more sinuous
                          Phongsaly Province, just south of the border with China. An                          than upland rivers, though this depends on the underlying
                          elevation Profile of the Nam Ou shows that it rises at over 1,007 m                  geological formations. This highlights the fact that the Nam Ou is
                          above sea level (masl) and meets the Mekong at 290 masl, after a                     generally a very straight river (where the SI is between 1 and 2);
                          distance downstream of 485 km (Figure 3). During the early courses                   there is at least one tributary entering on each side per 10 km for
                          of the Nam Ou, it widens from a fast-flowing mountain stream with                    most of the length of the river, except between km 140-160, and
                          a rocky bottom about 2 m wide, to a recognizable river over 10                       at km 270. A few of the 10-km stretches have several streams and
                          m wide within a few kilometers. The surrounding hill slopes are                      tributaries entering on both banks.
                          forested or have been cleared for cultivation of tea and banana
                          plantations in some areas. A further 20 km downstream in one of
                          these steeper stretches, a mini-hydropower plant has recently been
                          constructed – the Nam Ou 9. This is a run-of-river plant that diverts
                          water from a small headpond through about 700 m of headrace
                          channel to the powerhouse; it has an installed capacity of 450 kW.



                                                                                                                                              Legend
                                                                                                                                                     Elevation
                          Figure 3        Elevation and river width profile of the Nam Ou.                                                           Channel width
                                                                                                                                                     Dam – existing
                                                                                                                                                     Dam – under construction


                            Source        Gnot Ou                                                    M. Samphan               M. Khoa                  Nong Khiaw              Pak Ou
                   1200                                                                                                                                                                    300

                                                                            Nam Khang             Nam Leng           Nam Ban Nam Phak
                                                                            con uence             con uence          con uence con uence
                   1000                                                                                                                                                                    250

                                                                                                                                    Nam Noua
                                                                                                                                    con uence
                    800                                                                                                                                                                    200
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Channel width (m)
Elevation (masl)




                                                                              Nam Ou 7
                    600                                                                                                                                     Nam Bak      Nam Nga           150
                                                                                   Nam Ou 6                                                                 con uence    con uence
                                                                                                     Nam Ou 5
                                                                                                                      Nam Ou 4
                    400                                                                                                                   Nam Ou 3                                         100
                                                                                                                                                              Nam Ou 2 Nam Ou 1


                    200                                                                                                                       Limestone karst                              50
                                                                                                                                              begins


                      0                                                                                                                                                                    0
                            0   20   40     60     80    100    120   140    160    180     200    220   240   260    280   300   320   340    360    380    400   420   440   460   480

                                                                                            Distance from source (km)


                            Source: Google Earth survey for Nam Ou profile and Sinohydro.



                      26
                                                                                   NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
The density of villages along the river increases in the lower end           At the average annual flow rate of 100-600 m3/s in the Nam Ou’s
between km 120 and Pak Ou, and many of these lie on the right                cascade sites, the estimated bed load of 150-830 x 10³ tonnes/
bank (see Figure 1). This distribution of villages is clearly influenced     day would represent around 10-15% of the total sediment load,
by the presence of the road along Road No 13 from Luang Prabang,             which is typical of mixed load streams (Lane and Borland 1951).
with many villages on the right bank up as far as km 50, which is            Assuming an average sediment transport rate of 113-250 tonnes/
where the road diverts to follow the Nam Nga to Oudomxay. There              year/km² and a bed load sediment flux equivalent to 5-15% of the
are also large numbers of villages in Pak Bak and Nong Khiaw to              total sediment load in the Nam Ou, it is estimated that the average
Meung Ngoy (km 90 to km 120). The number of villages decreases               total sediment load (suspended plus bed load) is around 120-290
upstream, but usually there is at least one village on both sides            tonnes/year/km².
within each 10-km stretch. The larger number of villages around
Meuang Khoa (km 180) and Meaung Samphan (km 220) also stand                  The average total sediment load of 120-290 tonnes/year/km²
out.                                                                         estimated for the Nam Ou Basin is likely to be higher than various
                                                                             estimates of the natural (pre-clearing) sediment yield from
River-bank gardens can be observed on Google Earth and it is                 catchments in the humid tropics, which range from 80 to 150
evident that these tend to be associated with the villages, especially       tonnes/year/km² (Yu 2005). Furthermore, the sediment load could
along the lower reaches of the river between Pak Ou and Meuang               be significantly higher based on erosion events triggered by land
Ngoy. Above this there appear to be fewer river-bank gardens that            clearing, mining, dredging, and hydropower construction in the
can be seen on the imagery. This may reflect the steeper rocky               catchment.
banks, which are less favourable for cultivation.

The main soil types are Acrisols with four sub-types present (Ferric,
Gleyic, Haplic, and Humic), making up 82.8% of the basin’s area.
Haplic acrisols are the predominant type. They tend to be acidic
with a low-base status (<50% base saturation) and strongly                   Climate & Meteorology
leached. Most soils in the Nam Ou Basin are relatively infertile and,
unless well-managed, liable to degradation; as a result, crop yields         The Nam Ou catchment has a tropical monsoonal climate, with a
tend to be low.                                                              distinct wet season between May and October and a pronounced
                                                                             dry season for the rest of the year (Figure 4). Average annual rainfall
                                                                             within the catchment ranges from around 1,250 mm (Luang
            Box 5                                                            Prabang) to 1,750 mm (Meuang Ngoy). In 2009, annual rainfall
                                                                             was 1,752 mm at Phongsaly, 1,340 mm at Oudomxay, and 1,260
                                                                             mm at Luang Prabang, while evaporation rates represented 43%
    Karst & Caves in the Nam Ou Basin                                        (747.8 mm), 66% (879 mm), and 67% (847 mm) of rainfall at these
                                                                             stations, respectively (ESL 2011). Around 84% of the total rainfall
    There are five recognized karst areas with documented                    occurs during the wet season, with the highest rainfall occurring in
    caves within the Nam Ou Basin. These are at Oudomxay,                    the months of July and August.
    Nong Khiaw, Meuang Ngoi Neua, Nam Bak, and Pak Ou.
    There is no record of karst or caves in Phongsaly. The Nam               From 1971 to 2006, average maximum temperatures at Luang
    Ou cuts through impressive karst peaks and massifs, at one               Prabang ranged from 34oC to 44°C, while Phongsaly recorded
    point via a very deep limestone gorge. Caves occur both                  average maximum temperatures of 26°C to 35°C from 1988 to
    close to present river level and at 50-100 m above it. At the            2006. The hottest months are from April to June. Average minimum
    Nam Ngoy-Nam Ou confluence, the limestone mountains                      temperatures range from 3.4°C to 20°C at Luang Prabang and 0.4°C
    in the Meuang Ngoy Neua area are cut by a spectacular                    to 12.4°C at Phongsaly. Temperatures are lowest in December
    gorge with vertical rock walls up to 600 m high, where the               and January. Spatial temperature trends exist across the Nam
    village of Ngoy Neua is situated.                                        Ou catchment, with average monthly temperatures becoming
                                                                             increasingly cooler in the north (toward Phongsaly) and warmer in
    The Pak Ou Caves are located on the Mekong near the                      the south (toward Luang Prabang).
    confluence of the Nam Ou with the Mekong, about 25 km
    upstream from Luang Prabang. Two of the caves contain                    In December and January, temperatures in the north of the basin
    large numbers of Buddha images and are an important                      can drop significantly, even down to 0oC. Prolonged periods of up
    tourism site.                                                            to 10 days of cold weather have been recorded in several years,
                                                                             most recently in 2016, and can lead to livestock mortality. In
    Source: (Kiernan 2009)                                                   January 2016, cold weather caused the deaths of large numbers
                                                                             of fish, especially Puntioplites proctozystron (61), in the Nam Noua,
                                                                             according to villagers in Ban Sopnao.
The following are the Nam Ou’s baseline sediment transport                   Rainfall distribution is even more distinct. Between May and
characteristics as described by HydroChina Kunming Engineering               October, most of the upper (northern) parts of the Nam Ou Basin
Corporation (HKEC) (ESL 2011):                                               receive between 1,200 mm and 1,500 mm of rainfall, while the lower
                                                                             parts of the basin (effectively Luang Prabang) receive between
•	 Sediment concentrations in the Nam Ou are low in the dry                  1,100 mm and 1,200 mm. In the dry season, the lower rainfall range
   season but are relatively high during floods (mainly in the wet           of 200-300 mm appears to follow the river valley from a drier area
   season).                                                                  around Gnot Ou and then an increasingly wider area from the Nam
                                                                             Phak confluence down to the Mekong. Outside of these drier areas
•	 The average annual sediment flux at Meuang Ngoy is estimated              (on the higher ground), rainfall in the dry season ranges from 300-
   at 233 tonnes/km2 per annum, more than doubling the rate                  400 mm.
   of 113 tonnes/km2 per annum reported by the Water Quality
   Monitoring Network (1997).

•	 Meuang Ngoy’s average annual sediment flux corresponds to
   a sediment flux of 142.4 kg/s and an average annual sediment
   concentration of 0.346 kg/m3. These figures represent suspended
   sediment loads.

                                                                                                                                                  27
                                                NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
              Box 6


      Flood Events & other Disasters

      Key flood characteristics of the Nam Ou at Meuang Ngoy are summarized below (HKEC 2009):
      Flood hydrographs are typically unimodal, with a duration of 5-15 days, with major floods occurring in 1994 and 1996.

      	 August 15-19, 1996 	 Heavy monsoon rainfall from the east gave rise to a peak flood discharge of 7,017 m3/sec,
      				                   damaging agricultural crops. The maximum average daily discharge was 9,290 m3/s.
      	 July 15-20, 1994 	         A monsoon typhoon caused damage to agricultural crops and livestock. The storm rainfall was
      				                         1,090 mm, giving rise to a peak flood discharge of 7,771 m3/sec.
      	       July 26, 1992 		     Minimum average daily discharge was 1,660 m3/s.

      In Phongsaly, three major floods have taken place since 2001:
      	       2016	 Nam Lan and Nam Leng in Boun Tai.
      	2011	 Meuang Mai and all tributaries of the Nam Neua.
      	2001	 In Meuang Gnot Ou, the urban area close to the river was flooded with significant damage,
      		     including the concrete irrigation water pipe.

      Meuang La appears to be the district most affected by flash flooding, with three big recorded events in 1975, 1991, and 2008. In 1991,
      17 people were killed and 20 injured, but no casualties were recorded in the other floods. Drought, in terms of water supply and
      agriculture, has not occurred in the Nam Ou Basin. (Source: Provincial validation workshops)




Nam Ou Water Resources                                                       Hydrology

                                                                             Information on the Nam Ou’s surface water hydrology was
Tributaries and Catchment Area                                               obtained from the official hydrological gauging station at Meuang
                                                                             Ngoy (20°42’38.01”N, 102°40’25.52”E), which had records dating
The Nam Ou has 11 major tributaries. The size and ranking of their           back to the 1970s. Several other hydrological stations have been
catchment areas are shown in Table 1. The Nam Phak, the Nam                  put in place recently for other purposes such as hydropower
Nga, and the Nam Leng are the top three tributaries by catchment             development, but the records for these are either unavailable or are
area and percentage of the river basin, with the Nam Noua being              not of long duration. Daily flow data from 1987 to 2003 were used
the fourth-largest tributary.                                                to generate hydrological estimates for the design of the seven-
                                                                             dam cascade (HKEC 2009) and the IDOM training study between
                                                                             1999 and 2003 (IDOM 2014, ESL 2011).




          Figure 4      Long-term mean monthly rainfall in Nam Ou Basin.




Dec           Jan          Feb        Mar          Apr          May          Jun          Jul         Aug          Sep          Oct            Nov
                                                                   Rainy season                                                    Dry season
            < 20 mm                                                (May–Sept.)                                                     (Oct.–Apr.)




                                                 100 mm
                                                                                                                150 mm
                                                                                        260 mm
                                                                                   higher in Phongsaly
                                                                                                    300 mm


28
                                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
            Box 7


    Hydrology – Key characteristics (HKEC 2009):

    •	 The average discharge of the Nam Ou at Meuang Ngoy
       was 440 m3/s, based on data collected from 1987 to 2003.

    •	 The maximum average annual discharge was 710 m3/s
       (1971) and the minimum was 221 m3/s (1992).

    •	 Runoff increases each year from May, peaking between
       July and September, and decreases from November to
       April.

    •	 Around 83.6% of the annual runoff occurs in the wet
       season (June to November), while only 16.4% occurs in
       the dry season (December to May).

    •	 The lowest average monthly discharge occurs around
       March to April, with a minimum of 57 m3/s observed in
       April 1979.

    •	 Based on an average annual rainfall of 1,650 mm and
       an average annual runoff depth of 721 mm, the runoff
       coefficient for the catchment is estimated at 44%.




Surface Water Quality                                                          When compared to the United Nations Economic Commission for
                                                                               Europe (UNECE)’s river-quality standards regarding DO, chemical
The Mekong River Commission has been collecting monthly water-                 oxygen demand, manganese, Total P, Total N, pH, and alkalinity,
quality data from different sites on the Mekong since 1985, including          most of the samples (collected since 1985) fall into Aquatic Health
one location on the Nam Ou at Ban Hat Kham downstream from                     Classes 1 and 2 (UNECE 1994). Historically, the aquatic health of the
the Pak Ou bridge (Station Name and ID: Ban Hat Kham, H100101).                Nam Ou waters at Ban Hat Kham before discharge to the Mekong
Figure 5 shows general trends in water quality observed at this                was generally very good to good, especially for DO, pH, and
station over time.                                                             chemical oxygen demand. Upstream waters in Phongsaly have
                                                                               better water quality than downstream in Luang Prabang near the
                                                                               confluence with the Mekong.




Table 1          Catchment area (km²) and estimated average annual flow rate (m³/s) for the Nam Ou Basin and its main tributaries.



  Tributary                           Code        Catchment area (km²)      % of basin area        Annual Avg. flow (m³/s)            Rank*

  1. Nam Khang                         (NK)              1,097                    4.2                         21.7                       6
  2. Nam Ngay                         (NNy)               879                     3.4                         18.6                       8
  3. Nam Leng                          (NL)              2,092                    8.1                         40.9                       3
  4. Nam Houn                          (NH)               881                     3.4                         19.5                       7
  5. Nam Pok                           (NP)               517                     2.0                         10.0                       11
  6. Nam Ban                           (NB)               742                     2.9                         15.3                       9
  7. Nam Phak                         (NPk)              3,342                    12.9                        68.4                       1
  8. Nam Noua                         (NNa)              2,089                    8.1                         32.1                       4
  9. Nam Hub                          (NHb)               713                     2.8                         12.9                       10
  10. Nam Bak                         (NBk)              1,722                    6.6                         15.8                       5
  11. Nam Nga                         (NNg)              2,677                    10.3                        47.1                       2
  Total Tributary area (km²)                            16,752                   64.7
  Nam Ou Basin total area (km²)                         25,910

Source: GIS analysis and (HKEC 2009)
*Ranked by catchment area and flow contribution

                                                                                                                                                  29
                                                  NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
                                                                       In recent years, there has been an increase in nutrient levels such
 Figure 5     Average monthly water temperature and pH at              as Total P and Total N (perhaps indicating a tendency toward
              Ban Hatkham since 1985 (Source MRC).                     eutrophication) and lower alkalinity, suggesting that the water has
                                                                       less potential for buffering acidity. There are some marked peaks
                                                                       in COD up to 16 mg/l between 2012 and 2014. These figures all
                                                                       point toward a general decline in the Nam Ou’s water quality in
                             31.4°C                                    recent years, especially in downstream areas, probably coinciding
                                                                       with large infrastructure construction activities upstream of Ban
                                                                       Hat Kham.
                                      28°C – May/June
                                      21°C – Dec/Jan                   Key sources of water pollution include: industrial discharges in
                                                                       urban areas, untreated sewage, hydropower development, sand
                                                                       and gravel dredging, gold mining (including use of mercury),
                             18°C                                      and overuse of agricultural chemicals on banana and rubber
                                                                       plantations. To date, no comprehensive surveys of toxic chemicals,
                                                                       including persistent organic pollutants, have been conducted on
                                                                       the Nam Ou, and there are limited data on heavy metals and other
                                                                       parameters of concern.




        pH                          9.5
                                                                       Wetlands & Associated
                         stable between
                         7.4 – 7.9
                                                                       Waterbodies
                                since 2014, below 7.0 	
                                	           down to 5.5                The total area of water bodies found in the Nam Ou is estimated at
                                                                       5,554 ha. This includes the river itself and standing bodies of water,
                                                                       lakes, ponds, and reservoirs. As a very steep-sided and rather narrow
                                                                       valley, the Nam Ou Basin is generally not suitable for the formation
                                                                       of natural lakes and wetlands; there is little floodplain area where
                                                                       such wetlands could form. However, floodplain areas on the banks
                                                                       of the main river and tributaries are important spawning areas for
        Increasing acidity and decline                                 many fish species and are used as riverbank gardens during the dry
        in overall water quality                                       season.




30
                                                NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
3.2                       BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES

 Ecological Characteristics                                             Habitat Surveys
 of the River
                                                                                   Box 9
         Box 8
                                                                            Habitat Survey – Ban Vangle, Pak Ou
  Ecological Characteristics of the Nam Ou Basin                            A detailed habitat survey was carried out on the sand and
                                                                            gravel island upstream of Ban Vangle, near Pak Ou (see
  The Nam Ou Basin lies within the Northern Indochina sub-                  also Figure 6). The Google Earth image of the area shows
  tropical terrestrial ecoregion as defined by World Wide                   the widening of the river channel at this point with two
  Fund For Nature (WWF) (Olson and Dinerstein 2002). The                    channels, both of which are fast-flowing. The left-bank
  basin also lies within the moist, sub-tropical broadleaf                  channel is wider with exposed rocks and shrubs at the
  forest biome and is recognized to have special karst                      upstream and downstream ends. This channel has some
  features. Under the classification system for river reaches               small rapids and riffles. The right-bank channel is about
  developed for the Greater Mekong sub-region (Lehner                       30-40 m wide with a sharp bend at the end of the island
  and Ouellet Dallaire 2014), which uses three groups of                    where it rejoins the main channel. There is an area of rock
  classes, the following may be noted about the Nam Ou                      and sand deposition at this point, used extensively by the
  Basin’s hydrologic, physio-climatic, and geomorphologic                   small village on the right bank.
  features:
                                                                            The island itself is 580 m long by 190 m wide, consisting
  Hydrologic:                                                               of deposited sand, gravel, and pebble beds, laid down in
                                                                            channels that are inundated in the high flow season. The
  •	 The tributaries of the Nam Ou can be classified as                     higher banks of the island are vegetated with tall grasses
     medium-sized rivers based on their mean annual flow                    and shrubs, especially Mimosa pigra. The left bank of the
     of 10-100 m3/sec.                                                      river has larger trees and shrubs, while the right bank has
                                                                            riverbank gardens and smaller trees and shrubs.
  •	 The Nam Ou mainstem from the Nam Khang confluence
     to Pak Ou can be classified as a large river with a mean               A macroinvertebrate survey of the sand, gravel, and
     annual flow of 619 m3/sec (range 100-1,000 m3/sec).                    bank vegetation on the island showed relatively
                                                                            sparse populations of Crustacea (crabs and shrimps),
  •	 The peak monthly discharges are about three times                      mayflies, bugs and beetles, molluscs, and small fish. The
     the mean annual flow, which put the tributaries in the                 biodiversity index showed a score of 6.5, indicating a
     category of high seasonal flow variability. The upper                  moderately modified stretch of the river in fair condition.
     reaches have a slightly lower flow variability because                 The populations of macro-invertebrates in the upper
     of the lower rainfall compared to the lower reaches and                bank layers sampled were probably depressed because
     tributaries.                                                           of changes in water level due to a recent storm and flow
                                                                            changes from upstream dams.
  Physio-climatic:

  •	 The tributaries and the mainstem are in the high (above
     750 masl) and low (below 750 masl) moist broadleaf
     forests.

  •	 There is significant presence of karst in the lower parts
     of the river.

  Geomorphologic:

  •	 The tributaries and the mainstem have high stream
     gradient.

  •	 The tributaries and the mainstem have presence of
     sediment but no floodplain.




                                                                                                                                          31
                                           NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
      Figure 6      Google Earth image of the island opposite Ban Vangle (top),
                    overlay of aquatic habitats, bank type, and bank vegetation types on island upstream of Ban Pak Ou (bottom).




                                                             Shrubs/scrub
                                 River bank garden                                 Grasses/Reeds
                                                                                                                       Aquatic shrubs




                         Trees                                                                           Run


                                                               Sand

               Bedrock
                                                                                                          Rapids
        Sand                                                  Riffle


Run                                                  Aquatic shrubs

                                                       Run




  32
                                                         NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Fisheries & Aquatic
Resources
          Box 10


    Fisheries Resources in the Nam Ou Basin

    There have been several studies of the fishes of the Nam Ou Basin, notably by Kottelat (2009) for WWF. Surveys were conducted for
    the environmental impact assessment (EIA) of the Nam Ou cascade and noted that because of the diverse range of aquatic habitats,
    the Nam Ou supports a high diversity of fish species that have adapted to fill the different ecological niches in the river (Warren 2010).

    Kottelat (2009) identified a total 84 fish species of 23 different families in the Nam Ou Basin. At least three species are exotic, having
    been introduced for aquaculture, such as the Nile Tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus), or for stocking, such as Rohu (Labeo rohita) and
    Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio). Golden Barb (Puntius semifasciolatus) and Spotted Steed (Hemibarbus maculatus) may also have been
    introduced into the basin through the Nam Noua from Vietnam (Kottelat, 2009). Dr. Phouvin Phousavanh (NUOL) conducted a series
    of fisheries surveys between 2007 and 2011, identifying a total of 139 species in the Nam Ou and its tributaries.

    The Mekong Giant Catfish (Pangasianodon gigas), a critically endangered species, is reported as being present in the area of the
    confluence with the Mekong but not in the Nam Ou itself. The lower part of the Nam Ou from Meuang Ngoy to Pak Ou is listed as a
    key biodiversity area (KBA) by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) (https://www.iucn.org/key-biodiversity-areas)
    because of the presence of another critically endangered species, the Giant Barb (Catlocarpio siamensis or Pba Chok). Respondents at
    provincial validation workshops held in Phongsaly and Luang Prabang in 2017 confirmed that this species is found in the Nam Ou as
    far up as Pak Ban where fish of up to 10 kg have been caught, but it is not found in Oudomxay Province.

    Two other endangered fish species, the Mekong Freshwater Stingray (Dasyatis laosensis) and Seven-striped Barb (Probarbus jullieni),
    are also found throughout the Nam Ou. A spawning ground of the Seven-striped Barb and its spawning behaviors have been recorded
    at Ban Hatkhe, which is 41 km upstream from the confluence with the Mekong and 27 km upstream of the proposed Nam Ou 1
    hydropower project site.

    Respondents at the 2017 provincial validation workshops also noted the presence of one of the longest distance migratory species,
    Pangasius krempfi, which migrates from the Mekong Delta to spawn and returns with its young. It was noted as far upstream as
    Meuang Samphan where fish of up to 30 kg have been caught. By contrast, the Marbled Eel (Anguilla marmorata) is the only truly
    catadromous fish of the Mekong migrating from the river to breed in the sea.




Fish migrations are an important part of the seasonal cycle. Fish            This analysis of fish guilds found in the Nam Ou shows that it is
move upstream from the Mekong into the Nam Ou and from the                   dominated by species that are characteristic of fast-flowing rocky
Nam Ou mainstream into the tributaries to breed. There are two               mountain rivers as well as migratory species that move from the
main migration seasons: late in the dry season when the waters               Mekong mainstream into the Nam Ou and its tributaries. The
and flow rates are low and the smaller fish can move upstream                proportion of generalist species and black fish species is lower
easily; and in the flood season, when there is more water and the            than in some other tributaries where there are greater lengths of
larger, stronger swimming fish, such as catfish, migrate. At the end         slower-moving lowland rivers.
of the flood season, many fish migrate back downstream again
(Poulsen, et al. 2004, Warren 2010).

Table 2 shows the number of species falling into different fish
guilds (or groupings) as described by (Welcomme et al. 2006).
There are 28 rhithron resident guild species, which are typical of
fast-flowing rocky, mountainous rivers. There are 48 main channel
migratory species, including one migratory main channel and
tributary resident guild species (Bangana behri [8]), 27 migratory
main channel spawner guild species, and 20 migratory main
channel refuge seeker guild species. Generally known as white
fish species, they migrate from the Mekong mainstream into the
tributaries such as the Nam Ou and from there into its tributaries,
either to spawn or to seek refuge during the dry season.

Thirty species are characterized as generalists, which live and
breed under wide ecological conditions. Six species are floodplain
residents, generally known as black fish species. Only one species,
the Marble Goby (Oxyeleotris marmorata [127]), is semi-anadromous
(living both in brackish and estuarine conditions). There are no
catadromous (moving back down to the sea to breed) or marine
species, as is to be expected. There are five non-native species and
six whose guild is not known. Three exotic species reported are
widely distributed throughout the basin.

                                                                                                                                                 33
                                             NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Table 2            Distribution of fish species by fish guilds in
                   the Nam Ou Basin.


                                                                                              A number of threatened fish species are found in the river,
     Guild              Description                     No.            % of                   according to the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species (Red List). One
                                                    of species        species                 species, Scaphognathops theunensis (71), is considered critically
     Guild 1     Rhithron resident guild                28          22.6                      endangered; three are endangered, including Luciocyprinus
                                                                                              striolatus (37), Probarbus jullieni (56), and Probarbus labeamajor
     Guild 2     Migratory main channel                  1          0.8                       (57); and five are considered vulnerable, namely Bangana behri (8),
                 and tributaries resident                                                     Crossocheilus reticulatus (15), Hypsibarbus lagleri (31), Mystacoleucus
                 guild                                                                        lepturus (44), and Pseudohemiculter dispar (58).
     Guild 3     Migratory main channel                 27          21.8
                 spawner guild                                                                The critically endangered Scaphognathops theunensis is only
                                                                                              found in the Nam Theun and Nam Gnouang rivers, which are a
     Guild 4     Migratory main channel                 20          16.1
                                                                                              long way from the Nam Ou. Identification of specimens collected
                 refuge seeker guild
                                                                                              from the Nam Ou is being conducted to confirm that this species is
     Guild 5     Generalist guild                       30          24.2                      indeed more widespread than reported in the IUCN Red List, and/
     Guild 6     Floodplain resident guild               6          4.8                       or if villagers had erroneously identified the fish. Another similar
                 (Blackfish)                                                                  species found in the Nam Ou, Scaphognathops stejnegeri (72), was
                                                                                              recorded in two locations – Ban Pakban and Ban Paknga – and is of
     Guild 7     Estuarine resident guild                0          0.0                       least concern on the IUCN Red List.
     Guild 8     Semi‐anadromous guild                   1          0.8
                                                                                              When the Nam Ou 4 dam is built, the five endangered species
     Guild 9     Catadromous guild                       0          0.0
                                                                                              identified by villagers at Ban Pakban will probably disappear. When
     Guild 10    Marine guild                            0          0.0                       the Nam Ou 1 dam is built, the two endangered species at Ban
     NG          No Guild appropriate                    0          0.0                       Paknga will also likely disappear, especially Probarbus jullieni (56),
                                                                                              which has a recognized low-flow spawning area at Ban Hatkhe that
     NK‐NI       Not Known or No                         6          4.8                       will be inundated after the construction of the dam.
                 Information
     NN          Non-Native                              5          4.0                       Table 3 lists the distribution of fish guilds reported by villagers in
                                                                                              the eight villages for case studies.
     Total                                             124          100.0




Table 3            Number of fish species reported at 8 villages from the Nam Ou and associated tributaries. Fish species are grouped
                   based on their guilds¹, and their origin. Number of Species of Concern (IUCN/Red List) ² are listed.


       Village             Waterbody                    Fish groups (guilds)¹                                 Origin                      IUCN (Red List)²          Total

                                               A          B          C         D          E      Endemic Native            Exotic       CR       EN/VU        NT
     1 Ban Nagnao          Nam Ou              19        12         14          4         3          19          35           3                     3          3     52
     2 Ban Homsang³ Nam Ou                     14        12          7          4         3          10          29           3          1                     2     41
                           Reservoir            1         3          3                    2           2           4           2                                      9
     3 Ban Pakban          Nam Ou              16        25         14          1         3          18          40           3          1          5          6     59
                           Nam Ban              4         5          2                                4           7           0                                2     11
     4 Ban Buamsom         Nam Phak            11        11         16          3         1          16          29           1          1                     2     42
     5 Ban Sopnao          Nam Noua             7         9          8          3         2           9          19           2          1                     2     29
     6 Ban Sopkhong Nam Ou                      9        18         14          6         2          13          36           2          1          1          2     49
     7 Ban Pak Nga         Nam Ou              12        21         11          2         3          14          35           3          1          2          4     49
                           Nam Nga              2         3                                           3           2           0                                      5
     8 Ban Pak Ou          Nam Ou               1        20         10          2         2           7          26           2          1          2          4     35
       Total                                   28        48         30         6          5          35          86           5          1          8          8    117


¹ Fish grouping: (A) Rhithron resident (guild-1); (B) Migratory main channel, resident, spawner, and refuge seeker species (Guild 2-4); (C) Generalist (Guild-5);
(D) Floodplain resident/blackfish (Guild-6); and (E) Non-Native.
² IUCN Red List species of concern: (CR): Critically Endangered; (EN/VU): Endangered or Vulnerable; & (NT) Near Threatened.
³ Ban Homsang: a relocated village previously known as Ban Phoumuang.




34
                                                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Fisheries & Fishing Gear                                                   Other Aquatic Animals (OAA)

The fishery specialist report for the EIA of the Nam Ou cascades           Several OAA species, especially freshwater prawns, river weed
included surveys with fishermen in 18 villages along the length            (Cladophora spp.), amphibians, and reptiles are important in the
of the river (Warren 2010). The surveys revealed that a single             local subsistence economy and in livelihoods of communities
fisherman could on average catch between 0.5 kg and 3.0 kg of              along the Nam Ou. However, no systematic studies of OAA, which
fish per day using whatever gears appropriate to the time of year.         include benthic invertebrates, zooplankton, phytoplankton,
During the upstream fish spawning migrations between April and             molluscs, crustaceans, and aquatic insects, have been conducted
June, daily landings can rise considerably, and reports of individual      in the Nam Ou Basin.
fishermen catching in excess of 10 kg per day are not uncommon
(sometimes as high as 30 kg per day). When fish landings exceed            A few turtle species are found in the basin, many of which are
what is necessary for daily household consumption, fish are sold           captured for sale and consumption. Some species are critically
for cash if they are medium-sized (1 or 2 kg) or large (>5 kg) and         endangered, including the Asian Box Turtle (Cuora amboinensis)
processed –fermented, smoked, or sun-dried – if they are small             and the Indochinese Box Turtle (C. galbinifrons) – both of which
(Warren 2010).                                                             have been captured in Phongsaly. There is one endangered
                                                                           amphibian species, the Yunnan spiny frog (Nanorana yunnanensis).
In December and January, men from the Luang Prabang districts of           These species are threatened primarily by human consumption
the Nam Ou may catch 5-10 kg of fish per day using a cast or scoop         and habitat loss.
net and women may catch 2-5 kg per day using different gear. The
transition to wet season is the most productive period, with about
70% of the catch sold and 30% used domestically.

Further upstream in Phongsaly, fish catches tend to be lower in                      Box 11
Gnot Ou. A fisherman normally catches around 2-3 kg per day
during dry season. Most fish are consumed domestically rather
than sold. Before the impoundment of the Nam Ou 5 hydropower                   Littoral macroinvertebrates bio-survey
project, fish catches in Ban Pak Ban between February and March
could be as high as 20-30 kg per day, while fewer fish were caught             Littoral (shoreline) macroinvertebrates are good indicators
between August and October. During impoundment, when the                       of a river’s general health because different taxonomic
river levels were very low, they caught many fish including large              groups respond differently to changing flow and chemical
ones. Now fish catches have been reduced to less than 0.5 kg per               conditions in the river. During field studies conducted in
day. In Ban Homsang, during the impoundment of the Nam Ou                      developing this Profile, the South African miniSASS system
6 reservoir, they caught 10-20 kg of fish per day and sold 70% of              was used to sample and analyze macroinvertebrates.
them in Ban Hatsa and Meuang Khoa markets while consuming                      Littoral macroinvertebrates are probably the easiest
the rest.                                                                      aquatic fauna to sample from the banks and can be sorted
                                                                               on site, preserved, and identified at leisure. However, the
The main fishing gears used include fixed and drift gillnets, beat-            choice of sampling sites is important: usually banks and
nets, cast-nets, “Jun” traps, long-lines, single hooks, “Sai” traps,           river beds with gravel, pebbles, and boulders are the most
“dtawn”, “Oo” traps, home-made spear guns, “Son”, “Dtoom”, and                 effective for sampling, as sand and mud tend to be too
“Scoup-nets”. Some of the gears are seasonal and others are used               dense for many species.
year-round (Warren 2010).
                                                                               The bio-survey index results showed that three sites in the
Fish conservation zones (FCZ) have been established with                       upper river – the Nam Ou source stream, a natural site above
assistance from WWF at several villages along the Nam Ou and its               Gnod Ou, and the Gnod Ou Bridge – are considered the
tributaries. These zones are sections of the river that are recognized         most natural, despite some disturbance from agricultural
by local fishermen as important habitats for fish; usually they are            runoff and pollution from Gnod Ou town. Stoneflies were
deep pools that provide refuge for fish during the dry season and              found in all three sites, which increased their scores.
serve as spawning areas or fish nursery grounds. Participating
fishermen from surrounding villages agree to abide by the rules                Downstream sampling was not possible until Ban
and regulations restricting fishing activities in these zones, which           Sopkhong, which was considered to have a good
are often marked with a string of flags across the river at the                macroinvertebrate index despite a rather low number
beginning and end of the reach that may be 500-m or 1-km long.                 of groups and indicators showing higher sensitivity.
Most fishermen agree that FCZ are effective in helping to protect              Below Ban Paknga, Ban Hatkhe, and Ban Vangle, the
and increase fish stocks.                                                      macroinvertebrate index revealed fair to poor conditions
                                                                               possibly due to a combination of high rainfall, drying-up,
Warren (2010) identified 15 villages with established FCZ on the               occasional releases from the dams, and sediment releases
Nam Ou mainstem. In the Luang Prabang districts of the Nam                     as a result of dam construction.
Ou Basin, there are 30 FCZ, with 25 on the Nam Ou (Ngoy – 10,
Nam Bak – 11, Pak Ou – 4) and five on the Nam Nga as of 2016.                  Three sites were sampled in the tributaries of the Nam Kor,
In the Oudomxay districts along the river, more than 90 villages               the Nam Phak, and the Nam Nao. The first two were in poor
have 35 conservation pools and 101 protection pools, figures from              to fair conditions largely because of sewage releases from
the 2017 provincial validation workshops show. Local regulations               Oudomxay town. From the macroinvertebrate sampling
prohibit the use of explosives, electrofishing, and biocides (poison)          results, the Nam Noua appeared to be in fair condition
to catch fish; however, these activities are still undertaken in some          though the diversity of species was relatively low (see
communities                                                                    Table 4 for detailed results).




                                                                                                                                              35
                                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Table 4              Stream health assessment –  littoral macro-invertebrate sampling (miniSASS) conducted on the Nam Ou Basin and
                     tributaries.


 Stream Health Indicator                Score                Nam Ou                                Nam Ou                                      Tributaries
 (macro-invertebrates)                                       (source)                              u/s – > d/s                                  u/s – > d/s

                                                     S1         S2          S3         B1         B2         B3         B4          T1         T2         T3         T4
     1. Flat worms                         3
     2. Worms                              2
     3. Leeches                            2
     4. Crabs and shrimps                  6                     6                      6          6                     6          6           6          6
     5. Stoneflies                        17         17         17          17
     6. Minnow mayflies                    5                                  5                                                     5           5          5          5
     7. Other mayflies                    11         11         11          11         11         11                    11          11         11         11         11
     8. Damselflies                        4
     9. Dragonflies                        6          6          6            6         6                     6                     6                      6          6
 10. Bugs and Beetles                      5          5          5            5         5          5          5          5          5           5          5          5
 11. Caddis flies                          9          9          9                      9                     9                     9                      9          9
 12. True flies, Diptera                   2          2                                                                             2                      2          2
 13. Molluscs                              4                     4            4         4          4          4          4          4           4          4
 14. Megaloptera                           9                     9                                                                              9
     i.   Tadpoles                                    ×                                 ×                                                       ×
     ii. Fish                                         ×                       ×         ×          ×          ×          ×          ×
          Total score                     85         50         67          48         41         26         24         26          48         40         48         38
          Average score (Index)           6.1        8.3        8.3        8.0        6.8         6.5        6.0        6.5        6.0        6.7         6.0        6.3



Note: ‘x’ - Tadpoles and fish are not included when calculating stream health index, yet, the presence of both organisms was recorded as this is indicative of a healthy
aquatic ecosystem.



 Legend:                                                                                    Sampling locations:
 Stream Health Index values for rocky type rivers                     Index
                                                                                            1.    Nam Ou Source                                                       S1
 Unmodified (Natural/pristine condition)                              > 7.9                 2.    Gnot Ou Town upstream ('pristine' site)                             S2
 Largely natural/few modifications (Good condition)                  6.8 – 7.9              3.    Gnot Ou downstream of bridge                                        S3
 Moderately modified (Fair condition)                                6.1 – 6.8              4.    Ban Sopkong FCZ                                                     B1
 Largely modified (Poor condition)                                   5.1 – 6.1              5.    Ban PakNga                                                          B2
 Seriously/critically modified (Very Poor condition)                  < 5.1                 6.    Ban Hatkhe                                                          B3
                                                                                            7.    Ban Vangle (island)                                                 B4
                                                                                            8.    Nam Kor –  fast water                                               T1
                                                                                            9.    Nam Kor –  slow water                                               T2
                                                                                            10. Nam Kor (confluence with Nam Phak)                                    T3
                                                                                            11. Ban SopNao                                                            T4




36
                                                             NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
      Box 12


Freshwater Prawn Fishery in the Nam Ou

An important prawn fishery is found in the limestone
karst mountainous areas near Meuang Ngoy. Several
limestone caves in this area have streams flowing out into
the Nam Ou mainstream, especially the Tham Paho caves
near Ban Sopchem. The waters found in these streams are
cool-cold and are very clear. There is a species of prawn
(Macrobrachium yui) that lives in the Nam Ou where it
grows to sexual maturity (Kounthongbang et al. 2015).
When the mainstream becomes turbid at the beginning of
each wet season, prawns move up and into the clear-water
streams issuing from the caves. According to researchers
at the Living Aquatics Research Center in Vientiane,
the prawns reside in this area during their spawning
migration. During this seasonal migration period, certain
villages close to these caves are able to exploit the fishery
by setting special traps to catch the prawns as they move
into the caves. Most landings are made at night. Following
capture, the prawns are either eaten by villagers or sold
to local restaurants and traders who have specialized
marketing outlets in large cities such as Luang Prabang.

There are four villages active in the prawn fishery: Huay
Chong, Nong Khiaw, Meuang Ngoy, and Sopchem. From
July to September, the villagers may catch up to 50 kg
of prawns per day, with individuals reaching a size of 0.5
kg. An estimate of the total prawn catch has been put at
170,000 kg per year, according to information presented at
the 2017 Luang Prabang provincial validation workshops.




      Box 13


River Weed in the Nam Ou

River weed (Cladophora spp.) is a freshwater alga collected
throughout the main channel and the tributaries of the
Nam Ou Basin. There are several different algae species
that grow on underwater rocks and thrive in clear, shallow
water. River weed is collected during the dry season when
flows are low and the water has less sediment. Known as
“Mekong weed” in English, it is dried in flat sheets and
eaten as a delicacy. Most families living in riverside villages
harvest river weed; for example, there are 80 such families
in Ban Pak Ou and each could collect up to 25 kg of weed
in wet weight per day between January and May. In
recent years, however, river weed collection has become
more difficult and less productive because of river-level
fluctuations and increased sediment due to hydropower
construction.

Families in the Nam Ou tributaries in Oudomxay collect
10-15 kg of river weed per day from January to May. This
yields 2-3 kg of dry river-weed sheets, which measure
40x80 cm each. There are about three to five sheets per kg
and each sheet sells for 3,000 kip (or 8,000-10,000 kip per
kg). Thus, a full day’s collection of river weed in Oudomxay
might provide an income of 45,000 kip per day. This can
make a significant contribution to household income in
the villages.




                                                                                           37
                                           NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Terrestrial Resources
Land Use/Cover

The most recent comprehensive land cover/land use assessment
for the Lower Mekong sub-basin was carried out by the MRC
in 2014 using satellite imagery from 2010 and ground-truthed
throughout the basin, including the Nam Ou Basin in both Lao PDR
and Vietnam (Vo, et al. 2015).

The land cover reflects both the terrain, geology, and land uses in
the basin. The predominant land cover is broadleaved deciduous             In Lao PDR, protection and conservation forests are defined by the
forests, followed by shrubland; together, they make up 86% of              Forestry Law (2008) as follows:
the total land cover in the basin. The combined natural forest
lands (deciduous, evergreen, bamboo, and coniferous) make up               •	 Protection forest is forest and forestland classified for
14,596 km2, contributing 56% of the total. The industrial plantations         the purposes of protecting water sources, soil quality, the
in the northern sub-catchments reflect the recent developments                environment, and strategic areas for national defense;
of rubber plantation. Agriculture makes up 6.5% of the total land             preventing soil erosion; protection from natural disasters and
area, including annual crops, paddy rice, orchards, and shifting              so on.
cultivation, which makes up 4.0% of the total. Compared to the rest
of the basin, the Nam Noua sub-catchment in Vietnam stands out             •	 Conservation forest is forest and forestland classified for the
with much more intensive land use such as paddy, annual crops,                purposes of conserving nature and preserving plant and animal
and orchards.                                                                 species, forest ecosystems, and other valuable sites of natural,
                                                                              historical, cultural, tourism, environmental, educational, and
                                                                              scientific importance.

                                                                           In Phongsaly, there is one national conservation forest (Phou Den
Forest Cover/Vegetation                                                    Din), five provincial-level conservation forests, and four district-
                                                                           level conservation forests covering a total area of 327,518 ha. There
The main forest types in the Nam Ou Basin are as follows:                  are five national protection forests and two district protection
                                                                           forests covering a total area of 797,409 ha, and two production
Upper mixed deciduous forest is small patches of relatively                forests covering a total of 158,573 ha.
undisturbed primary forest with a dense canopy of around 10-20
m in height. This is the most biologically diverse vegetation type         The Phou Pha Provincial Conservation Forest is located on forested
in the Nam Ou Basin. Deciduous tree species represent more than            mountain slopes adjacent to the provincial administrative center
50% of the stand and bamboo occurs in some areas.                          of Phongsaly and covers around 200 ha. The area is protected
                                                                           primarily to conserve the township’s water resources. The area
Unstocked forest refers to areas that were once upper mixed                is also managed as a district protection forest by the Phongsaly
deciduous forest, but the primary tree crown density in these areas        District Agriculture and Forestry Office.
has been reduced to less than 20% because of selective logging or
shifting cultivation activities.                                           The Phou Tasan Provincial Conservation Forest is located adjacent
                                                                           to the Nam Ou within the Nhot Ou District. The forest covered over
Riparian forest identifies dense forest along creeks and rivers.           14,000 ha before it was reclassified by the Ministry of Agriculture
Most of the riparian forest along the Nam Ou and its tributaries           and Forests – Forest Inventory and Planning Department (FIPD) as
is unstocked due to selective logging. Large emergent trees are            Phu Sen National Protection Forest covering 9,495 ha.
often present above a dense mid-story and understory. Riparian
forest usually does not extend further than 50 m from the creek or         The Phou Taleng Provincial Conservation Forest is located within
river edge.                                                                the Boun Nua District. The forest currently covers around 14,310 ha,
                                                                           but its boundaries have been reclassified by the Ministry of
Bamboo forest is widely distributed across the region and occurs           Agriculture and Forests – FIPD, expanding its area to about
primarily in areas previously subject to shifting cultivation. Areas       16,000 ha.
classified as bamboo forest have at least 80% composition of
bamboo species with canopy heights of up to 15 m.                          The Nam Lan Provincial Conservation Forest is located in the
                                                                           southwest corner of Phongsaly Province, adjacent to the Lao
In-channel vegetation occurs within the Nam Ou itself and the              PDR-China border. Covering around 15,200 ha, the forest is a
channel of major tributaries such as the Nam Khang. This vegetation        mountainous area with altitudes from 600 masl to 1,900 masl
occurs on sandbanks, sandbars, and rocky outcrops within the river         and reportedly contains significant areas of primary forest and
channel.                                                                   supports a wide range of amphibian species. Tourism in this area
                                                                           is promoted by the Phongsaly Forest Conservation and Rural
                                                                           Development Project.

                                                                           Oudomxay has 130,000 ha of protection forests, 133,000 ha of
                                                                           reservoir forests, and 64,000 ha of production forests lying within
                                                                           the Nam Ou Basin. In Luang Prabang, there are 198,923 ha of
                                                                           national protection forest, 57,540 ha of district protection forest,
                                                                           and 8,028 ha of district reservoir forestry.




38
                                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Fauna –                                                                     Lao PDR has 27 important bird areas (IBA; BirdLife International
Threatened Species, including Wildlife & Birds                              2004), with only one located in the Nam Ou Basin – the Phou Den Din
                                                                            Important Bird Area (IBA No. LA008). This area covers around
                                                                            126,880 ha and comprises the upper Nam Ou and its catchment
         Box 14                                                             within the Phou Den Din NPA. To be classified as an IBA,
                                                                            the site must fulfil at least one of the three criteria: 1) The
                                                                            area holds significant numbers of one or more globally
   Animals of Conservation Significance                                     threatened species, 2) is among a set of sites that together
                                                                            hold a suite of restricted-range species or biome-restricted
   (Endangered Species) in the Nam Ou Basin
                                                                            species, and 3) has exceptionally large numbers of migratory or
                                                                            congregatory species.
   Critically Endangered
   •	 Northern White Cheeked Gibbon, Nomascus
                                                                            A second KBA is in the lower Nam Ou from above Meuang Ngoy
      leucogenys
                                                                            to Pak Ou because the critically endangered Siamese Giant Barb
                                                                            (Catlocarpio siamensis) is found there. Villagers attending the 2017
   Endangered
                                                                            provincial validation workshops confirmed its presence in the area.
   •	 Francois’s Langur, Trachypithecus francoisi
   •	 Phayre’s Langur, Trachypithecus phayrei
   •	 Banteng, Bos javanicus
   •	 Sunda Pangolin, Manis javanica
   •	 Chinese Pangolin, Manis pentadactyla
   •	 Large Antlered Muntjac, Muntiacus vuquangensis                        Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP) in the Nam Ou
   •	 Indochinese Tiger, Panthera tigris corbetti
   •	 Fishing Cat, Prionailurus viverrinus
   •	 Green Peafowl, Pavo muticus                                                     Box 15
   •	 Elongated Tortoise, Indotestudo elongata
   •	 Big-headed Turtle, Platysternon megacephalum

   Source: ESL. (2010). Nam Ou Cascade Terrestrial Biodiversity and
                                                                                Non-Timber Forest Products (NTFP) in the
   Forest Resource Use Study.                                                   Nam Ou Basin

                                                                                The collection of NTFP is an important livelihood activity
                                                                                for all villagers living in the Nam Ou Basin, whether it is
                                                                                for food for home consumption or sale, or as medicinal
                                                                                plants. Many species have high commercial value and are
                                                                                sold for cash income.
                                                                                NTFP species were reported as being collected in many
                                                                                areas of the Nam Ou River Basin; these are listed in order
                                                                                of widespread use:

                                                                                Most widespread
                                                                                •	 Galangal (Alpinia galanga)
                                                                                •	 Bamboo shoots (Bambusa spp.)
                                                                                •	 Fern (Diplazium esculentum)
                                                                                •	 Cardamom (Amomum krervanh) (not in lowest area)
                                                                                •	 Centella (Centella asiatica) (not in highest area)

                                                                                Common
                                                                                •	 Paper mulberry (Brousonetia papyrifera)
                                                                                •	 Broom grass (Thysanolaena maxima)
                                                                                •	 Acacia (Acacia spp.)
                                                                                •	 Amorphophallus (Amorphophallus rhizomatosus)
                                                                                •	 Elephant’s ear fig tree (Ficus auriculata)
                                                                                •	 Melientha (Melientha suavis)




                                                                            Several tree species are used by villagers mostly for house-
                                                                            construction purposes. Two tree species are used throughout the
                                                                            Nam Ou Basin: Duabanga grandiflora (Maiten) and Toona sureni
                                                                            (Mai ngom). Two species are found throughout the basin except
                                                                            in the north: Grape myrtles (Lagerstroemia spp.) (Mai yen) and
                                                                            Mechelia (Paramechelia baillonii) (Mai sai). Two are mainly found
                                                                            in the middle sections of the basin: Beechwood (Gmelina arborea)
                                                                            (Mai so) and Island longan (Pometia pinnata) (Mai kha). Four have a
                                                                            less even distribution: Leichhardt tree (Nauclea orientalis) (Mai kan
                                                                            luang) is found mainly in the north, Fijian longan (Pometia eximia)
                                                                            (Mai kuang leng) and Protium serratum (Mai mak faen) in the middle
                                                                            reaches, and Schima wallichii (Mai ta lo) mainly in the south.




                                                                                                                                               39
                                               NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
     National Protected Areas (NPA) in the Nam Ou Basin

           Box 16


     National Protected Areas

     With 222,000 ha, Phou Den Din covers about 8.6% of the Nam Ou Basin and is the oldest NPA. Phou Den Din represents about 1% of
     Lao PDR’s total land area and about 6.4% of all 23 NPA in the country.

     According to Berkmüller and Southammakoth (1995), Phou Den Din has the following characteristics:

     •	 A mid-ranking NPA in terms of biological importance. Although being the only NPA in biogeographic sub-unit 10c, surveys of birds
        and herptiles to date suggest it is not particularly distinct from other northern Lao sites.

     •	 Three bird species are not recorded from any other National Biodiversity Conservation Area (NBCA,) but none of them are key
        species.

     •	 Elephants (Elephas maximus), gibbons (including Nomascus leucogenys), and a high density of Lesser Fish-eagles (Icthyophaga
        humilis) live in the area.

     •	 High densities of deer, otter, and water-monitor tracks around the Nam Ou, upstream of the Nam Khang, suggest that this area is
        little affected by hunting, almost certainly due to its difficulty of access. The extent of disturbance in the other remaining block of
        old forest, near the Vietnamese border, is unknown.

     •	 Reports of several species of large mammals; more extensive surveys may well yield appreciable numbers of additional species
        (Berkmüller and Southammakoth 1995).

     In 2013, a second NPA was created in Oudomxay Province by upgrading the Phou Hiphi conservation area (MONRE, 2016), covering
     87,000 ha in the area on the east bank of the Nam Kor. The Nam Kat, a tributary of the Nam Kor, flows through the center of this new
     NPA. It contains a mixture of pristine old-growth forest with giant dipterocarps (nyang oil tree), limestone outcrops, and mountains
     surrounding the eastern side of Oudomxay town.

     Immediately adjacent to Phou Den Din but outside of the Nam Ou Basin is the Muong Nhe National Nature Reserve in Vietnam,
     covering nearly 300,000 ha. It has 47,400 ha of forest (mostly evergreen and bamboo), 204,200 ha of grassland, and 44,000 ha of
     shifting cultivation and scrub.

     There is one Vietnamese NPA lying within the Nam Ou Basin: Muong Phang. It is an ecological and historical protected area known for
     being the location of General Vo Nguyen Giap’s headquarters during the Dien Bien Phu campaign against the French in 1954. Lying
     at around 1,000 masl, Muong Phang covers an area of 92 km2 mainly comprising forests with centuries-old trees. It surrounds the Pha
     Khoang Lake with two hydropower plants, Thac Bay and Na Loi.




      Remy Rossi © 2016


40
                                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
3.3                              PEOPLE & LIVELIHOODS

 People of the Nam Ou Basin                                                               of Oudomxay and Luang Prabang residents live in the basin.
                                                                                          Compared to the other two provinces, Luang Prabang has the
                                                                                          largest population but a majority of its residents live in urban
 Administration                                                                           areas. Over the last decade, population density has increased in
                                                                                          all three provinces: Oudomxay recorded the biggest change with
 The Nam Ou Basin is located within the boundaries of three                               its population density rising from 17.3 persons/km2 in 2005 to 20.0
 provinces – Phongsaly, Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang – but not                             persons/km² in 2015, while Phongsaly was the lowest (Figure 7).
 all of their areas fall within the hydrological boundaries of the Nam
 Ou Basin. There are 17 districts within the basin: seven in Phongsaly,                   Between 2005 and 2015, the population growth rate in the three
 six in Oudomxay, and four in Luang Prabang. All districts and nearly                     provinces of the Nam Ou Basin has been uneven. Almost three-
 all villages in Phongsaly are in the Nam Ou Basin. The mainstream                        quarters of the people live in rural areas of the provinces; most
 Nam Ou and territories within the 5-km corridor of the river lie                         of them engage in subsistence agricultural activities and depend
 within Phongsaly and Luang Prabang provinces; only tributaries of                        heavily on natural resources for their livelihoods. A high percentage
 the Nam Ou are in Oudomxay Province.                                                     of the rural population does not have road access. In Phongsaly,
                                                                                          for example, over 21% of the population live in rural areas without
                                                                                          roads.

                                                                                          From the Agricultural Census (2011), over a quarter of farming
 Population                                                                               households live within a 5-km corridor of the mainstream Nam Ou
                                                                                          and the Nam Phak. Results of the 2016 household survey indicated
 In 2015, the total population of the three provinces was 885,200,                        that most households (around 96%) within 5 km of the Nam Ou are
 with an estimated 404,094 people (45.7%) living within the                               headed by men.
 watershed boundaries of the Nam Ou Basin (Table 5). About 96%
 of Phongsaly’s population live in the basin, but only one-third




                   The Nam Ou Basin demographics (based on the availability of data from the Population and Housing Census 2015)
 Table 5           – Phongsaly, Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang; number inside basin by district and total number outside the Nam Ou
                   Basin.


                          Number of Households               Household Size             Total Population           Population Inside            % of Total
                                                                                                                     Basin (est.)¹              Population
 Phongsaly                           33,800                          5.1                      171,400                     163,858                 95.6%
 Oudomxay                            55,200                          5.4                      295,800                     101,459                 34.3%
 Luang Prabang                       80,900                          5.2                      418,000                     138,776                 33.2%
 Total                             169,900                           5.2                     885,200                     404,094                  45.7%

 ¹ The number of population within the basin is estimated based on Data of the Agricultural Census 2010/11, however in terms of distribution.



 Ethnic Groups/Ethnicity

 The 2005 population census shows that residents of the Nam Ou
 Basin are ethnically diverse. In Phongsaly, the Akha account for the
 largest percentage of the provincial population (27%), followed by
 the Khmu (22%), and the Songsiri (18%). In Oudomxay, the Khmu
 is the largest (59%), followed by the Hmong (14%) and the Lue
 (around 10%). The Khmu makes up almost half (47%) of Luang
 Prabang Province’s population, followed by the Lao ethnic group
 (29%) and the Hmong (16%).




                                                                                                                                                             41
                                                     NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
            Box 17          People in the Nam Ou Basin




 Akha                                                                       Khmu
The                                                                         The




 The Akha originally settled in the area from Kuaichao and Yunnan,          The Khmu are one of the oldest inhabitants in northern Lao PDR.
 which are part of China today. Akha villages are usually situated on       Khmu villages are found near streams in lower mountainous areas,
 hillsides 600-1,000 masl and have 40 to 50 households per village.         varying in size from 10 to 90 houses. The Khmu practice shifting
 Their houses are made of materials from the forest such as bamboo          cultivation, growing crops such as cassava, maize, peanuts, other
 and wood planks. Most Akha villages are located far from rivers.           vegetables, and tobacco. They raise buffalo, goats, pigs, and
 Qualitative information on the Akha suggests that they would be            chickens; they also fish, hunt, catch rodents, and collect NTFP for
 little affected by changes in water-resource availability in the Nam       cash and food. The Khmu are skilled at working with metal and
 Ou Basin because they mainly practice upland agriculture with              weaving with bamboo and rattan, making baskets, fish traps,
 little reliance on fishing.                                                and other tools and utensils, which are sold or traded. Qualitative
                                                                            information on the Khmu suggests that they would be significantly
                                                                            affected by changes in Nam Ou water resources because of their
                                                                            reliance on fisheries and belief in the Hom Spirit.




 Lao                                                                        Singsily
The                                                                         The


                         ethnic
                         group
 The Lao ethnic group has been in Lao PDR for hundreds of years.            The Singsily have lived in Lao PDR for centuries near streams in
 They usually live in lowland areas near river/streams and have             mountainous areas 600-1,000 masl. Singsily villages range from
 followed Theravada Buddhism for centuries. The Lao practice                20 to 100 households in size. They grow both dry and wet rice in
 lowland paddy and upland agriculture, growing crops such as                upland/shifting cultivation areas, with glutinous rice being the
 vegetables, tobacco, cotton, fruit, and cassava. They also raise           most common; other crops include corn, cucumber, sugar cane,
 buffalo, cattle, pigs, poultry, and dogs. Fish are an important source     cabbage, lettuce, and some tobacco. Chicken, pigs, and buffalos
 of food and income for the Lao who fish in rivers, streams, lakes,         are the livestock often raised. Singsily women are skillful in sewing
 and other areas. They will be significantly affected by changes in         clothes, while men can make simple tools such as knives, axes,
 Nam Ou water resources because lowland agriculture, including              machetes, and crossbows. They also weave baskets, fish traps,
 paddy and riverbank gardening, is highly dependent on water and            and storage baskets. Singsily households would be significantly
 they rely on fish as a food supply and income source.                      affected by changes in Nam Ou water resources as their villages
                                                                            are located close to streams/rivers and they believe water spirits
                                                                            influence the results of harvests.




 Hmong                                                                      Lue
 The                                                                        The




The Hmong migrated from the Tibetan region in China into Lao                The Lue originally came from China’s Guangdong Province. Their
PDR in the mid-19th century. The Hmong practice mainly shifting             villages are located at altitudes 150-400 masl near rivers/streams.
cultivation, including rice and maize. They are skilled at animal           They grow mostly glutinous rice as a staple food and other crops
husbandry, raising cattle, buffalos, horses (historically), goats,          such as corn, tobacco, cotton, fruits, and vegetables. They raise
pigs, dogs, and chickens. Handicrafts form an important part of             buffalo, pigs, and poultry. They work with silver, weave baskets,
their livelihoods, including blacksmithing, baskets, jewelry, and           and make sarongs, handbags, and other handicrafts. If there are
embroidery. They fish only occasionally; as a result, changes in            changes in Nam Ou water resources, the Lue would be affected
water resources in the Nam Ou Basin will affect them less as they           because of their dependence on rivers/streams for farming.
mostly practice upland agriculture.




Remy Rossi © 2016


42
                                                     NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
    Figure 7   Population by sub-catchment in the Nam Ou Basin.




                                                                                                  C o d e Su b -c at c h m en t Nam e
                                                                                                   GO
                                                                                                   C o d e Gnot  Ou
                                                                                                            Su b -c at c h m en t Nam e
                                                                                                     GO Lower
                                                                                                   LGO      Gnot OuGnot Ou
                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                    LGO     Lower Gnotcatchment
                                                                                                           Mainstream      Ou       A
                                                                                                            Mainstreamcatchment
                                                                                                     BA Mainstream         catchmentBA

               GO              NK                                 VIET NAM                                  Mainstreamcatchment
                                                                                                     CB Mainstream         catchmentCB

               GO              NK                                 VIET NAM                           D      Mainstreamcatchment
                                                                                                      C Mainstream         catchmentDC
                                                                                                     E      Mainstreamcatchment
                                                                                                      D Mainstream         catchmentED
                                                                                                            Mainstreamcatchment
                                                                                                     FE Mainstream         catchmentFE
                                                                                                    NBF Nam     Ban
                                                                                                            Mainstream     catchment F
                                                                                                     NB Nam
                                                                                                   NBk     NamBak Ban
                      LGO                                                                           NBk Nam
                                                                                                   NH      NamHounBak
                       LGO                       A                                                  NH Nam
                                                                                                  NHb      NamHub Houn
                                                 A                                                  NK Nam
                                                                                                   NHb     NamKhang
                                                                                                                  Hub
                                                                                                     NK Nam
                                                                                                    NL     NamLengKhang
                                                                                                     NL Nam
                                                                                                   Nna     NamNouaLeng
                           NNy                                                                      Nna Nam
                                                                                                   NNg     NamNga Noua
                           NNy                                                                      NNg Nam
                                                                                                   Nny     NamNgayNga
                                                            NH
   CHINA                            B                       NH                                      Nny Nam
                                                                                                    NP     NamPok Ngay
   CHINA                            B                                                                NP Nam
                                                                                                   NPk     NamPhakPok
                                                                                                    NPk Nam Phak



                                                   C           NB
                        NL                         C
                        NL                                     NB

                                        NP
                                        NP         D                                          NNa
                                                   D                                          NNa




                                  NPk
                                  NPk                                        E
                                                                             E
LAO PDR                                                                                NHb
LAO PDR                                                                                NHb

                                               NBk
                                               NBk
                                                                                             LEGEND
                                                                                              LEGEND
                                                                                             Total Population by sub-catchment
                                                                  F                          (persons)
                                                                                              Total Population by sub-catchment
                                                                  F                           (persons)
                                                                                                     0 - 1500
                                NNg                                                                   0 - 1500
                                                                                                     1500  - 10000
                                NNg                                                                   1500 --10000
                                                                                                     10000    20000
                                                                                                               20000
                                                                                                      10000--40000
                                                                                                     20000
                                                                                                      20000 - 40000
                                                                                                     >40000
                                                                                                      >40000
                                                                                                     No  data
                                                                                                      No data
                                                                                                   Sub-catchment boundary
                                                                                                    Sub-catchment boundary
                                                                                                   Country boundary
                                                                                                    Country boundary
                                                                                             Data
                                                                                             Source:sources:
                                                                0     5 10       20
                                                                                              Source: River Commission Secretariat
                                                                                             1. 	 Mekong
                                                                  0   5 10        km.
                                                                                 20          2. 	Population data by village: Lao Census
                                                                                      km.         of Agriculture 2010/2012

                                                                                                                                          43
                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Remy Rossi © 2016




 Baseline vulnerability                                                   Dependency ratio is defined as the number of individuals aged
                                                                          below 15 or above 64, divided by the number of individuals aged
 Life expectancy is higher for women than men in all provinces            15 to 64, expressed as a percentage. The higher the dependency
 of the Nam Ou Basin. Phongsaly has the highest life expectancy,          ratio, the more difficult it is for a household to adapt to changes that
 followed by Luang Prabang, for both sexes despite having the             may be required by a decline in livelihood resources. Phongsaly
 lowest percentage of population with access to health services;          and Oudomxay share the same, high dependency ratio of 0.8.
 only 5.3% of its population has access to a licensed pharmacy. More      This means that people in Oudomxay would be more vulnerable
 than half of the population in the three provinces have access to        to negative changes because they are poorer and have more
 midwives and health volunteers.                                          unproductive household members to feed compared to people in
                                                                          the other two provinces.
 Overall, less than 5% of the total sampled heads of households
 are females. Women aged between 15 and 49 in Phongsaly and               Poverty in rural areas is caused by factors such as limited
 Oudomxay give birth to nearly four children on average, while            opportunities for skill development, lack of investment in the area,
 women in the same age group in Luang Prabang give birth to just          a high dependence on rain-fed farming, the collection of NTFP, and
 over 3 children.                                                         fisheries, which are highly seasonal. Communities are therefore
                                                                          vulnerable to any changes in livelihoods or access to natural
 Literacy rates for women are lower than men in all three provinces.      resources. Vulnerability in this context is not fixed, but highly
 In Phongsaly, less than half of its population is literate, with a       dynamic. Poverty distribution in the Nam Ou Basin shows that the
 literacy rate of 53% for men and 34% for women; in Oudomxay,             poorest province is not the remotest; Phongsaly, a mountainous
 73% of men and 40% of women are literate; the figures are 80%            province, has the highest percentage of population employed in
 for men and 55% for women in Luang Prabang (National Statistics          the agricultural sector, but the other two provinces with larger
 Center 2007).                                                            urban centers – Meuang Xay and Luang Prabang – are in fact
                                                                          poorer (Figure 8).
 A low percentage of the Nam Ou Basin’s population has completed
 secondary education or higher. If people’s livelihoods in these
 provinces are affected by changes in access to natural resources,
 less than 13% of Luang Prabang’s population may be able to find
 better opportunities elsewhere and less than 7% in Phongsaly and         More than half (53.9%), of the villages surveyed in Phongsaly had
 9% in Oudomxay can do so.                                                access to electricity. Although access is much higher in Oudomxay
                                                                          (74%) and Luang Prabang (71%), the electrification rate in these
 Water resources, such as fish, other aquatic animals and plants,         provinces is among the lowest in the country. However, LECS4
 and riverbank gardens, are an important part of people’s nutrition       data indicate that the percentage of villages with electricity has
 in the Nam Ou Basin. A food security study found that wild meat          increased between the LECS 2002/03 and 2007/08 surveys. In the
 and aquatic resources, especially wild fish, were the biggest            northern provinces, including three in the Nam Ou Basin, access to
 source of animal protein in rural parts of the country (World            electricity increased from 22% to 51% over this period.
 Food Programme, 2007). The 2016 household survey within the
 5-km corridor of the Nam Ou and the Nam Phak showed that the             The percentage of people living in villages with piped water
 value of water resources, including irrigated rice, fish, and other      supply is low in all three Nam Ou Basin provinces, ranging from
 aquatic animals, makes up 15-28% of the total monetary value of          under 15% in Phongsaly to just over 25% in Luang Prabang. Within
 daily consumption. Changes in water resources will directly affect       the 5-km corridor in 2016, most households (93%) obtained water
 the nutrition of people in the basin. Fish have been the basis of        from piped water sources, often connected from small streams
 subsistence livelihoods for rural people in the country and will         running from hills or mountains near the villages. Less than 7% of
 remain important in the years to come.                                   Phongsaly’s population has access to markets, while the figures are
                                                                          13% in Luang Prabang and 11% in Oudomxay.




44
                                                   NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
    Figure 8   Poverty rate, infant mortality rate, and child malnutrition by province.




               GO                 NK                                VIET NAM



                       LGO
                                                     A


                             NNy
                                                               NH
   CHINA                            B (12.3)
                                Phongsaly
                                Infant mortality: 151
                                Child underweight: 34.1
                                Child stunting: 61.1

                                                      C            NB
                          NL


                                         NP                                                     No Data
                                                      D                                         NNa




                                     NPk
                                                                               E

LAO PDR                                                                                 NHb
                       Oudomxay (30.1)
                       Infant mortality: 100
                       Child underweight: 28.7     NBk
                       Child stunting: 54.9

                                                   Luangprabang (25.5)                         LEGEND
                                                   Infant mortality: 107                       Poverty Rate
                                                   Child underweight: 19.8
                                                                     F
                                                   Child stunting: 45.6                               10 - 20%
                                                                                                      20 - 30%
                                   NNg                                                                30 - 40%
                                                                                                      No data

                                                                                                     Sub-catchment boundary
                                                                                                     Country boundary


                                                                                              Data sources:
                                                                                              1. 	 Mekong River Commission Secretariat
                                                                                              2. 	 Poverty rate: LECS5 (2013)
                                                                    0   5 10       20         3.	 Infant mortality: ISIS 2012
                                                                                    km.       4.	 Child malnutrition: ISIS 2012

                                                                                                                                         45
                                       NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Livelihoods
Key Livelihood Activities of Nam Ou Basin Residents                         Results of the 2016 Household Survey indicate that a substantial
                                                                            proportion of the working-age population in the 5-km corridor of
Households in the three provinces of the Nam Ou Basin undertake             the Nam Ou engage in rice cultivation in upland (45%) and paddy
different livelihood activities around the year, including paddy            (26%) areas as their main livelihood activity. The high percentage of
cultivation, upland cultivation of rice and other crops, fishing,           people undertaking upland rice cultivation as their main livelihood
collection of OAA and plants, riverbank gardening, raising                  activity is partly because only 2.2% of the basin is flat and the rest
livestock, hunting, collection of NTFP, and planting of industrial          of the area has steep slopes.
trees such as teak (Table 6). Households interviewed in 2016 said
their most important livelihood activities include, but are not             The 2016 survey results show that over 70% of all respondents
limited to, those pertaining to rice cultivation and livestock. Fishing     said their household members went fishing within the past year.
is also important, particularly during the dry season and the onset         Fisheries are important to the local subsistence economy for
of the wet season.                                                          many communities along the Nam Ou as fish can both be eaten
                                                                            and traded/sold. Several previous studies conducted in Lao PDR
Close to 93% of the working-age population in Phongsaly is self-            and the Lower Mekong Basin have clearly demonstrated that fish
employed in owner-operated farms. In Oudomxay, the percentage               are a critical source of food and protein for local communities
is just 73.2%, while Luang Prabang was lowest (66.9%). This means           throughout the country. This is also true for residents of the Nam
Phongsaly would be most affected if significant changes occur in            Ou Basin.
its farming systems or access to local resources.




 Table 6           Main livelihood activity of working-age population by zone in the Nam Ou Basin.



                                                                                   Zone
     Livelihood
                                        1                       2                    3                       4                       5
     Not working                      0.8%                    2.3%                 1.8%                    1.2%                    1.3%
     Paddy                           43.9%                    0.2%                20.0%                   21.2%                   37.3%
     Fishing                          0.3%                    0.6%                 0.2%                    0.3%                    0.0%
     Temporary worker                 0.2%                    0.7%                 2.3%                    3.6%                    0.4%
     Permanent employee               1.8%                    1.4%                 4.5%                    8.0%                    4.4%
     Students/pupil                   7.7%                    10.9%               10.6%                   10.3%                   13.9%
     Business/Trading                 1.1%                    2.5%                 3.9%                    7.4%                    4.1%
     Housewife                        3.3%                    1.1%                 1.5%                    1.3%                    0.8%
     Other                            0.0%                    1.9%                 0.4%                    0.4%                    0.3%
     Upland rice                     37.9%                    70.9%               46.5%                   40.2%                   35.2%
     Other crops (not rice)           1.9%                    6.6%                 5.9%                    4.4%                    1.6%
     Livestock                        1.1%                    0.7%                 2.2%                    1.5%                    0.6%
     Total                          100.0%                   100.0%              100.0%                  100.0%                  100.0%



Agriculture                                                                 income in the Nam Ou Basin. One-third (33.2%) of the total sampled
                                                                            households along the 5-km corridor said they grew vegetables in
Only around 40% of villages within the 5-km corridor of the                 riverbank gardens within a year before the survey.
Nam Ou ranked upland rice as the most important livelihood
activity, according to the 2016 Household Survey. Close to 30%
of people living in the 5-km corridor do not have enough rice to
eat throughout the year and experience shortages for about five
months a year.                                                              Livestock
Few households in the Nam Ou Basin have land suitable for                   Livestock, especially buffalo and cows, are an important livelihood
cultivation of dry-season paddy or second crops; only nine                  asset that enhances household capacity to withstand or recover
households out of 1,499 sampled said they grew a second rice crop           from shock. Experience in Lao PDR shows that losing livestock has
(naxeng) in irrigated paddy within a year before the survey.                the most serious impact on long-term livelihoods and household
                                                                            security. The sale of livestock is an important source of funds when
Non-rice crops grown by Nam Ou villages include: maize, starchy             a disaster strikes or medical emergency arises. In rural areas of the
roots, peanut, soybean, vegetables, mung bean, tobacco, cotton,             country, the income from the sale of a buffalo can provide enough
sugarcane, coffee, and tea. According to the Lao Statistical Bureau         cash to buy rice for four to five household members for an entire
(2015a), productivity in Phongsaly is lowest among the three                year (World Food Programme, 2001). Livestock is therefore ranked
provinces for most crops, except for maize, sugarcane, and coffee.          by some villages for case studies as one of the most important
Riverbank gardens are an important source of household food and             livelihood activities.

46
                                                     NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Fisheries                                                                  Importance of Nam Ou Water Resources to Local
                                                                           Livelihoods
Over 70% of the sampled households in the 5-km corridor indicated
that they went fishing in the Nam Ou or one of its tributaries within      Water resources play an important role in food consumption.
a year before the survey. Over 90% of households in Zone 1 were            Results of the 2016 Household Survey show that on average, 20.6%
engaged in fishing, and nearly 80% of households in Zones 2 and            of the total food consumption value is derived from aquatic items,
3 did the same. Almost two-thirds (64.4%) of sampled households            including irrigated rice, fish, and OAA. The share of consumption
said they collected OAA; in Zone 1, over 90% of households                 value from water resources can be as high as 28% in Zone 1;
collected OAA, and households headed by women noted that                   this does not include vegetables from riverbank gardens due to
OAA collection was a more common activity for them compared                difficulties in separating sources of vegetables in the survey, and the
to fishing.                                                                results presented are therefore conservative. Overall contribution
                                                                           of water resources to cash income in villages in the basin is about
The amount of fish and OAA captured increases as one moves                 7% overall but much higher in specific zones (for example, over
from north to south along the Nam Ou; the total population also            24% in Zone 5 and 13% in Zone 3).
increases the further along downstream. The number of fishing
households within the 15-km corridor of the Nam Ou Basin is
higher in Phongsaly than Luang Prabang (Table 7).


                                                                           Changes in livelihood activities

                                                                           Information obtained through FGD and household surveys
                                                                           conducted in 2016 suggests that fish catches have declined on
Table 7         Number of fishing households in the Nam Ou                 the Nam Ou in recent years. In the eight villages selected for case
                Basin.                                                     studies, women and children who used to catch small fish and
                                                                           collect OAA and plants can no longer do so; this is the result of the
                                                                           hydropower developments and creation of reservoirs with steep
                       0-5km      5-10km      10-15km       Total          slopes in the natural river.
 Oudomxay                                         1           1
                                                                           Villagers said the number of fish species collected has also
    Nga                                           1           1            declined. For example, villagers of Ban Phoumeuang (near Nam
 Phongsaly              5,352       2,676        84        8,112           Ou 6) identified 41 fish species that they used to catch in the Nam
                                                                           Ou; following their move to the new resettlement village of Ban
    Boun-tai              43         89           3          135           Homsang, they report that they are only catching nine fish species
    Gnot-ou             2,641        983         12         3,636          in the reservoir, two of which are exotic – Tilapia (Oreochromis
                                                                           niloticus) and Common Carp (Cyprinus carpio). The experience
    Khoa                 704         263         12          979
                                                                           of other areas of Lao PDR and Southeast Asia show that species
    Mai                  249         261         18          528           diversity is reduced with the inundation of a reservoir; migratory
    Phongsaly            679         319         25         1,023          fish species and rhithron resident species move away, allowing
                                                                           generalist and exotic species to take their place. If there is insufficient
    Samphan             1,036        761         13         1,810          suitable habitat remaining, these species are likely to die out. It
    Boun-neua                                     1           1            is, however, possible that the villagers of Ban Phoumeuang have
                                                                           not yet adapted to alternative fish-capture methods required in a
 Luang Prabang          5,340       1,341        47        6,728
                                                                           deep, steep-sided reservoir.
    Nambak               465         686         32         1183
    Ngoy                2,751        222          9         2982           In some of the case-study villages, villagers from Ban Pak Ou, Sop
                                                                           Kong, and Phou Meaung said they could no longer collect river
    Pak-ou              2,100        265          2         2367           weed following the construction of hydropower dams.
    Phonthong             24         168          4          196
                                                                           People in the Nam Ou Basin focus on upload rice as their main
 Total                 10,692       4,017        132       14,841          livelihood, and this has changed little over time. Only 68 of 1,500
                                                                           households surveyed in 2016 reported a change in their livelihood
                                                                           activity in the last five years; many of them live in Zone 3, where
                                                                           hydropower developments have taken place.

                                                                           A significant proportion of the people living along the Nam Ou
                                                                           and its main tributaries would be highly vulnerable to negative
                                                                           changes in water resources availability or access because of their
                                                                           reliance on fisheries and riverbank gardens. Overall, resilience
                                                                           capacity is low.




                                                                                                                                                    47
                                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
How dams are built and managed
will be vital for the people who
rely on the Nam Ou. A sustainable
economic growth model for the
river, with integrated and inclusive
management, can minimize the
potential negative impact on the
economy and local communities.
It will also contribute to long-term
development and sustainable growth
in the region.

Ounheuan Saiyasith, a native to the Nam Ou
Basin and Senior Program Officer (Water
Resources) for the Australian Aid Program
        WATER
                4.0
    RESOURCE USE &
MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES




                                                    49
    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Agriculture, Land use, Irrigation, & Livestock                              When these animal numbers are converted into Tropical Livestock
                                                                            Units (TLU) (1 cow=250 kg=1 TLU; 1 buffalo=2 TLU; 1 pig=0.2 TLU; 1
The Nam Ou Basin has 112,409 ha of agricultural land and                    goat/sheep=0.1 TLU), there are 135,795 TLUs in the Nam Ou Basin
34,249 ha of non-agricultural land, representing 4.6% and                   with a density of 5.52 TLUs per square kilometer. This is much lower
1.4% of its total land area, respectively. The amount of agricultural       than the average for Southeast Asia, which has a density of 17.7
land in each province increases with passage downstream, from               TLU per square kilometer (Peden, et al. 2007). Every year, some
2.8% in Phongsaly to 6.2% in Oudomxay and 17.7% in Luang                    1.276 million cubic meters are required as drinking water for the
Prabang.                                                                    livestock to keep them alive without weight loss, and some 60.7
                                                                            million cubic meters are required for fodder production (Peden, et
Cereal cultivation in the basin has been divided into four main crops:      al. 2007).
lowland rice, upland rice, sweetcorn, and Job’s tears (Poaceae). In
the wet season, there are nearly 19,000 ha of lowland paddy rice
(rain-fed and irrigated), 29,000 ha of upland rice, 4,500 ha of sweet
corn, and 1,000 ha of Job’s tears. In the dry season, there are only
1,460 ha of irrigated rice and small areas of other cereals cultivated.     Aquaculture & Fisheries
In recent years, there has been a marked expansion in crop                  In the Nam Ou Basin, there are 54,748 households participating in
production during the dry season, with a total of 4,621 ha being            the capture fishery and 5,496 households engaged in aquaculture,
cultivated in Phongsaly in 2016. The main fruits cultivated in the          usually fish ponds (Agricultural Census 2010). In Mai, Khoa, and
basin are longan (368 ha), mangos (205 ha), custard apple (184 ha),         Xai Districts, around 11 to 16% of households are engaged in
and lychee (171 ha). Banana plantations have rapidly developed              aquaculture.
for export to the Chinese market, especially in Phongsaly and
northern parts of Oudomxay; hillsides of banana plantations are             According to 2016 provincial data, there are 2,324 households
becoming a characteristic feature of the agricultural landscape in          engaged in aquaculture in Luang Prabang, roughly double the
some parts.                                                                 number of households recorded since 2009. Each household
                                                                            usually has one pond with an average size of 0.2 ha.
In 2010, there were 16,020 ha of rubber plantations in the river
basin, of which 10,394 ha (65%) were in Phongsaly. Five districts           Most agricultural households also participate in the capture fishery.
in Phongsaly have similar areas of rubber plantations ranging               In Pak Ou, 66% of agricultural households engage in the capture
from 1,300 to 2,700 ha, but Mai and Samphan Districts have much             fishery. In Nam Ou mainstream districts, over 90% of households
smaller areas of rubber. The 2010 Agricultural Census showed that           are engaged in fishing, with the highest number in Gnot Ou
462 ha of tobacco was cultivated in the wet season, with 60% in             (97%), Samphan (92%), and Khoa (99%); further downstream, the
Luang Prabang and 30% in Oudomxay.                                          percentage of households engaged in fishing is lower (71% in
                                                                            Ngoy and 66% in Pak Ou). The districts furthest away from the Nam
Only 110 ha of coffee were cultivated as of 2010, with under                Ou mainstream have the lowest proportion of households going
50% in Phongsaly and about 40% in Luang Prabang. However,                   fishing, including Nam Bak (49%), Xai (52%), Phongsaly (57 %), and
recent (2016) newspaper articles have indicated that concession             La (66%).
agreements with a Chinese company will develop up to 3,000 ha of
coffee plantations in Phongsaly. The province has long been known           Assuming that each agricultural household goes fishing about
as a tea-growing area: 1,227 out of 1,928 ha of tea planations were         three times a week, the total fish catch in the Nam Ou Basin is
in Phongsaly District, according to data from the 2010 census. The          estimated at around 42,500 tons per year (ranging from 21,000-
total area of tea in the Nam Ou Basin is 2,026 ha, with Oudomxay            64,000 tons per year), of which 18,600 tons are caught in Phongsaly,
and Luang Prabang having about 50 ha each.                                  10,200 tons are captured in Oudomxay, and 13,600 tons are caught
                                                                            in Luang Prabang.
According to the MRC Irrigation Database (2009), there are 178
existing irrigation schemes in the Nam Ou, of which 57 are fully
operational, 98 are partially operational, and 14 are not operational.
A total of nine schemes planned for construction between 2009
and 2016 have been included, of which eight are in the Nam Phak
and one in the Nam Nga. These schemes provide irrigation for a
total of 7,440 ha, including 3,416 ha during the dry season.

There are 492 planned irrigation schemes in the Nam Ou Basin
covering a total of 20,031 ha with 5,675 ha for dry-season irrigation.
The schemes will have an average size of 63.7 ha, with the smallest
one at 30 ha and the biggest at 400 ha. Together, they will irrigate a
total of 11,998 ha including 6,996 ha in the dry season throughout
the Nam Ou Basin. These figures roughly double the 6,339 ha of
total irrigated areas and 3,347 ha of dry-season areas presented in
the MRC irrigation database (2009).

There are over 39,000 cattle, 37,000 buffalo, and 121,000 pigs in
the Nam Ou Basin, with a smaller number of goats and sheep.
The proportion of buffalo (18,000) to cattle (13,000) is higher in
Phongsaly, but there are more cattle than buffalo in Oudomxay
and Luang Prabang. Animal densities strongly correlate with
human densities and are highest in areas with the most agricultural
activities, especially in and around irrigation systems.




50
                                                     NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Energy Sector / Hydropower Development                                                 The total installed capacity of the Nam Ou cascade will be
                                                                                        1,272 MW, generating 5,044 gigawatt hours per year (Table 8).
The Nam Ou has one of the highest potential for hydropower                             Each hydropower plant will operate for an average of 10.8 to
development among the tributaries in the Lower Mekong Basin.                           11.2 hours per day. The top dam in the cascade (Nam Ou 7) is the
Three of Sinohydro Corporation’s seven hydropower plants – Nam                         main regulating dam, storing water (1,060 Mm³) during the wet
Ou 2, 5, and 6 – have been constructed in the cascade on the                           season for release in the dry season. Nam Ou 6 and 5 have smaller
Nam Ou mainstream. Before these were built, there were six small                       regulating capacities of 246 Mm³ and 142 Mm³, respectively, while
hydropower plants in the Nam Ou Basin:                                                 the lowest four dams (Nam Ou 1-4) have very little regulating or
                                                                                       storage capacity and essentially act as run-of-river plants. They
•	 Nam Kor hydropower plant – 1.5 MW; built in 1996 on a tributary                     each have about 2 m draw-down, which enables them to balance
   of the Nam Phak.                                                                    daily power-generation schedules.

•	 Nam Ngay hydropower plant – 1.2 MW; built in 2002 but has                           For most of the cascades, the reservoirs back up almost to the
   now been submerged with the filling of the Nam Ou 6 reservoir.                      foot of the dam above, apart from the headwaters of the Nam Ou
                                                                                       2 reservoir to the Nam Ou 3 dam where there is about 30 km of
•	 Nam Ou 9 – 454 kW; funded by the government of Japan and                            free-flowing river, and the headwaters of the Nam Ou 3 reservoir
   came into operation in 2013 on the Nam Ou above Gnot-Ou.                            to the Nam Ou 4 dam where there is 15 km of free-flowing river.
                                                                                       Therefore, most of the mainstem Nam Ou will be transformed into
•	 Nam Boun – 110 kW in M. Boun Neua, Phongsaly; came into                             a series of reservoirs through the construction of these projects.
   operation in 1997		
                                                                                       A total of 64 villages have been affected by the three dams, with
•	 Nam Ngam – 110 kW in M. Mai, Phongsaly; funded by Japan’s New                       804 households being resettled from 22 of these villages. Roughly
   Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization in                        509 ha of land have been acquired for dam construction and
   2010; undergoing improvement                                                        5,189 ha of land have been inundated.

•	 Nam Mong – 70 kW in M. Nam Bak, Luang Prabang; operated by
   EDL.
	
There are two hydropower plants in Vietnam in the headwaters of
the Nam Noua:

•	 Na Loi hydropower plant – 9.3 MW; completed in 2003 on the Pa
   Khoang Lake.

•	 Thac Bay hydropower plant – 2.4 MW; completed in 1984 and
   repaired and upgraded in 2002.




Table 8           Specifications for the 7 Sinohydro hydropower projects in the Nam Ou Basin.



Nam Ou Hydropower Project                       1                2             3               4              5              6               7            Total
  Distance from Mekong (km)                     18              53            112            171             215            283            327             392
  Distance from d/s dam (km)                      –             35             68             59             44              53             47               – 
  Reservoir length (km)                        35.4            67.3           59.7           45.1           53.2            46.9           65.3¹           373
  Reservoir area (km²)                          9.6            15.7           13.3            9.4           17.2            17.0           38.2            120
  Area of stream channel                        7.1            13.5           8.6             4.2            4.1            3.5             5.4           46.4
  inundated (km²)
  Regulating storage capacity                   22              25             24             16             142            246           1,060           1,536
  (Mm³)
  Installed capacity (MW)                      180              120           210            132             240            180            210            1,272
  Annual output GWh                            710              448           826            519             977            726            838            5,044


¹ Reservoir length on the Nam Ou, main arm. The reservoir will also extend for 44.4 km along the Nam Khang (Sources: Sinohydro 2016, ESL 2010, CIA of Nam Ou cascade)
Profile document source: 2 tables in Profile (Tables 6-22 & 6-23).




                                                                                                                                                                   51
                                                       NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Other Industrial Sectors                                                   Urban & Rural Water Supply

Of all the river basins in Lao PDR, the Nam Ou Basin has among             Urban areas in the Nam Ou Basin are relatively small. The largest
the lowest number of industries. In 2013, the Asian Development            is the provincial capital of Oudomxay, which has a population of
Bank Core Environment Program carried out a study of industrial            around 25,000 people, followed by Phongsaly provincial capital.
pollution in the country (ADB Core Environment Program, 2013).             The district headquarters have smaller populations of under 5,000
Most of the industries are in Oudomxay, especially in Meuang               people. Total urban water usage in the Nam Ou Basin, including
Xai; industries in Luang Prabang Province are concentrated in the          Vietnam, is likely to be in the range of 12,000-19,000 m3/day. In
urban areas and not in the Nam Ou Basin.                                   Vietnam, the town of Dien Bien Phu has an estimated population
                                                                           of 100,000 people, making it the largest urban area in the basin.
Riverine sand and gravel dredging in the basin occurs in many
locations. A total of 22 sand extraction licenses have been granted:       There are many rural water supply schemes. In M. Pak Ou, 50 villages
14 on the Nam Kor, four on the Nam Muan, three on the Nam Phak,            are supplied with water, five of which come from springs and the
and one on the Nam Ngao – together, they extract 13,823 tons of            rest from streams and rivers; a total of 27,634 people are served
sand per day. Sand and gravel extraction is usually a dry-season           by these schemes. Eight schemes have problems with the water
activity, when the flows and river levels are lower and the sediment       source drying up and not producing sufficient quantity, while the
transport is reduced.                                                      water is too hard for two of these schemes.

Artisanal gold mining occurs in many villages and is usually
conducted by women and children. Impacts from these small
local operations are likely minimal and restricted to small areas.
However, in the middle sections of the river, there are large gold
mining operations, which may significantly affect water quality
and fisheries habitats (i.e., pools and riverbed).




Navigation & Tourism

River transport on the Nam Ou has historically been very important.
Boats move people and goods up and down the full length of
the mainstem, bringing them to villages and towns that would
have been difficult to access by land. Most parts of the river are
navigable, except in some areas where rapids restrict movements
of smaller vessels, especially during the dry season. Boats can carry
up to 2,000 kg of people and cargo when river conditions are ideal
(and 500 kg per boat in the dry season). The connectivity of the
river enabled trade and socialization between different villages
and ethnic groups in the basin.

The construction of the Nam Ou dams 2, 5, and 6 has dislocated
some of the boat routes. To address the issue, boat landings were
built on the reservoirs above the dam wall. Villagers now have to
portage around the dam sites, using local roads. To some extent, the
reservoirs have made navigation easier and safer compared to the
river, which was sometimes difficult to navigate, especially at low
water levels. However, the dams are expected to pose significant
and negative impacts on trade and overall vessel movement
between communities.

Tourism is an important economic sector in the Nam Ou Basin,
especially in the lower reaches of the river between Meuang Ngoy
through Nong Khiaw to Pak Ou. These include the areas with
dramatic limestone-karst landscape, caves, and river transport
to the Mekong. In 2015, there were 13,541 domestic visitors and
38,863 foreign tourists visiting the Nam Ou according to data
presented at the Luang Prabang provincial validation workshop.
Tourism also depends on boat transport on the river, especially
from Meuang Khoa to Nong Khiaw and Pak Ou. The construction
of Nam Ou 3 and 4 within the main tourist area will likely have a
significant impact on tourism.




52
                                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Remy Rossi © 2016
                    53
                      Acknowledging the private sector’s
                      pivotal role and responsibilities
                      in the use of the region’s river and
                      groundwater systems is a must in
                      order to minimize the negative social
                      and environmental impacts that
                      might offset economic gains.

                      Rachel Jolly,
                      First Secretary of the Australian Embassy in
                      Vientiane, Lao People’s Democratic Republic




Tessa Bunney © 2016
              5.0
     THE FUTURE
OF THE NAM OU BASIN




                                                  55
  NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
5.1                                 CHANGES IN WATER FLOW
                                    PATTERNS
 Flow patterns in the Nam Ou experienced significant changes in               In terms of water availability, the Nam Ou cascade will not affect
 2015 mainly because three of the dams in the cascade (Nam Ou                 the flows in the tributaries, where most of the offtakes for irrigation
 2, 5, and 6) were constructed and the associated reservoirs filled.          and water supply are located. The potential of irrigation projects in
 This resulted in very low water levels downstream. After the dams            the basin is large: 492 schemes have been proposed, with 20,031
 became operational in April 2016, flow patterns throughout the               ha of irrigation in the wet season and 5,675 ha in the dry season.
 basin became more regular, with increased flows in most of the dry           This is a significant increase from the current 3,979 ha of irrigated
 season and slightly reduced peaks in the wet season. Construction            area in the dry season and will require discussions among various
 of the other four dams in the cascade (Nam Ou 1, 3, 4, and 7) is             stakeholders, including the hydropower developers, on ways to
 expected to be completed by the end of 2020.                                 achieve this.

 During the dry season, the outflows will increase by more than               Under baseline conditions, the Nam Ou on average contributes
 20% compared to the baseline flows in January, rising to 73% in              about 16.1% to the flows in the Mekong at Luang Prabang. The
 April. By contrast, the outflows are 13% lower than the baseline             monthly contributions vary from 21.6% in July to 11.5% in April.
 flows in June and July; they return to the baseline level or above           The overall annual flow contribution will remain the same at
 from October to December.                                                    16.1% following dam construction, but in the dry season from
                                                                              January to April, the flow contribution will increase from 11-15%
 Flow patterns also change daily among all seven dams as the plants           to 18-22%; for example, the flow rate for March will rise from
 are operated for 10 to 12 hours a day. During the night, the plants          137 m3/sec to 229 m3/sec. In the wet season, the Nam Ou’s
 will only release minimum flows; the turbines will be brought                contribution to Mekong flows would drop from 20.6% to 17.9% in
 up to full flow in the morning with peaking operation. Ramping               July (from 1,370 m3/sec to 1,136 m3/sec), and from 21% to 19.5%
 rates, or actual changes in flow over time, can have significant             in August (from 1,844 m3/sec to 1,712 m3/sec).
 environmental impacts on aquatic biota and ecosystem health. For
 example, excessively fast ramping of flow rates can result in fish
 stranding or isolation, leading to a loss of habitats critical for fish;
 rapidly rising water levels can also pose health and safety issues for
 local communities living downstream of the dams.




5.2                                 CHANGES IN LAND USE &
                                    SOIL EROSION
The Nam Ou Basin stands out with a very high degree of land cover             Since the Nam Ou Basin is characterized by steep and very steep
change of more than 60% (Vo, et al. 2015). These changes in land              slopes with over 80% of the land having slopes of more than 15
use have been largely driven by the patterns of upland cultivation            degrees, the potential for erosion with changes in land use is very
and the conversion of shifting-cultivation areas into rubber and              high. Soil erosion will likely decrease when the rubber plantations
banana plantations, especially in the northern parts of the basin             mature, as this land has been converted from shifting cultivation
in Phongsaly.                                                                 and upland rice/corn. In 2010, there were 1,064 km2 of shifting
                                                                              cultivation, 94 km2 of industrial plantations (mainly rubber),
Changes in land use often lead to severe soil erosion: degraded               33,174 ha of upland rice and corn, and 16,020 ha of rubber
forests have more than 10 times the erosion rate of virgin and                plantation. Although only 110 ha of coffee were cultivated in 2010,
regrowth forests, and crops like cassava and upland rice also have            the prospect of an additional 3,000 ha of coffee will potentially
significantly higher erosion rates. Industrial plantations of rubber          increase soil erosion in Phongsaly.
and coffee also cause soil erosion, especially in the early stages of
establishment.




56
                                                       NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
       Box 18


Environmental Flows in the Nam Ou

Environmental flows refer to “the quantity, frequency, timing, and quality of water and sediment flows necessary to sustain freshwater
and estuarine ecosystems and the human livelihoods and well-being that depend on these ecosystems” (amended from The Brisbane
Declaration (2007)). Environmental-flow assessments require the collaboration of engineers, lawyers, ecologists, economists,
hydrologists, sociologists, resource economists, water planners, politicians, stakeholders, and communicators. Environmental flows are
negotiated through a process of data analysis and discussion of the physical, chemical, biological, social, resource-economic, economic,
biodiversity, and land-management implications of water-resource developments. Because of their wide reach, environmental flows
have become a central component of integrated water resources management (IWRM), which “promotes the coordinated development
and management of water, land, and related resources in order to maximize economic and social welfare in an equitable manner
without compromising the sustainability of vital ecosystems” (Global Water Partnership 2010).

Information on minimum flow releases or environmental-flow requirements is not available for the Nam Ou. The timing and volume
of water released from the Nam Ou hydropower projects will be determined by the operational requirements to meet power demand;
these water releases are expected to vary significantly on a daily and seasonal basis. Changes in flows downstream from the hydropower
projects will affect fish habitat by altering channel features as well as geomorphological and biological processes; the flows’ alteration
in volume, depth or velocity may result in the fish’s behavioral or physiological needs not being met. This can lead to changes in a
fish community’s abundance, age structure, and/or species composition. During periods of high precipitation, water is retained in
the reservoir, leading to lower than normal levels of downstream flows; flows will be higher when water is released later. Rapid daily
flow fluctuations from hydropower peaking requirements can result in reduced fisheries production in tailwaters and the presence
of fewer aquatic plants and benthic invertebrates that are important for fish. Altered flow regimes can reduce a habitat’s abundance
and quality for critical life-history stages, impede fish migrations, affect food chains that support fish (for example, algae, benthos, and
macrophytes), and change the community structure of fish and other aquatic biota.

The reservoir’s operation can cause chemical and physical changes that may significantly affect water quality downstream. The
temperature and DO levels of released waters may vary drastically at different periods of the year; the waters may also contain
suspended solids and other compounds such as hydrogen sulfide and ammonia. Sediment deposition will be significantly reduced –
this can have positive short-term effects for phytoplankton and some fish and invertebrate species but will generally lower productivity
in downstream areas. This could alter the abundance and composition of organisms on which fish feed, including algae, other plant
life, and benthic invertebrates. The extent of the impact from reduced sediment deposition will depend on planned sediment releases
during dam operation.

Stream benthic invertebrate communities downstream of the hydropower projects will be affected by changes in flow patterns,
temperature, substrate-particle size and stability, and water depth; this will likely result in reduced species diversity for a substantial
distance downstream of the dam.

Some Nam Ou fish species rely on inundated floodplains for breeding and feeding. Lower flows in the wet season, including reduced
peak flow conditions, will prevent several fish species from accessing these floodplains and tributaries downstream of the dam, which
are important habitats at critical life stages of these species. Several other species that rely on access to spawning areas upstream of
the dams will be eliminated.

The operation of the dams brings more even flows throughout the year compared to the baseline, but other changes include increased
dry-season flows, reduced wet-season flows, delayed and lower flood peaks, and diurnal variation in water level of up to 3 m, which will
significantly affect the livelihoods of people living downstream of the dams. Key anticipated impacts include changes in navigation
patterns and access routes to communities, loss of aquatic resources and riverbank gardens, declines in migratory and resident fish
species biodiversity (and replacement with primarily introduced species), and reductions in fish, OAA, and river weed harvests. As a
result, several communities have been relocated from the vicinity of the dam construction areas.




                                                                                                                                               57
                                          NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
5.3                                 CHANGES IN SEDIMENT
                                    TRANSPORT
 With the construction of the first three dams on the Nam Ou                  The annual total sediment load of about 140 million tons (Mt) per
 mainstream, the sediment transported by the river will increase and          year in the Mekong comes from two principal areas: the upper
 sediment trapping will rise significantly following the completion           basin in China and the Central Highlands of Vietnam. The former,
 of all seven dams (Shrestha 2013). During the construction of                sourced from less than 20% of the overall basin, produces some
 the dams, associated roads and other infrastructure, some of the             700 t/km2/yr or 60 Mt per year representing about 50-60% of the
 sediment will settle in the river and some will be transported into          regional total, while the latter produces an estimated 30% of the
 the Mekong. Similarly, sand mining and alluvial-gold mining in               total sediment load reaching the delta. The remaining 10% comes
 the river also releases considerable quantities of sediment from             from all the other tributaries combined, of which the Nam Ou is
 the banks and riverbed, which increases the sediment load and                the largest contributor with a historic total of about 6.7 Mt per year.
 concentration of suspended solids in the river for many kilometers           This is about 4.8% of the total sediment load added to the Mekong.
 downstream.                                                                  With the seven Nam Ou dams in place and only 1.94 Mt per year
                                                                              being released, the contribution of sediment from the Nam Ou
 With the completion of the three dams, much of the sediment in the           will drop significantly to about 9% of the sediment transported at
 river, especially bed loads (that is, the rocks, stones, and gravel that     Luang Prabang.
 move down the river during times of high flows), will be trapped
 in the reservoirs, especially at the top end where the rate of water
 flow slows down as it enters the reservoirs, forming a delta.

 The net effect will be a significant decrease in annual sediment
 transport rates downstream of Nam Ou 1. However, sediment
 loads will tend to increase with distance downstream of Nam Ou
 1 because of increasing contribution of flows (and sediment) from
 tributaries and increased entrainment of sediment within the
 Nam Ou. Seasonal changes to the erosion and sediment transport
 regime of the Nam Ou could affect the channel morphology
 and thus have an impact on aquatic ecosystems and fisheries
 downstream of Nam Ou; for example, scouring may reduce fish
 habitat during the dry season.




5.4                                 CHANGES IN FISHERIES
                                    RESOURCES & AQUATIC HABITATS
As a result of the hydropower cascade development, one of the                 The transformation from a free-flowing river into deep, steep-sided
biggest changes in the Nam Ou will be the alteration of aquatic               reservoirs will have profound implications for the river’s overall
habitats from a free-flowing river (with regular alternation of               productivity and the different species living in the aquatic habitats,
rapids, runs, and pools as deep as 20 m) to a series of slow-moving           including fish, amphibians and invertebrates, and aquatic plants
or semi-stagnant reservoirs ranging from 40 to 60 m deep near the             and algae. In general, a free-flowing river has greater biodiversity
dam walls.                                                                    and productivity than steep-sided, deep upland reservoirs, which
                                                                              tend to be oligotrophic. The spawning habitats of many fish species
With the completion of all seven dams in the cascade by 2020,                 will be lost, and the dams will prevent fish migration both from the
the total length of the reservoirs will extend almost continuously            Mekong and the Nam Ou mainstream to its tributaries, resulting in
from the bridge over the Nam Ou at Ban Tang, on the road to Gnot              a decline in biodiversity. This is already evident from observations
Ou (forming Arm 2 of Nam Ou 7), and down to Nam Ou 1 (18 km                   by villagers of Ban Phoumeuang, who stated that fewer fish species
upstream from the confluence). The total reservoir length will be             are caught in the new Nam Ou 6 reservoir compared to what they
417 km, with 372 km of the Nam Ou mainstream being converted                  were able to catch in the river.
into reservoirs. These reservoirs will be long and thin following
the river valley of the Nam Ou and its tributaries; they will be
generally 200-300 m wide with steep sides. Apart from the Nam
Ou 7 reservoir, which has significant storage and drawdown, the
inundated area is relatively small.




58
                                                       NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Areas with ecological features can be classified as of global,
national, provincial, and local importance. The reach of the
Nam Ou mainstem from above M. Ngoy to Pak Ou is viewed as
globally important because it is a KBA within a karst-limestone
landscape with many caves and serves as a spawning area for the
endangered Giant Barb (Catlocarpio siamensis). The other large sets
of river reaches of national and provincial importance are: (i) the
mainstem from M. Khoa to M. Samphan and up to the confluence
with the Nam Leng; (ii) the reaches within the Phou Den Din NPA
in Phongsaly; and (iii) the tributaries of the Nam Nga and the Nam
Bak because of their karst landscape and caves.

The entire mainstem of the Nam Ou is already heavily compromised
by completed dams (Nam Ou 2, 5, and 6) and those under
construction (Nam Ou 1, 3, 4, and 7). It is anticipated that most
of the river’s important reaches will come under pressure from
human activities.




          Box 19


    Mapping ecologically sensitive areas & human
    pressures on the Nam Ou

    An analysis of the ecologically sensitive river reaches
    in the Nam Ou Basin affected by existing and planned
    human activities has been applied following the method
    developed by the MRC – Initiative on Sustainable
    Hydropower 01 project (MRC, 2015). It uses the river-reach
    classification of the Nam Ou established by WWF (Lehner
    and Ouellet Dallaire, 2014) and assesses the ecological
    importance of different reaches based on the following
    criteria:

    •	 River reach lies within a KBA and protected areas –
       national and provincial

    •	 Scarcity of the river-reach type within the Nam Ou
       Basin, especially karst-limestone areas

    •	 River reaches above and below major confluences

    •	 Presence of hot springs and caves, culturally important
       areas

    •	 Recognized spawning areas of endangered fish species
       and areas known for endemic fish species

    Existing and planned pressures from human activities
    have been mapped, including urban areas (all the
    provincial and district centers), influencing water quality
    downstream, mining operations at the exploitation stage,
    sand and gravel extraction and alluvial-gold mining in
    the river, dry-season irrigation schemes, land use change
    (especially loss of forest cover), and existing and planned
    hydropower plants (Figures 9 and 10).




                                                                                            59
                                            NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
 Figure 9   Ecologically Sensitive Reaches in the Nam Ou River Basin.




                                     ກຊສ
                                    MONRE
                                                           Australian
                                                           Aid




60
                                            NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Figure 10   Existing and Planned Pressures on Nam Ou River Basin.




                                    ກຊສ
                                   MONRE
                                                                Australian
                                                                Aid




                                                                                           61
                                           NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
5.5                              WATER QUALITY
 The MRC has been measuring the Nam Ou’s water quality at Ban             Factors that may be contributing to the deterioration of water
 Hat Kham since 1985 and the results generally ranged from good           quality include:
 to very good. However, since the construction of the three dams in
 the Nam Ou cascade in 2013, the river’s water quality has shown          •	 Infrastructure construction activities, especially hydropower
 signs of deterioration. Water-quality analysis carried out by the           projects
 MRC near the mouth of the Nam Ou shows a trend of decreasing
 pH and DO as well as rising COD. Results from the biomonitoring          •	 Changes in water levels and flow rates
 carried out during the 2016 field studies indicate that the upper
 reaches and some tributaries have good aquatic health, but the           •	 The release of reservoir water
 lower reaches (Ban Pak Nga, Ban Pak Ou, the Nam Phak, and the
 Nam Noua) are variable and in poorer condition. More detailed            •	 Sand and gravel extraction, and gold mining
 water-quality and aquatic-health monitoring data are needed to
 confirm these findings.                                                  •	 Increased urbanization, for example, around Meuang Xai town
                                                                             on the Nam Kor, a tributary of the Nam Phak

                                                                          •	 Increased industrial activities

                                                                          •	 Increased commercial agriculture and agro-forestry

                                                                          •	 Poor waste disposal practices and lack of sewage treatment
                                                                             plants in the Nam Ou Basin.




5.6                              CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON
                                 WATER RESOURCES
Climate-change downscaling and modelling projections for the              Changes in annual stream discharges are likely to range from a
whole of the Lower Mekong have recently been undertaken by                17% decrease to a 66% increase in the future, which will lead to
the MRC, and some of the projections used in the Council Study            predicted changes in annual sediment yield, ranging from a 27%
have been applied to the Nam Ou Basin. Based on these studies,            decrease to about a 160% increase. Shrestha (2013) estimated
changes in temperature and rainfall are expected in the Nam               that under current conditions, about 7 Mt of sediment per year are
Ou Basin, although the extent of change remains unclear and               discharged from the Nam Ou into the Mekong. The final sediment
modeling results vary.                                                    discharge will be significantly influenced by the trapping of
                                                                          sediment in the Nam Ou cascade, which will reduce sediments to
Modeling results suggest up to a 3o C shift in seasonal temperature       between 1 and 2 Mt per year regardless of which climate-change
and a 27% decrease to 41% increase in seasonal precipitation. The         scenario is applied.
largest increase in temperature is observed in the dry season, while
the largest change in precipitation is observed in the wet season.




62
                                                   NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
5.7                               CHANGES IN LIVELIHOODS FOR
                                  PEOPLE LIVING ON THE RIVER
Community reliance on fisheries resources in the Nam Ou is                 gardens, river weed collection and harvesting, and artisanal mining
significant, and fish play an important role in the local subsistence      in the mainstream Nam Ou. Key biological and social assets that
economy. The hydropower cascade developments will result                   will be impacted by hydropower developments are presented in
in significant losses of fisheries and OAA resources used by               Tables 9 and 10.
local communities; this will have economic, health, and cultural
implications. Livelihood changes are also expected for riverbank




                                                                                                                                            63
                                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Table 9            Key Biological assets in the Nam Ou Basin which will be impacted by hydropower developments.



 Assets                                 Description
     Fish and fish habitat              Over 139 fish species are known to be present in the Nam Ou Basin, of which 9 are listed as Endangered
                                        on the IUCN Red List (including 1 Critically Endangered species). Both resident and migratory fish
                                        species are present; some species migrate to the Nam Ou via the Mekong River from Cambodia and Viet
                                        Nam, so the fisheries resources are of transboundary importance (Poulsen, et al. 2002). Fish life cycles
                                        revolve around the natural flow regime, which include specific triggers to migration at the onset of the
                                        wet season; availability of dry season habitats, especially deep pools; and, connectivity of the different
                                        sections of the river with the tributaries, particularly during the wet season. Fish are important to local
                                        subsistence economies and to livelihoods throughout the basin.

                                        Some fish species will thrive in the new reservoirs, others will move away into the smaller rivers upstream
                                        and populations will decline. The diversity of fish species in the reservoirs is likely to be lower than in
                                        the original river as reported by the villagers from Ban Homsang on the Nam Ou 6 reservoir, with the
                                        commonest species caught being the exotic species, common carp and Tilapia.

     Plankton and zooplankton; and      Plankton, zooplankton, benthic invertebrates and other OAA form the basis of the aquatic food chain.
     Other Aquatic Animals (OAAs)       OAA also provide an important source of food for local communities, particularly during the wet season.

     Other amphibians and reptiles      The upper sections of the Nam Ou contain a number of rare amphibians and reptiles which are important
                                        for biodiversity conservation in the region, and are also used as a source of food for local communities.

     Aquatic plants and ecosystems      Aquatic plants, especially algae (river weed) and macrophytes, are an important food source for many
                                        fish species. The upper sections of the Nam Ou contain a number of plants and ecosystems are important
                                        for biodiversity conservation in the region. River weed grows on rocks and pebble beds in relatively
                                        shallow, clear water during the dry season. In reservoirs and in reaches with fluctuating water levels and
                                        high sediment loads, river weed will not grow.




Table 10           Key Social assets in the Nam Ou Basin which will be impacted by hydropower developments.



 Assets                                 Description
     Fisheries and collection of OAAs   Local communities are highly dependent of fisheries and collection of OAAs for subsistence. Fish and
                                        OAAs are the main source of protein for most communities in Lao PDR and Cambodia. OAAs consumed
                                        included snails, frogs, shrimp, tadpoles and water insects and were important in both seasons. OAA are
                                        harvested mostly by women and children, especially in female-headed households. It is estimated that
                                        about 42,000 tons of fish are harvested from the Nam Ou and its tributaries each year.
     Riverbank gardens                  All communities located close to the river or streams develop dry season riverbank gardens. Seasonal
                                        variation in hydrology inundates areas and along the banks of the Nam Ou and its tributaries depositing
                                        sediment and nutrients and creating fertile alluvial soils. Local communities have developed strategies
                                        for maximizing harvests and working with natural hydrological conditions. For example, some riverbank
                                        crops are planted when water levels are high while others are planted when water levels have receded.
     River Weed                         River weed (Cladophora spp.) is collected throughout the Nam Ou Basin, both in the main channel and in
                                        the tributaries. Most families living in riverside villages engage in this activity, which makes a significant
                                        contribution to household income in the villages.
     Gold panning                       Artisanal gold panning undertaken by downstream communities will be impeded by the increased dry
                                        season flows and upstream communities through the inundation of the reservoir areas.




64
                                                      NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
65
                      Proper water management
                      is important to protect the
                      environment, to preserve water usage
                      for communities, and for economic
                      purposes.

                      Chanthanet Boualapha, Director General of the
                      Department of Water Resources




Tessa Bunney © 2016
                 6.0
RIVER BASIN GOVERNANCE &
       MANAGEMENT




                                                     67
     NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
6.1                               INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR
                                  NAM OU BASIN MANAGEMENT
 The main policies and strategies pertaining to river basin                According to the Decree No. 435/PM, MONRE is directly responsible
 management in Lao PDR include:                                            for planning and implementing integrated river basin management
                                                                           for the Mekong River Basin, transboundary river basins, and main
 •	 The Water and Water Resources Law (2017);                              river basins, including the Nam Ou. Under MONRE, agencies
                                                                           responsible for river basin management are DWR, Division of Water
 •	 The 8th Five-year National Socio-economic Development Plan             Resources under PONRE, and the Water and Forest Resources Unit
    2016-2020, officially approved at the VIIIth National Assembly’s       under DONRE.
    Inaugural Session, 20-23 April 2016, Vientiane; and
                                                                           DWR proposes the establishment of River Basin Committees and
 •	 Vision Until 2030 and the 10-Year Strategy (2016-2024) of the          their secretariats for basins in the country. DWR guides, supervises,
    Sector of Natural Resources and Environment.                           evaluates, and stimulates the activities of secretariats of River Basin
                                                                           Committees, Divisions of Water Resources at the provincial level,
 According to the Vision until 2030 and the 10-Year Strategy (2016-        and the Water and Forest Resources Unit at the district level. The
 2024) of the Sector of Natural Resources and Environment, the fol-        Division of River Basin Management and Development, under
 lowing have been accomplished and/or are planned:                         DWR, is responsible for planning and management of river basins.
                                                                           To date, no common approach is used across different river basins
 •	 Technical guidelines on IWRM have been created and tested.             in Lao PDR. Management and development of river basins should
                                                                           be conducted based on the unique characteristics, strengths, and
 •	 IWRM, including initial evaluation and management of                   problems of each basin. Another important role of DWR is its Center
    groundwater, water quality, flood, drought, and impacts of             for Data and Information on Water Resources, which creates and
    climate change, has been developed and improved.                       develops databases/networks on water resources at the central,
                                                                           river basin, provincial and district levels (Decree No. 3089/MONRE).
 •	 River Basin Committees for six river basins have been established
    based on characteristics of each basin. For the Nam Ou Basin, a
    River Basin Committee has been set up by relevant provinces;
    the committee would proactively manage the basin with
    coordination between central and local levels.

 •	 Integrated river basin management will be carried out to balance
    the use of water resources for socio-economic development,
    people’s livelihoods, and protection of ecosystems.

 •	 The Decree on River Basin Committees shall be improved.




6.2                               THE ROLE AND CAPACITY OF
                                  LOCAL AUTHORITIES
Based on the Ministerial Decree of MONRE No. 1467 dated 9                  Results of FGD and individual interviews undertaken during the
March 2012, PONRE manages and implements activities related                validation workshops in Luang Prabang, Oudomxay, and Phongsaly
to the conservation, protection, rehabilitation, development, and          in January 2017 indicate that implementation of these provincial
use of water and related resources. The Water Resources Division           strategies and plans has been challenging. Unclear coordination
under PONRE is tasked with developing plans, programs, and                 between relevant sectors, limited data/information, and lack of
detailed projects to implement the aforementioned activities in            human, technological, and financial resources all contributed to
coordination with the Secretariat of the River Basin Committee and         the difficulties in implementation.
relevant stakeholders.
                                                                           There are conflicting and sometimes duplication of laws. Roles and
According to the Ministerial Decree of MONRE No. 4384, DONRE is            responsibilities of different sectors are ill-defined and coordination
to implement regulations, strategies, plans, programs, and projects        between departments and sometimes even within their own
for the management, conservation, protection, rehabilitation, use,         divisions is weak. There is ambiguity in the allocation of decision-
and development of water resources within district boundaries.             making and management power between central and local
                                                                           authorities. Out-of-date legislation, such as the Law on Water and
                                                                           Water Resources (adopted in 1996), was also cited as a constraint
                                                                           to implementation.

68
                                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Staff shortages are common at both the provincial and district
levels, particularly the latter. Few newly-recruited staffers are
knowledgeable in water resources or related fields through formal
education. Technical work, such as monitoring water quality
and ecological health, requires on-the-job training. However,
most water monitoring and management activities associated
with hydropower development projects are performed by the
developer’s staff, leaving little room for government officials to
obtain on-the-job training. In writing proposals for new projects,
the role of PONRE staff is limited to filling in forms of potential
donors, such as the Environmental Protection Fund.

About 60 to 80% of the required budget is lacking for water-
related projects at the national and local levels. Available funds
come mainly from the state budget and private development
projects (for example, water-quality monitoring for hydropower
projects). The lack of technological resources is also constrained by
insufficient funding for the purchase and maintenance of scientific
equipment. Not many provinces have basic equipment such as
water-quality meters, biological-sampling equipment, computers,
cameras, and global positioning systems, and they are almost non-
existent in the districts.




                                                                                              69
                                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
                    Once complete, the Profile could
                    be used for the private and public
                    sectors to plan a more sustainable
                    future for the river basin. Primary
                    data will help companies and
                    officials understand the basin’s
                    key environmental and social
                    characteristics and how future
                    development could impact the river
                    and its communities.

                    Kate Lazarus,
                    Hydro Advisory Team Lead for IFC




Remy Rossi © 2016
                      CONCLUSIONS &
                                         7.0
                    RECOMMENDATIONS
The Nam Ou is one of the most important tributaries in Lao PDR and the whole Lower Mekong Basin. For
centuries, the river has been providing a stable water supply for domestic use and agriculture, fisheries, and
OAA resources as well as serving as a transportation corridor for local communities. However, the river and
surrounding watershed is rapidly changing because of hydropower and other developments. This Profile
provides important background information on the Nam Ou and aims to assist water-resource managers in
Lao PDR in future river-basin planning and management.




                                                                                                                 71
                            NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
 The following are key conclusions and recommendations:                    Monitoring programs for the Nam Ou Basin should, at a minimum,
                                                                           include:
 Need for Improved Management of Nam Ou Basin
 Resources                                                                 1.	Aquatic biological surveys to determine the effect of dam
                                                                              placements and associated impoundments on fish species
 Institutional mechanisms pertaining to water resource manage-                composition and abundance, both in the newly created
 ment in Lao PDR, including legislation and an administrative frame-          impoundments and in tributaries;
 work, are in place at the national, provincial, and district levels.
 The policy framework for water resource management in the Nam             2.	 Assessment of the effects of altered flow regimes on downstream
 Ou Basin is based on the 8th Five-year National Socio-economic                fish and OAA populations, and local communities, including
 Development Plan, the Vision until 2030, the 10-year Strategy                 impacts on the Mekong;
 (2016-2024) of the Sector of Natural Resources and Environment,
 the 8th Provincial Socio-economic Development Plan, and the               3.	 Determinations of the effect of altered temperature, sediment
 PONRE Strategic Plan. Mechanisms for planning and management                  levels, and water chemistry on fisheries, OAA, and aquatic
 of the basin are, however, limited to DWR. Furthermore, river-basin           habitats;
 management guidelines and a river basin management committee
 have not yet been formalized for the Nam Ou.                              4.	 Assessments of the effect of the projects on community fisheries,
                                                                               navigation, and livelihoods of local populations;
 Coordination between relevant sectors and stakeholders remains
 weak. PONRE and DONRE are facing other challenges in the                  5.	 Variables of dependence and resilience of people as stated in
 implementation of strategies, programs, and projects related to               this Profile should be used as basic indicators for long-term
 water resources. These include, but are not limited to, a lack of             monitoring to detect changes. Once changes are detected,
 relevant data/information and limited human, technological, and               linkages to the impacts of specific projects and human activities
 financial resources for effective river basin management.                     can be investigated and established.

 Recommendations: Coordination between the private sector                  Given the uncertainty and gaps in our understanding of the Nam
 and GoL agencies at the national and local levels needs to                Ou Basin, it is recommended that:
 be improved for management of the Nam Ou Basin. A River
 Basin Committee or Organization should be established to                  •	 Determinations of environmental flow values be made (for
 help manage water resources in the Nam Ou and address                        example, considering a habitat or holistic approach);
 issues associated with hydropower and other developments.
 Adequate budget needs to be allocated for water resource                  •	 A program of routine monitoring of stream flows should be
 management across the country, particularly in Phongsaly,                    initiated, including monitoring at a high frequency to measure
 Oudomxay, and Luang Prabang Provinces. Training and                          current ramping rates;
 capacity building is needed for PONRE and DONRE staff in
 aquatic and social sciences as well as river basin management.            •	 A long-term environmental monitoring program, including
                                                                              biological and geomorphology components, should be initiated
                                                                              to supplement baseline data; the program should continue
                                                                              through the construction and operation of all hydropower
                                                                              projects, covering the implementation of the ESMMP as well as
                                                                              ESO.
 Need for Monitoring and Mitigation of Impacts from
 Hydropower and Other Developments                                         •	 An adaptive management program should be developed
                                                                              to consider existing and baseline monitoring data as well as
 As part of the ESIAs produced for the Nam Ou cascade, an                     specific conditions that trigger such adaptive management.
 Environmental and Social Management and Monitoring Plan
 (ESMMP), a Resettlement Action Plan, and other related documents          Recommendations: Monitoring requirements and mitigation
 were prepared. The developers are also required to follow the             plans, as stipulated in the Project ESMMP, ESO, and associated
 Environmental and Social Obligations (ESO) signed as part of their        plans prepared for the Nam Ou hydropower cascade, should
 contract with GoL for operating the Nam Ou hydropower cascade.            be implemented and enforced. Information sharing and data
 Monitoring programs aim to provide ongoing information for                management systems need to be in place to help improve
 determining whether mitigative measures are effective, how                monitoring of the Nam Ou Basin. Monitoring results should
 environmental resources have been affected, and whether post start-       be made available to local communities, GoL, and the
 up corrective action is necessary. Monitoring must encompass all          international community.
 phases and components of the Nam Ou hydropower development
 project cycle, including pre-construction, construction, operation,
 and decommissioning.

 Monitoring programs should include measures to enhance and
 support fisheries and aquatic resources in the Nam Ou Basin
 as well as regular monitoring of water quality and community
 use of fisheries and other aquatic resources. Given the lack of
 information, data need to be collected on minimum flow releases
 and environmental flow requirements in this area. Monitoring
 of social changes associated with hydropower developments is
 needed, especially for communities that have been relocated
 and/or rely heavily on the Nam Ou resources for their livelihoods.
 Changes from baseline conditions should be addressed through
 increased monitoring and appropriate compensation to villagers
 for lost livelihoods. Monitoring needs to be transparent and the
 information should be shared between the developer, GoL, and
 the international community.


72
                                                    NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
Need for Protection of Livelihoods for People in the
Nam Ou Basin

For centuries, people in the Nam Ou Basin have relied on the river
for their water supply, fisheries and other aquatic resources, and as
a transportation corridor. The hydropower cascade developments
will result in significant losses of fisheries and OAA resources used
by local communities; this will have economic, health and cultural
implications. People living in the basin and their future generations
will continue to rely on the river for their livelihoods. It is uncertain
to what extent will the Nam Ou be able to continue to provide
important ecosystem services and natural resources required by
local communities. Overall, resilience capacity is low.

Recommendation: Monitoring and mitigation of social issues
associated with the Nam Ou hydropower cascade is essential to
ensure that local communities benefit from the developments,
and that livelihoods are maintained or improved compared to
before the developments.

This Profile has presented the key environmental and social
characteristics of the Nam Ou River Basin; the next step is to use
this information for water resource planning and management.
However, the mechanism for planning and management at
the basin level is limited to DWR and requires inter-ministerial
coordination. To enable proper planning and management based
on IWRM principles, the river-basin management guidelines
should be finalized and applied to the Nam Ou Basin. The
establishment of a Nam Ou River Basin Management Committee
(at least at the technical level) is also recommended. These
management plans will need to be guided by the 8th Five-year
National Social-economic Development Plan (2016-2020), the
Vision Until 2030, and the 10-year Strategy of the Sector of Natural
Resources and Environment.




                                                                                                73
                                                NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
                                                            8.0
                                                    REFERENCES
ADB Core Environment Program. 2013. Estimating industrial pollution in Lao PDR. Bangkok: GMS Core Environment Program.
B. Shrestha, M. S. 2013. “Impact of climate change on sediment yield in the Mekong River basin: a case study of the Nam Ou Basin, Lao PDR.”
   Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci., 17, 1–20, 2013,: 1-20.
Baran, E., Saray S., Teoh S.J., & Tran T.C. 2014. “Fish and fisheries in the Sesan, Sekong and Srepok River Basins.” In Chapter 3.1 in On optimizing
   the management of cascades or system of reservoirs, by ICEM. Hanoi: ICEM.
Berkmüller, K., and Sangthong Southammakoth. 1995. Protected area system planning and management in Lao PDR: status report to mid-
   1995. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Lao-Swedish Forestry Cooperation Program, Forest Resources Conservation Sub-Program, Department of Forestry,
   Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry.
Birdlife International (2004). Important Bird Areas for Asia: Key Sites for Conservation. Cambridge, UK. BirdLife International.
Brisbane Declaration. 2007. “Brisbane Declaration.” htts://www.conservationgateway.org/Documents/Brisbane-Declaration-English.pdf.
Earth Systems Lao (ESL). 2011. Meteorology, Hydrology, Sediment Transport and Water Quality Baseline and Impact Assessment for the Nam
   Ou Hydropower Project. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Report produced for Sinohydro Corporation.
Global Water Partnership. 2010. http://www.gwp.org.
HKEC. 2009. Feasibility Study Report on Nam Ou River Hydropower Project in Laos. June 2009. Kunming, P.R. China: Report produced for
   Sinohydro Corporation by Hydrochina Kunming Engineering Corporation.
IDOM. 2014. Sub-Basin Reservoir Simulation Modeling and Development of the Hydropower Decision Support Planning Tools. Vientiane, Lao
   PDR: Government of Lao PDR, Ministry of Energy and Mines.
Kiernan, K. 2009. “Distribution and character of karst in the Lao PDR.” Acta Carsologica 38 (1): 65-81.
Kounthongbang, Aloun, Oulaytham Lasasimma, Pany Souliyamath, Keiichiro Ito, and Sayaka Iguchi. 2015. “Life history characteristics of the
   fluvial shrimp Macrobrachium yui (Holthuis, 1950) (Decapoda, Palaemonidae) spawning in the cave streams in northern Laos.” Crustaceana
   88: 164 - 183.
Lane, E. W., and W. M. Borland. 1951. “Estimating bed load.” Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union 32 (1): 121-123.
Lehner, B, and C. Ouellet Dallaire. 2014. River Reach classification for the Greater Mekong sub-region. Vientiane, Lao PDR: WWF Great Mekong
   Program.
Mekong River Commission (MRC). 2009. A multivariate approach to defining “significance” in regard to the tributaries of the Mekong River
   System. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Mekong River Commission.
Mekong River Commission (MRC). 2015. Identification of ecologically sensitive sub-basins for sustainable development of hydropower on
   tributaries. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Mekong River Commission.
Mekong River Commission (MRC). 2007. Results of the Biomonitoring of the Mekong River 2004 - 2006. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Mekong River
   Commission.
Mekong River Commission Secretariat (MRC). 2001. Mekong Watershed Classification Project. Phnom Penh, Cambodia: MRCS.
Meynell, P.J. 2012. Assessing the ecological significance of the Mekong tributaries. Vientiane, Lao PDR: unpublished report for Mekong River
   Commission.
Meynell, P.J. 2014. The Sekong River in Viet Nam, Lao PDR: and Cambodia: An Information Sourcebook for Dialogue on River Flow Management.
   . Bangkok, Thailand: IUCN.
Olson, D.M., and E. Dinerstein. 2002. “The Global 200: Priority ecoregions for global conservation.” Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 89
   (2): 199–224.
Peden, D., G Tadesse, A.K. Misra, F. Awad Amed, A Astatke, W. Ayalneh, Mario Herrero, et al. 2007. “Chapter 13: Water and livestock for human
   development.” In Comprehensive assessment of water in agriculture, by D. Molden, 485-514. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Poulsen, A. F., O. Poeu, S. Viravong, U. Suntomratana, and N. T. Tung. 2002. Fish migrations of the Lower Mekong River Basin: Implications
   for development, planning, and environmental management. MRC Technical Paper No. 8, Mekong River Commission, Phonm Penh: MRC
   Technical Paper No. 8, 62. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18278701.
Poulsen, A.F., K.G. Hortle, J. Valbo-Jorgensen, S. Chan, C.K. Chhuon, S. Viravong, K. Bouakhamvongsa, et al. 2004. Distribution and ecology of
   some important riverine fish species of the Mekong River Basin. Phnom Penh, Cambodia: Mdkong River Commission, 116.
Shrestha, M.S. 2013. “Impact of climate change on sediment yield in the Mekong River basin: a case study of the Nam Ou Basin, Lao PDR.”
   Hydrol. Earth Syst. Sci. 17: 1-20.
UNECE. 1994. “Standard statistical classification of surface freshwater quality for the maintenance of aquatic life.” In Readings in International
   Environmental Statistics , by United Nations Economic Commission for Europe. New York and Geneva: United Nations.
Vo, Thi Be Nam, Michael Haase, Kritsana Kityuttachai, and Sou Virak. 2015. Land Cover Information Catalogue of the Lower Mekong Basin, MRC
   Technical Paper No. xx,. Phnom Penh, Cambodia: Information and Knowledge Management Program, Mekong River Commission.
Warren, Terry. 2010. Fisheries and Aquatic Biodiversity specialist study for Nam Ou Cascades EIA. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Earth Systsems Lao for
   Sinohydro.
Water Quality Monitoring Network,. 1997. Data of Water Quality in Lao PDR. Vientiane, Lao PDR: Government of Lao PDR (GoL).
Welcomme, R.L., K.O. Winemiller, and I.G. Cowx. 2006. “Fish and environmental guilds as a tools for assessment of ecological condition of rivers.”
   River Research and Applications 22 (3): 377-396.
World Food Programme (WFP). 2007. Comprehensive Food Insecurity and Vulnerability Analysis (CFSVA). Vientiane, Lao PDR: United Nations
   World Food Programme.
World Food Programme (WFP). 2001. Lao PDR District Vulnerability Analysis: A First Look. Vientiane, Lao PDR: United Nations World Food
   Programme.
Yu, B. 2005. “Process-based erosin modelling: promises and progress.” Chap. 33 in Forests, Water and People in the Humid tropics; Past, Present
   and Future Hydrological Research for Integrated Land and Water Management, edited by M. Bonell and L. A. Bruijnzeel, 790-810. Cambridge
   University Press.
                                                                                                                                                  75
                                              NAM OU RIVER BASIN PROFILE – SUMMARY DOCUMENT
                      International Finance Corporation (IFC)
                      The World Bank Group Office
                      PO Box 9690
                      Xieng Ngeum Village, Chao FaNgum Road
                      Chanthbouly District, Vientiane, Lao PDR

                      Learn more about IFC’s efforts to build a
                      more sustainable hydropower sector:
                      ifc.org/hydroadvisory

                      Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
                      (MONRE)
                      Vientiane, Lao PDR,
                      Tel: +856 21 263 799,
                      E-mail: monre@monre.gov.la,
                      Hotline: 1514

                      June 2017




IN PARTNERSHIP WITH



Australian
Aid
