            The PHILIPPINES
  Disaster Risk Finance Country Profile
        99
 million residents with close
                                When disasters strike, the poorest are the most vulnerable and pay the steepest
                                price. The loss of livelihoods can force families to make difficult choices to
                                survive, such as reducing food consumption or taking children out of school—
                                causing irreversible, life-long damage to health, well-being, and opportunity.
to 40 percent living on under
         US$3.10/day




    18+
     events and 1,817
                                According to the 2015 Global Climate Risk Index, the Philippines leads the list of
                                countries most affected by extreme weather events, followed by Cambodia and
                                India.

     deaths each year




   60%
   of the population living
                                Storm surges during Typhoon Haiyan were on average about 16 feet (5 meters)
                                high and in some places almost 23 feet (7 meters). The waves rolled over low-
                                lying parts of populated islands and coastal cities, killing thousands.

         on the coast




      4.6
 billion US$ in direct losses
                                Estimated annual average losses account for approximately 2 percent of total
                                GDP of the country and approximately 4 percent of total government spending.


   and US$941 million in
       emergency losses




        13
billion US$ in losses due to
                                The typhoon left 4 million people homeless and pushed 2.3 million people
                                (almost half a million households) below the poverty line, raising the poverty rate
                                from 41 percent to approximately 56 percent in the worst-affected area.


 Typhoon Haiyan in 2013




    811
  million US$ allocated to
                                Three strategic priorities have been identified by the government of the Philippines
                                to strengthen the country’s ability to absorb the financial impact of disasters:
                                I Maintaining fiscal health at the national government level to support long-term
                                  rehabilitation and reconstruction
 the National Disaster Risk     I Developing sustainable financing mechanisms for local government units,
Reduction and Management          enabling the provision of immediate cash at the onset of a disaster
        Fund for 2016           I Reducing the impact on the poorest and most vulnerable and preventing them
                                  from falling into a cycle of poverty
THREE LEVELS
The Department of Finance is working on three levels to support the implementation of these priorities.


         At the national level, the government is working to improve the financing of post-disaster
         emergency response, recovery, and reconstruction needs through the combination of financing
 instruments to protect against events of different frequencies and severities. These include budgetary
 resources, a standby line of financing from the World Bank to protect against moderate disasters, and
 (potentially) risk transfer to access international financial markets. The government is also improving the
 insurance of public assets to ensure sufficient resources for reconstruction.



         At the local level, the goal is to provide local governments with predictable and rapid funds for
         post-disaster recovery and reconstruction efforts. This will be done by establishing a Local Disaster
 Insurance Fund. A joint catastrophe risk insurance pilot for provinces is preparing the ground for the
 establishment of the fund.



         At the individual level, the government is working to empower poor and vulnerable households
         and small and medium enterprises to quickly restore their livelihoods after a disaster. Plans include
 establishing a disaster emergency income support program by linking the country’s conditional cash
 transfer program to risk financing, and strengthening public-private partnerships to expand private
 property catastrophe risk insurance, agricultural insurance, and micro-insurance.


WORLD BANK SUPPORT
Financing services include a contingent line of financing to
                                                                    US$500 million in contingent credit from the
provide immediate liquidity (see box) for emergency relief          WBG (Cat DDO) was approved by the World
and recovery efforts following a major disaster. In addition, a     Bank Board in December 2015. This follows a
World Bank Group (WBG) team is supporting the Philippine            first Cat DDO in 2011 and a similar financing
                                                                    arrangement with Japan International
Department of Finance in exploring a risk transfer to financial
                                                                    Cooperation Agency in 2014.
markets for immediate post-disaster liquidity for extreme
events.
Advisory services include establishing the Philippines Local Disaster Insurance Fund and acting as
reinsurance carrier in transferring the risk from the pilot to financial markets through the World Bank Treasury.
Additional support includes integrating disaster and climate risk in fiscal risk management, strengthening
catastrophe risk insurance supervision and regulation, and supporting the establishment of a post-disaster
emergency income support program by leveraging the country’s conditional cash transfer program to provide
additional assistance following disaster shocks.
Convening services include support to the Department of Finance in shaping Disaster Risk Finance
as a key topic under the country’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation presidency, as well as under the
“Vulnerable 20” climate change initiative led by the Philippines. The WBG also connects the experience of
the Philippines to other countries through the international policy agenda and direct exchange.
