CONFERENCE EDITION


Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply,
Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the
Sustainable Development Goals
Synthesis Report of the Water Supply, Sanitation,
and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic Initiative


EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
About the Water Global Practice
Launched in 2014, the Word Bank Group's Water Global Practice brings
together financing, knowledge, and implementation in one platform.
By combining the Bank's global knowledge with country investments,
this model generates more firepower for transformational solutions to
help countries grow sustainably.

Please visit us at www.worldbank.org/water or follow us on Twitter
at https://twitter.com/search?q=%40WorldBankWater&src=tyah.
CONFERENCE EDITION



Reducing Inequalities in
Water Supply, Sanitation,
and Hygiene in the
Era of the Sustainable
Development Goals
Synthesis Report of the Water Supply, Sanitation, and
Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic Initiative
Executive Summary
 This publication is the executive summary from the forthcoming Water Supply, Sanitation, and
 Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic, Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene
 in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals: Synthesis Report of the Water Supply, Sanitation,
 and Hygiene  (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic Initiative The full-length report is available at https://
 openknowledge​   .worldbank.org/handle/10986/27831. Please use the full report for citation,
 reproduction, and adaptation purposes.


© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations,
and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board
of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as
full attribution to this work is given.

Please cite the work as follows: World Bank. 2017. Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and
Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals: Synthesis Report of the Water Supply, Sanitation,
and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic Initiative. WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington, DC.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625;
e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover design: Bill Pragluski, Critical Stages, LLC.
  Contents
  Acknowledgements	v

  Abbreviations		                                                                                  vii

  Executive Summary	                                                                 1
     The Time for Action Is Now	                                                     1
     Problem-Driven Diagnostics to Guide the Way Forward	                            3
     All Hands on Deck: Working Together to Protect the Foundations of Development	  4
     Investments: More, Larger, and Better Targeted	                                 6
     Mind the Gap: From Policy to Pipes	                                             8
     Looking Toward the Sustainable Development Goals	                               9
     Notes		                                                                        10
     References	10


  Figures
  Figure ES.1:	     E. coli Contamination Rates at Water Sources	                                   3
  Figure ES.2:	     Risk Factors of Diarrheal Mortality: Exposure and Susceptibility	               5


  Maps
  Map ES.1:	        Exposure to Inadequate WASH and Susceptibility Factors
                    Combine in Parts of Mozambique to Raise Incidence of
                    Childhood Deaths from Diarrhea	                                                 6
  Map ES.2:	        Poverty and Access to Improved Sanitation in Nigeria	                           7




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   iii
  Acknowledgments
  The preparation of this report was led by Craig Kullmann (Senior Water and Sanitation
  Specialist, Water Global Practice), Luis Alberto Andres (Lead Economist, Water Global Practice),
  Vivek Srivastava (Lead Public Sector Specialist, Governance Global Practice), and Emmanuel
  Skoufias (Lead Economist, Poverty Global Practice). Team members that contributed to this
  report include Shiqing Li (Consultant), Libbet Loughnan (Consultant), Diana Cubas (Consultant),
  Ruth Carlitz (Consultant), Brittany Grabel (Consultant), Suneira Rana (Consultant), and Aroha
  Bahuguna (Operations Analyst, Water Global Practice).

  This report draws directly from the 18 WASH Poverty Diagnostic country studies, led by the
  following teams:

    ••   Bangladesh: George Joseph (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice), Nobuo Yoshida
         (Senior Economist, Poverty Global Practice), and Monica Pagans (Economist, Poverty
         Global Practice)

    ••   Democratic Republic of Congo: Max Hirn (Water and Sanitation Specialist) and Aude-
         Sophie Rodella (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice)

    ••   Ecuador: Gustavo Perochena (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice) and Ana Maria
         Oviedo Silva (Senior Economist, Poverty Global Practice)

    ••   Ethiopia: Oliver Jones (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice)
         and Dominick de Waal (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice)

    ••   Guatemala: Christian Borja-Vega (Economist, Water Global Practice) and Kinnon Scott
         (Senior Economist, Poverty Global Practice)

    ••   Haiti: Zael Uriarte (Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice), Emilie
         Bernadette Perge (Economist, Poverty Global Practice), and Carl Christian Jacobsen
         (Senior, Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice)

    ••   India: Manish Kumar (former World Bank staff) and Rinku Murgai (Lead Economist,
         Poverty Global Practice)

    ••   Indonesia: Claire Chase (Economist, Water Global Practice) and Maraita Listyasari
         (Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice)

    ••   Mozambique: Christian Borja-Vega (Economist, Water Global Practice)

    ••   Niger: Aude-Sophie Rodella (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice), Aly Sanoh
         (Economist, Poverty Global Practice), and Taibou Maiga (Senior Water and Sanitation
         Specialist, Water Global Practice)

    ••   Nigeria: Luis Alberto Andres (Lead Economist, Water Global Practice), Michel Duret (former
         World Bank staff), Pier Mantovani (Lead Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global
         Practice), Vasco Molini (Senior Economist, Poverty Global Practice), and Rachel L. Ort
         (Public Sector Specialist, Governance Global Practice)

    ••   Pakistan: Ghazala Mansuri (Lead Economist, Poverty Global Practice) and Mohammad
         Farhanullah Sami (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice)




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   v
               ••   Panama: Gustavo Perochena (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice) and Kinnon Scott
                    (Senior Economist, Poverty Global Practice)

               ••   Tanzania: George Joseph (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice)

               ••   Tajikistan: Emcet Tas (Social Scientist, Social, Urban, and Rural Global Practice),
                    William Seitz, (Economist Poverty Global Practice), Sana Agha Al Nimer (Senior Water
                    and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice), and Rob Swinkels (Senior Economist,
                    Poverty Global Practice)

               ••   Tunisia: Jose Cuesta (former World Bank staff), Ester Illouz (Infrastructure Specialist),
                    and Sophie Tremolet (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice)

               ••   West Bank and Gaza: Adnan Ghosheh (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water
                    Global Practice), Aziz Atamanov (Economist, Poverty Global Practice), and Rama
                    Venkateswaran (Lead Financial Management Specialist, Governance Global Practice)

               ••   Yemen: Yogita Mumssen (Senior Economist, Water Global Practice) and Sailesh Tiwari,
                    (Senior Economist, Poverty Global Practice)

             The team would like to thank Helene Grandvoinnet (Lead Governance Specialist, Governance
             Global Practice) and Shomikho Raha (Senior Public Sector Specialist, Governance Global
             Practice) for their commitment as well as for their contributions to our understanding of
             constraints to service delivery. The team is also grateful to Meera Shekar (Lead Health
             Specialist, GHNDR), Patrick Osewe (Lead Health Specialist, GHNDR), and Mickey Chopra
             (Lead Health Specialist, GNHDR) for their critical inputs to the modeling of the global burden
             of disease.

             The team appreciates the feedback and continuous guidance received from Jyoti Shukla
             (Director, Water Global Practice) and Maria Angelica Sotomayor (Program Manager, Water Global
             Practice), and thanks the leaders of the Bank’s Global Practices for enabling the collaboration
             required for the success of the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative.

             The team is grateful to Richard Damania (Lead Economist, Water Global Practice), William
             Kingdom (Lead Water and Sanitation Specialist, Water Global Practice), Fernando Lavadenz
             (Senior Economist, Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice), Ana Bellver (Senior Public
             Sector Specialist, Governance Global Practice), and Luis-Felipe Calvo (Program Manager,
             Poverty Global Practice) for guidance and peer reviewing this report. The Water Supply,
             Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH), Poverty Diagnostic Initiative was funded by the Water and
             Sanitation Program (WSP) and the Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency.




vi	   Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals
  Abbreviations
  B40	           bottom 40 percent (of asset wealth distribution)
  DALYs	         Disability-Adjusted Life Years
  DHS	           Demographic Health Survey
  DNAAS	         National Directorate of Water Supply and Sanitation
  DRA	           demand-responsive approach
  GBD	           Global Burden of Disease
  GDP	           gross domestic product
  HAZ 	          height-for-age Z score
  HOI	           Human Opportunity Index
  JMP	           Joint Monitoring Programme
  LGUs	          local government units
  MDGs	          Millennium Development Goals
  O&M 	          operation and maintenance
  ORT	           oral rehydration therapy
  PPPs	          public-private partnerships
  PRM	           Poverty Risk Model
  SDGs	          Sustainable Development Goals
  T60	           top 60 percent (of asset wealth distribution)
  UN	            United Nations
  UNDP	          United Nations Development Programme
  UNICEF	        United Nations Children’s Fund
  WASH	          water supply, sanitation, and hygiene

  The WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative covers 17 countries and the West Bank and Gaza.
  For purposes of convenience, this report refers to the 18 entities collectively as countries or,
  less frequently, as economies.




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   vii
  Executive Summary

       London, United Kingdom, 1858.

       Sanitation was considered a private good, and not a concern of the state. The better-off
       installed flush toilets, while the poor relied on basic amenities. When people complained
       about declining living conditions, the politicians didn’t listen. When evidence of the
       biological contamination of local water sources was presented, the politicians tried to
       undermine it. Over time, horse dung on the streets and human waste in cesspits
       flowed into the capital city’s largest river, the source of drinking water, choking it of
       oxygen. Still, calls for change went unanswered until the political elites literally faced a
       summer stench at their doorsteps, and the death toll from cholera reached into the
       thousands. Only then did they act, making major investments in sanitation and water
       supply infrastructure and institutions. The Great Stink was a watershed moment
       for London.




  The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and the World Bank’s corporate goals of ending
  extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity call for specific attention to the poor and
  vulnerable. The overarching objective of the SDGs is to end poverty in all its forms, but their
  key difference from the earlier Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) is the integration of
  social, economic, and environmental goals (UN 2015). This has significant implications for
  reforms aimed at improving service delivery. With this understanding as its guiding compass,
  the Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) Poverty Diagnostic Initiative focuses on what
  it would take to reduce existing inequalities in WASH services worldwide.

  This report, a synthesis of that global initiative, offers new insights on how data can be
  used to inform allocation decisions to reduce inequalities and prioritize investment in
  WASH to boost human capital. It also offers a fresh perspective on service delivery that
  considers how institutional arrangements1 affect the incentives of a range of actors. When
  it comes to improving services, politics matters as much today as it did in the London of
  the mid-19th century.

  Importantly, as will be discussed below, the report does not offer prescriptive global solutions
  for service delivery challenges. Instead, it seeks to encourage a dialogue on ways to think and
  work differently, using a problem-driven approach and engaging with the constraints imposed
  by the broader governance environment.


  The Time for Action Is Now
  The importance of water supply, sanitation, and hygiene obviously transcends time and
  geography—but even where this is explicitly recognized in policy, the needs of hundreds of
  millions of citizens remain unmet.2 In particular, renewed efforts are needed to address those
  populations at greatest risk of death and disease due to inadequate WASH, which threatens
  human capital and economic development.




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   1
            The SDGs set ambitious new targets for WASH: universal access to safe and affordable services
            by 2030.3 The SDGs raise the bar by aiming not only to expand access to basic WASH services
            but also to close gaps in service quality, with an eye toward long-term sustainability. This
            means not only providing water in people’s homes, but also making sure that the water is safe
            to drink and continuously available. It means not just constructing more sanitation facilities,
            but making sure, year after year, that these are used and human waste is properly removed,
            treated, and disposed of—in all neighborhoods, not just the wealthiest. Beyond their intrinsic
            value, improved WASH services will ensure the achievement of other development goals. For
            instance, SDG 3, focused on overall health, includes targets that explicitly relate to improvements
            in WASH. In their comprehensiveness, the SDGs open the difficult and yet unanswered
            questions of where to start making improvements, how to prioritize action, and how to overcome
            existing bottlenecks.

            Countries that have struggled to reach the MDGs for WASH4 will likely need to improve efficiency
            and invest even more to reach the SDGs. The fourfold increase in investments that is likely
            needed to meet the SDGs is beyond what most governments can afford (Hutton and Varughese
            (2016)5. Hence, private capital for infrastructure investment will become increasingly important
            for services, such as urban water supply, where cost-recovery, at least for operations and
            maintenance, is more feasible. And given that resources, whether public or private, will always
            be finite, increasing the efficiency of investments will be as important as how and where
            investments are made. In some cases, achieving greater efficiency will mean confronting
            political obstacles. Often, policy documents say the right things about investing in water supply
            and sanitation to benefit poor and vulnerable populations, but implementation by governments
            and donors does not reflect these commitments.

            Many countries struggle to maintain current infrastructure, let alone respond to growing demand.
            In densely populated areas, economies of scale can be achieved by providing piped water
            rather than leaving individual households to rely on their own sources, such as wells. Providing
            piped water also allows groundwater, a public good, to be better regulated and controlled
            against pollution and overabstraction. Surprisingly, this report reveals that the public provision
            of piped water on household premises is declining as countries struggle to keep up with
            population growth. In Nigeria, it fell from 29 percent in urban areas in 1990 to less than
            10 percent by 2015. Similarly, in the Democratic Republic of Congo, piped connections dropped
            from 48 percent of the urban population in 1990 to only 17 percent in 2015. Haiti, Tanzania,
            and the West Bank and Gaza also suffered a decline in urban areas during this period. In the
            face of service delivery failures, households take matters into their own hands, sinking
            private  wells if they can afford to (and thereby straining the local aquifer) or buying from
            unregulated private providers that charge three to four times what public providers do.

            In some countries, piped water is hardly any safer than pond water and is a threat to people’s
            health. The SDGs call for safely managed water, which means that improved water is located
            on premises, available when needed, and free of biological and chemical contamination.
            Figure ES.1 presents data on E. coli contamination in four countries—Bangladesh, Ethiopia,
            Tajikistan, and Ecuador.6 Contamination levels vary dramatically not only by country, but also by
            location and household wealth. The figure also reveals a surprising fact about piped water,
            which is theoretically the safest source: in some locations, it is equally or more contaminated
            than nonpiped supply.

            In Bangladesh, 80 percent of piped water is contaminated with E. coli, a level that is just as
            contaminated as surface water. Reasons for this could be inadequate treatment at the source,
            and/or the intermittent water supply, whereby porous networks increase the risk of contaminants
            being drawn in. Giving citizens more information about this problem—making the invisible
            visible—will be critical for improving accountability of service providers. Improving accountability
            involves not only giving citizens information, but also creating space to act on that information
            so that service providers and/or governments have incentives to respond. Thus, it is critical to
            promote household water treatment in areas where the improvement of infrastructure and
            service will take time.


2	   Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals
       Figure ES.1: E. coli Contamination Rates at Water Sources


                100
                90
                80
                70
                60
      Percent




                50
                40
                30
                20
                10
                 0
                      Bangladesh              Ethiopia              Tajikistan            Ecuador
                             Urban   Rural   Piped on premises   Total improved water   B40   T60


  Source: World Bank calculations.




  Problem-Driven Diagnostics to Guide
  the Way Forward
  Built on in-depth country-level analysis, the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative aims to provide
  data-driven recommendations to help policy makers, stakeholders, and donors plan more
  strategically and equitably. The present report synthesizes multisectoral research from 17 low-
  and middle-income countries7 and the West Bank and Gaza, undertaken since 2015. It presents
  new evidence on inequalities in access to WASH services, examines the impact of unequal
  services on the poor, and explores context-specific constraints that go beyond technical issues
  to understand why service delivery continues to be inadequate and inefficient. It highlights
  findings from individual countries, involves substantial reanalysis of existing data sets in new
  and innovative ways, brings new evidence on spatial inequalities at the subnational level, and
  shares insights on SDG parameters that were previously invisible. The work confirms some
  prior findings, even as it challenges water sector practitioners and decision makers to do
  business differently.

  The report is not prescriptive about how governments should spend their resources—such
  decisions are the domain of autonomous states, based on local needs, resources, and conditions.
  Rather, it offers insights on how to better use available information to prioritize and inform
  investment decisions. The report also does not offer prescriptions for addressing identified
  constraints but suggests an approach to finding solutions. One of the key learnings from the
  initiative is that there are no universal off-the-shelf solutions. Not only do politics, institutional
  arrangements, and norms vary across countries, but so do the different services within the
  WASH sector. The characteristics of urban water/sanitation and rural water/sanitation differ
  considerably in terms of their constituencies and the roles of state and private actors, and
  therefore attract varying degrees of political attention, suggesting diverse strategies to improve
  performance.

  To find solutions that will work within a given context, specific service delivery problem(s) may
  be used as the starting point for a diagnostic aimed at identifying binding constraints. The next
  step is to work with local stakeholders to debate and contest issues and solutions that are


Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   3
            context specific and fit with local politics and the existing policy environment. This can open the
            ambit of reform options that are needed to improve services. (While the desk-based country
            analysis conducted under the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative highlights why such an
            engagement process is required, the process itself is beyond its scope.)

            The lessons from the Initiative point to the need to think and work differently—business as
            usual is not an option. Specifically, three broad shifts in thinking are needed to accelerate
            progress toward the SDGs’ vision for water and sanitation:

              ••   Investments and interventions need to be coordinated across sectors to improve human
                   development outcomes.

              ••   Future investments need to be better targeted and efficiently allocated, given that most
                   countries have limited fiscal space.

              ••   A better understanding of the broader governance context within which WASH services
                   are delivered is needed to bridge gaps between policy and implementation.


            All Hands on Deck: Working Together to Protect the
            Foundations of Development
            Regardless of their income level, all countries included in the WASH Poverty Diagnostic
            Initiative—and indeed most of the countries in the world—face multiple and competing
            challenges and priorities. In poor countries, poverty cuts across multiple dimensions, WASH
            being one of them. In fact, the lack of WASH services typically constitutes one of the deepest
            and most far-reaching deprivations. With this in mind, this study highlights how improving
            WASH can help protect the foundations of development by supporting nutrition (addressed by
            SDG 2) and health (addressed by SDG 3), two key pillars of human development.

            In several countries studied here, a silent emergency is putting vulnerable sections of the
            population at risk for nutritional deficiency and diarrheal disease. In Guatemala, Niger, the
            Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique, Yemen, and Bangladesh the rate of stunting8
            among children under 5 is over 40 percent. Stunting is a powerful risk factor associated with
            53 percent of infectious-disease-related deaths in developing countries. The undernutrition
            from which it results can have long-lasting negative effects on children: poor mental development,
            behavioral abnormalities, and a reduced capacity to work, among others. These disadvantages
            are detrimental to human capital and to economic development more generally. A growing
            literature shows how poor WASH contributes to undernutrition by transmitting pathogens and
            infections that inhibit nutritional uptake.

            Directing WASH investment toward public health objectives can help reduce childhood
            diarrheal disease and undernutrition—and, for this, geospatial mapping data are key. Although
            the correlation between monetary poverty and children’s health is clear enough at the
            country level, it does not map directly to poor/non-poor or rural/urban categories. Not all
            children in poor households or in rural areas are undernourished or suffering from diarrheal
            disease, and not all children in relatively wealthy or urban households eat well and are free
            from diarrheal disease. While it is a fact that children living in the five largest slums of
            Bangladesh have the highest rate of stunting in the country (nearly 50 percent), children in
            relatively well-off households are also at risk. Among the better off, those exposed to drinking
            water contaminated with E. coli are at higher risk than those who are not exposed to such
            water. The research conducted under the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative demonstrates
            that WASH investments targeted at areas or groups whose risk of diarrhea and stunting is
            high are likely to accomplish more in improving overall human development outcomes than
            efforts to achieve universal coverage by reducing the WASH gaps between poor and rich,
            rural and urban.


4	   Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals
  An effort to improve WASH, coordinated with other health and nutrition interventions, can have
  effects greater than the sum of its parts. Using a conceptual framework from the United Nations
  Children’s Fund (UNICEF) as a guide, the analysis highlights the need to look across the
  determinants of poor health indicators, such as stunting, to understand the overlapping
  deprivations of a child. UNICEF identifies four determinants of stunting: a lack of (i) food
  security, (ii) adequate personal care and feeding, (iii) a healthy environment (that is, WASH),
  and (iv) adequate health-care services. The Initiative considers whether synergies are generated
  when more than one of these basic human needs are met. As outlined in this report, stunting
  can be reduced to a greater degree when children are given simultaneous access to both
  adequate WASH and specific health services than when they gain access to only WASH or only
  health services.

  A combination of WASH-related risk factors increases the likelihood of childhood death from
  diarrheal disease.9 The Initiative developed a risk model to assess the co-distribution of risk
  factors for child mortality from diarrheal disease—one of the most important being poor water
  supply and sanitation. Understanding where the risk of diarrheal mortality rates is highest also
  means understanding where children lack access to Vitamin A, are underweight for their age,
  and lack access to oral rehydration therapy (ORT). The combination of these risk factors
  determines a child’s overall risk of dying from diarrheal disease (figure ES. 2).

  WASH investments will have the greatest impact on childhood mortality due to diarrheal disease
  when they target geographic areas where populations have little access to services plus other
  vulnerabilities. One of the main benefits of the risk model that the WASH Poverty Diagnostic
  Initiative developed is its quantification of overall disease risk—and variations in this risk
  across subnational and income-level divisions.

  Map ES.1 highlights the spatial distribution of the exposure index associated with inadequate
  WASH and the susceptibility index of the factors that amplify or weaken the impacts of
  inadequate WASH in Mozambique. A high value of the exposure index (the blue map) implies
  poor WASH, while a high value of the susceptibility index (green map) implies high vulnerability



         Figure ES.2: Risk Factors of Diarrheal Mortality: Exposure and Susceptibility


                                                                      Exposure index
                                   Low                                                                   High
                             Low
                                     Risk of
                                    mortality                                                           Risk of
                                     due to                                                           diarrheal
                                    diarrhea
                                                                                                      infection
                                                                       Unimproved water
      Susceptibility index




                                                                     unimproved sanitation


                                                Low Weight for age
                                                No ORT
                                                No Vitamin A


                                                                                                      Overall
                                                                                                      mortality
                                     Risk of                     Exposure x susceptibility =            risk
                                    mortality              Risk of child mortality due to diarrhoea    due to
                                     due to                                                           diarrhea
                      High         infection



  Source: Rheingans et al. 2017.
  Note: ORT = oral rehydration therapy.




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   5
         Map ES.1: Exposure to Inadequate WASH and Susceptibility Factors Combine in Parts of Mozambique to
         Raise Incidence of Childhood Deaths from Diarrhea


                      Exposure index                               Susceptibility index                         Risk index

                           Overall                                       Overall                                  Overall




                                                                                                                             <1.0
                                       <2.4                                        <0.5                                      1.0–2.0
                                       2.4–2.6                                     0.5–1.0                                   2.0–3.0
                                       2.6–2.8                                     1.0–1.5                                   3.0–4.0
                                       >2.8                                        >1.5                                      >4.0


     Source: World Bank Forthcoming.




                                     (that is, lack of access to Vitamin A and ORT and being underweight). The risk index (red) is a
                                     combination of the exposure and susceptibility indices and highlights the provinces where
                                     children are most at risk of dying from diarrheal disease. This and other findings reveal that
                                     geographic targeting based simply on poor WASH services (high exposure index) may not be
                                     the most effective in terms of reducing diarrhea.


                                     Investments: More, Larger, and Better Targeted
                                     Significant disparities in WASH quality are associated with differences in wealth level, location,
                                     and other demographic characteristics. Specifically, the quality of WASH facilities and services
                                     differ between the poor and non-poor, between rural and urban areas, between large cities and
                                     small cities, and across and within geographic regions of the same country. Traditionally
                                     disadvantaged groups—including women, the indigenous, and the disabled—suffer an additional
                                     burden. In some pockets of both rural and urban areas, this burden poses a dire threat to basic
                                     health. The WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative provides decision makers with more precise
                                     information about such inequalities so they can act to better allocate their resources.

                                     Rural areas are particularly lagging: in the countries analyzed, three out of four people who lack
                                     improved sanitation and four out of five people who don’t have improved water live in rural
                                     areas. Of the estimated 2.4 billion people in these 18 economies, 1.5 billion (63 percent) live
                                     in rural areas. The poor are disproportionately affected by this lag: approximately 74 percent
                                     live in rural areas.10 Meanwhile, a lack of attention to sanitation and the management of
                                     human waste is causing problems in both urban and rural areas. Sanitation-related disease
                                     is  increasingly a concern in densely populated areas; the urban poor are two to three
                                     times less likely to access any type of improved sanitation than their better-off neighbors.11


6	                        Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals
  To assist decision makers in achieving the policy objectives of equitable access, the WASH
  Poverty Diagnostic Initiative provides new methods to inform resource allocation.

  Map ES.2 shows the overlay of income poverty and improved sanitation and their spatial
  distribution in Nigeria. This reveals that the relationship between poverty levels and access to
  improved sanitation is not straightforward. Around 22 percent of Nigerians are in low-poverty
  areas and have low levels of access to improved sanitation, and around 10 percent of Nigerians
  are in high-poverty areas and have high access to improved sanitation. This type of information
  can help decision makers identify areas where it may be prudent to employ subsidies due to
  low income levels, and provides a guide to better understand why some geographic areas do
  better than others despite a high degree of poverty.

  Discrepancies between policies and budget allocations are compounded by inefficient
  execution and implementation. Policies and voted budgets often look “good” in terms of their
  commitments to extend WASH services to poor and marginalized populations, but the actual
  resource allocation decisions do not reflect the policy commitments. While there are no
  standard objective criteria for judging whether policies are “good” or “bad,” for the purposes of
  this initiative policies are assessed from the perspective of providing affordable, sustainable,
  and equitable services to the poor and marginalized groups.

  For example, the policy in Niger (PROHESA 2016-30) clearly articulates the state’s commitment
  to ensuring equal access to WASH services, and their affordability, and would, by this
  yardstick, be considered “good.” While the rate of access to improved water in urban areas




      Map ES.2: Poverty and Access to Improved Sanitation in Nigeria




                                                                                  Poverty    Improved
                                                                                 indicator   sanitation
                                                                                   Low          Low

                                                                                   Low          High

                                                                                  High          Low

                                                                                  High          High
                                                                                  Admin boundaries
        0 25 50    100 Miles                                                              States



  Source: World Bank 2017b.




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   7
            stands near 100 percent, in rural parts of the same country only 2 percent of people have
            access to improved sanitation. While those living in cities saw their access to improved water
            increase by 39 percentage points between 1990 and 2015, open defecation increased in
            poor rural areas. These statistics are difficult to ignore given that 75 percent of residents live
            in rural areas, as do 90 percent of the poor, who are largely concentrated along the country’s
            southern border.

            While this report does not prescribe how governments should spend their resources, if countries
            and donors truly aspire to attain the SGDs then they will need to invest more in WASH and plan
            carefully to make more effective use of the resources available to them.


            Mind the Gap: From Policy to Pipes
            The failure to provide adequate WASH services to the poor and other marginalized groups
            results primarily from poor implementation rather than bad policy. For example, in Tanzania the
            water budget quadrupled in the span of just 12 years (2002–14), due in large part to enhanced
            coordination and commitments by donors to achieve the MDG for water. Donor support
            encouraged the country to adopt reforms aimed at devolving resources and authority to local
            governments and encouraging community participation in operations and management—
            widely endorsed measures meant to enhance sustainability and promote equity. However, as
            of 2015, access to basic water services had stagnated at just over 50 percent of the population.
            In addition, 40 percent of all water points12 in rural areas are not functional and an estimated
            25 percent of all water points in the country break down within two years of construction.

            The WASH sector is characterized by persistent failures in providing sustainable services to
            vulnerable populations—even when the funding to do so is available. This tendency is revealed
            again in the case of Tanzania, but its experience is not unique. Similar situations abound in
            most of the World Bank’s client countries. In addition to the resource allocation issues
            discussed previously, the kinds of service delivery challenges described in Tanzania point to
            the critical importance of enhancing the efficiency of resource use. There is a need to look
            beyond technical issues, and even challenge or revisit “best practice” approaches that have
            been promoted over the years. Improving the efficiency of resources will require sector
            practitioners to look beyond infrastructure and services and pay more attention to the
            institutional arrangements and the distribution of power that influences how these institutions
            perform in practice.

            Looking across a subset of 10 economies studied under the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative,13
            a set of common themes emerge. First, we see that information asymmetries and a lack of
            transparency frequently make it difficult for citizens to know what they can reasonably expect and
            demand from service providers and politicians. Such a lack of information is compounded by
            constraints on the ability of those without significant wealth to effectively voice their concerns.
            As a result, the visibility of outputs tends to drive the priorities of policy implementation. Among
            other things, this creates incentives to construct new infrastructure, rather than invest in the
            operation and maintenance of existing infrastructure or focus on improvements to water quality.

            The fact that water and sanitation services have been only partially decentralized in many of the
            cases also creates challenges for implementation. Several country cases reveal a lack of clarity
            in the allocation of responsibilities and poor coordination across different implementing agencies.
            This results in local governments failing to adequately discharge the responsibilities assigned to
            them. This is frequently the result of a transfer of responsibilities to the local level without a
            commensurate transfer/availability of financial and human resources. The failure to sufficiently
            resource local governments is frequently political—reflecting a reluctance on the part of the
            central government to meaningfully share power, an outcome of intergovernmental interactions
            within what the 2017 World Development Report calls the “policy arena” (World Bank 2017a).




8	   Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals
  Thus, in addition to the cross-government coordination discussed above, there are efficiency
  gains that can be had from improving coordination across levels/tiers of government.

  Critically, the identification of common constraints does not justify the application of common
  solutions. A problem-driven approach is necessarily context driven, and—perhaps frustratingly—
  means that would-be reformers cannot begin with a prepackaged toolkit of tried-and-tested
  reforms. Rather, the proposed approach necessitates beginning with a well-identified service
  delivery problem and identifying the broader governance context within which it manifests.
  Political economy analysis can help to identify the relevant actors whose incentives can
  potentially be shifted to facilitate more efficient and equitable outcomes. Instead of trying to
  rework the whole operating environment, the goal is to navigate it, while being cognizant of
  political and technical constraints.


  Looking Toward the Sustainable Development Goals
  The Initiative points to the importance of thinking (and working) differently, not only about
  inequality in WASH services, but also about how investment in WASH can have added impact
  on human development outcomes. It draws from all possible data sources, contributing new
  ones (notably in relation to water quality) to triangulate the analysis and objectively ascertain
  the facts and proposed recommendations. The lessons from this initiative highlight the
  following:

    ••   If policy objectives are to reduce inequities in human development outcomes with WASH
         investment, then going at it alone and taking a spatially blind approach will not do.
         Coordinated efforts that consider investment in health services and nutrition investment
         are critical. These can also help reinforce cross-sectoral coordination more broadly in
         efforts to reduce undernutrition, stunting, and morbidity and mortality due to diarrheal
         disease.

    ••   To reduce inequalities in WASH services between more and less vulnerable groups,
         resources need to be targeted in a more efficient manner; the Initiative offers a compass
         for achieving those policy objectives.

    ••   To strengthen institutions and improve efficiencies, there is a need to look at the broader
         governance environment to understand binding constraints beyond technical issues
         specific to the WASH sector.

    ••   More money is required, but investing more money in inefficient institutions will not
         always result in better outcomes; improving efficiencies and strengthening institutions is
         paramount.

    ••   Harmonizing and improving data collection efforts at the country level will be critical to
         monitoring the SDG indicators. This means more consistency across national surveys,
         but also better use of administrative data. Making information such as water quality
         available to the public can reduce information asymmetries.

  The lessons from 1850s’ London resonate today: politics matter when developing policies and
  allocating and spending resources. The tasks that countries and donor institutions must
  consider as they look ahead at the SDGs may be considered herculean. They need not be
  undertaken alone. A key reflection from this initiative is that building cross-sectoral collaborations
  among water, poverty, health, and governance specialists brings a diverse range of perspectives
  and new insights, and opens up the possibility to think and work differently. This report hopes
  to inspire decision makers and practitioners to do just that for goals to be more than words,
  with tangible benefits for the most vulnerable.




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   9
             Notes
             	1.	 Institutions are the “humanly devised constraints that shape human interaction”
                  (more commonly referred to as the “rules of the game”) and organizations are “groups
                  of  individuals bound by some common purpose to achieve objectives” (North 1990).
                  Combined, the two constitute the “institutional arrangements,” or governance environment,
                  observed in a particular area. Intergovernmental arrangements, regulations, and such
                  compose the “institutional architecture.”
             	 2.	As of 2015, 663 million people lacked access to improved drinking water (http://www​
                  .who.int/water_sanitation_health/monitoring/jmp-2015-key-facts/en/).
             	 3.	It is important to note that these are global aspirational targets and that countries are
                  expected to customize and adapt them to the local context.
             	 4.	According to the Joint Monitoring Programme of the World Health Organization and the
                  United Nations Children’s Fund (WHO/UNICEF) (JMP 2015), 147 countries met the drinking
                  water goals and 95 countries met the sanitation goals, but only 77 countries met both.
             	 5.	The unit costs on which these estimates are based implicitly include prevailing inefficiency.
                  Costs would be lower if these inefficiencies are reduced.
             	 6.	In the Democratic Republic of Congo, not included in this figure, E. coli contamination is
                  common across improved (piped and nonpiped) and unimproved sources; is high in the
                  capital, Kinshasa; and near-universal in rural areas.
             	7.	 Indonesia, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Tajikistan, Yemen, Tunisia, Ethiopia, Tanzania,
                  Mozambique, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Nigeria, Niger, Haiti, Guatemala, Panama,
                  and Ecuador. Criteria such as income status, income inequality, regional representation,
                  state fragility, WASH coverage, data availability, and ability to inform the World Bank’s
                  Systematic Country Diagnostic were considered in the selection process. Final decisions
                  were based on demand from World Bank country offices. Thus, the selected countries are
                  not a representative sample of the regions of the world, but they do include a mix of
                  low-income, fragile, and middle-income economies. Individual country reports prepared
                  under the WASH Poverty Diagnostic Initiative can be accessed at www.worldbank.org​
                  /­washpdinitiative.
             	 8.	The World Health Organization (WHO) defines stunting as a height-for-age value less than
                  two standard deviations from the WHO-defined median.
             	 9.	It is worth noting that there are numerous other benefits that extend beyond health.
             10.	This estimate is based on the distribution of the poor in each country using national
                  poverty lines. The rural share of the poor ranges from 54 percent in Tunisia to 93 percent
                  in Mozambique.
             11.	This estimate is based on urban income quintiles in the Sub-Saharan African and South
                  Asian countries that were part of this study.
             12.	That is, the point sources that account for most water supply infrastructure in rural areas
                  in many developing countries. These include communal standpipes, hand pumps, and
                  improved springs.
             13.	 Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Indonesia, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Panama, Tanzania,
                  and the West Bank and Gaza.



             References
             Hutton, G., and M. Varughese. 2016. “The Costs of Meeting the 2030 Sustainable Development
                 Goal Targets on Drinking Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene.” Technical Paper, Water and
                 Sanitation Program (WSP), World Bank, Washington, DC.

             North, D. C. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance. Cambridge,
                 United Kingdom: Cambridge University Press.




10	   Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals
  Rheingans, R., J. Anderson, K. Bagamian, S. Ryan, J. Watson, and O. Cumming. 2017. “WASH
      Poverty Diagnostic Poverty Risk Model Methods Note.” Background Paper.

  UN (United Nations). 2015. “Transforming our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
     Development.” Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015.
     http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E.

  WHO/UNICEF JMP (Joint Monitoring Programme). 2015. “Progress on Sanitation and Drinking
     Water: 2015 Update and MDG Assessment.” JMP, WHO, and UNICEF, Geneva.

  World Bank. 2017a. World Development Report 2017: Governance and the Law. Washington, DC:
      World Bank.

  ———. 2017b. World Bank. 2017. A Wake Up Call: Nigeria Water Supply, Sanitation, and
    Hygiene Poverty Diagnostic. WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington, DC.

  ———. World Bank. Forthcoming. “Suggestions to Improve WASH Statistics in Mozambique”
    WASH Poverty Diagnostic. World Bank, Washington, DC.




Reducing Inequalities in Water Supply, Sanitation, and Hygiene in the Era of the Sustainable Development Goals	   11
W17076
