Tuna Fisheries
Pacific Possible Background Paper No.3.
Pacific Island countries face unique development challenges.
They are far away from major markets, often with small
populations spread across many islands and vast distances,
and are at the forefront of climate change and its impacts.
Because of this, much research has focused on the challenges
and constraints faced by Pacific Island countries, and finding
ways to respond to these.

This paper is one part of the Pacific Possible series, which
takes a positive focus, looking at genuinely transformative
opportunities that exist for Pacific Island countries over the
next 25 years and identifies the region’s biggest challenges
that require urgent action.

Realizing these opportunities will often require collaboration
not only between Pacific Island Governments, but also with
neighbouring countries on the Pacific Rim. The findings
presented in Pacific Possible will provide governments
and policy-makers with specific insights into what each
area could mean for the economy, for employment, for
government income and spending.

To learn more, visit www.worldbank.org/PacificPossible,
or join the conversation online with the hashtag
#PacificPossible.
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: +1 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the
work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced,
in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is
given.

Queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                          Acknowledgements

This report was authored by John Virdin, Director of Ocean Policy at Duke University’s Nicholas Institute
for Environmental Policy Solutions, with support from Tibor Vegh, Alexandra Aines and David Bjorkback.
Peter Cusack and Elizabeth Havice provided written contributions on post-harvest segments of the supply
chains and the international market respectively. Bob Gillett, Quentin Hanich and Kieran Kelleher peer
reviewed the draft, and Charlotte de Fontaubert and Miguel Jorge contributed extremely valuable additional
comments and advice. Information and comments were gratefully received from Transform Aqorau and
Sangaalofa Clark in the Parties to the Nauru Agreement Office, and Mike Batty and Wez Norris at Forum
Fisheries Agency, and Les Clark. Finally, Robert Utz supervised and guided the preparation of this report.
Any errors in the document, factual or otherwise, are the sole responsibility of the author.




Suggested Citation:
World Bank and Nicholas Institute. 2016. Tuna Fisheries. Pacific Possible Background Report No, 4
Sydney: World Bank.




                                                                                                        2
Abbreviations and Acronyms

AIS          Automatic Identification System
IMF          International Monetary Fund
EEZ          Exclusive Economic Zone
ENSO         El Nino-Southern Oscillation
EPO          Eastern Pacific Ocean
GDP          Gross Domestic Product
EU           European Union
EUMOFA       European Market Observatory for Fisheries and Aquaculture
F            Fishing Mortality
FAD          Fish Aggregating Device
FAO          Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FFA          Forum Fisheries Agency
FPO          Framework for a Pacific Oceanscape
FSM          Federated States of Micronesia
FSMA         Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement
GCM          Global Climate Model
GHG          Greenhouse Gas
GPS          Global Positioning System
IATTC        Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
ICCAT        International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
IFC          International Finance Corporation
IFPRI        International Food Policy Research Institute
IOTC         Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
IW           International Waters
MEA          Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
MSY          Maximum Sustainable Yield
PAE          Party Allowable Effort
PIC          Pacific Island Country
PIPA         Phoenix Islands Protected Area
PIROP        Pacific Islands Regional Ocean Policy
PNA          Parties to the Nauru Agreement
PNAO         Parties to the Nauru Agreement Office
PNG          Papua New Guinea
RFMO         Regional Fisheries Management Organization
RMI          Republic of Marshall Islands
SB           Spawning Biomass
SPC          Secretariat of the Pacific Community
SRES         Special Report on Emissions Scenarios
SST          Sea Surface Temperature
TAE          Total Allowable Effort
USDA         United States Department of Agriculture
VDS          Vessel Day Scheme
VMS          Vessel Monitoring System
WCPFC        Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission
WCPO         Western and Central Pacific Ocean




                                                                               3
Contents
Summary for Policy-Makers ...................................................................................................................... 7
I. Introduction and Objectives of the Report ......................................................................................... 12
   1.1 Introduction: The importance of tuna resources to economic growth in the Pacific Islands ............ 12
   1.2 Objectives of the Report ................................................................................................................... 14
II. Methodology ......................................................................................................................................... 15
   2.1 Defining the Units of Analysis within Western and Central Pacific Ocean Tuna Fisheries ............. 15
   2.2 Measuring the Current and Future Economic Contribution from these Fisheries ............................ 17
   2.3 Developing a Plausible Scenario for Change to 2040 to this Economic Contribution ..................... 19
III. Baseline................................................................................................................................................ 24
   3.1 Historical Development of Tuna Fisheries Value Chains in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean
   ................................................................................................................................................................ 24
   3.2 Measuring the Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from the Purse Seine Tuna Fishery 26
   3.3 Measuring the Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from the Longline Tuna Fishery..... 37
   3.4 Summary of the Economic Contributions of WCPO Tuna Fisheries ............................................... 44
   3.5 Summary of the Status of the WCPO Tuna Resource Base.............................................................. 46
   3.6 Characterization of Current Status of the WCPO Tuna Asset .......................................................... 50
   3.7 Summary of Key Trends in WCPO Tuna Fisheries Policy............................................................... 51
   3.8 Summary of Key Trends in WCPO Tuna Fisheries Outcomes......................................................... 55
IV. Key Drivers of Future Changes in Western & Central Pacific Tuna Fisheries ............................ 67
   4.1 Evolution of Key Non-Policy or External Drivers of WCPO Tuna Fisheries’ Economic
   Contribution to Pacific Island Countries................................................................................................. 67
   4.2 Proposed Key Policy Decisions to Drive the Opportunity in 2040................................................... 92
V. The Opportunity Scenario in 2040 ................................................................................................... 113
References ................................................................................................................................................ 122



List of Tables
                                                                                       Page
1 Pacific Ocean under the Jurisdiction of World Bank member Countries……………………………….14
2 Break-Down of WCPO Purse Seine Tuna Catch by Water in 2013 and 2014 (metric tons)……………26
3 Catch levels and description of WCPO purse seine fleet segments……………………………………..29
4 Tuna Processing Plants in the Pacific Island Countries…………………………………………………33
5 Total global canned tuna consumption by region in 2008………………………………………………34
6 Break-Down of WCPO Longline Tuna Catch by Water in 2013 & 2014 (in metric tons)……………..36
7 Distribution of 2013 WCPO tuna longline catch by fleet (in tons)……………………………………..38
8 Description of WCPO Tuna Longline Fleet Segments………………………………………………….40

                                                                                                                                                                    4
9 Estimated Contribution of WCPO Tuna Fisheries to Pacific Island Countries’ Economies in 2013…...43
10 Projected percentage changes in catches of skipjack and bigeye tuna, relative to the 20-year average
for 1980 to 2000, under low (B1) and high (A2) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios in 2035 and 2100 66
11 Estimated Changes by 2035 in Percentage Contributions of Tuna Fisheries to GDP and Public
Revenues relative to 1999 – 2008, based on projected changes in skipjack catch due to climate change..67
12 Projected Population Growth in Pacific Island Countries and Territories to 2035…………………….84
13 Projected Food Fish Gap in 2035………………………………………………………………………85
14 Summary of Key Trends in Recent Decades in WCPO Tuna Fisheries and Expected Direction of
Future Change in Selected Variables for Key External Drivers in the Fisheries………………………….88
15 Indicative Magnitude of Net Economic Benefits to PICs of Opportunity Scenario to 2040…………104
16 Indicative Distribution of Net Economic Benefits to PICs of Opportunity Scenario to 2040………..107


List of Figures
                                                                                                  Page
1 Long-Distance Movements of Tagged Yellowfin Tuna….……………………………………………..13
2 The Main Tuna Fishing Methods in the Pacific…………………………………………………………15
3 Generic components of a simple commercial fisheries value chain…………………………………….16
4 Current Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from WCPO Tuna Fisheries………………….17
5 Methodology for Developing the 2040 Opportunity Scenario for Pacific Tuna Fisheries……………...19
6 Summary of Conceptual Framework for Developing the 2040 Opportunity Scenario…………………23
7 Increasing Number of Purse Seine Vessels Operating in the WCPO…………………………………...24
8 Total WCPO Tuna Catch in 2014……………………………………………………………………….25
9 Distribution of Purse Seine Tuna Catch in the WCPO from 2011 – 2013……………………………...26
10 Breakdown of 2014 WCPO Purse Tuna Catch by Location…………………………………………...27
11 Estimated Tuna Access Fees Received by Pacific Island Countries…………………………………..28
12 Indicative Growth In Purse Seine Foreign Access Fees Received by PICs……………………………28
13 Distribution of Purse Seine Catch by Fleet…………………………………………………………….29
14 Distribution of Processing of WCPO Purse Seine Catch in 2010……………………………………..32
15 Illustration of the WCPO Purse Seine Tuna Fishery Value Chain in 2013 & Net Economic Benefits to
Pacific Island Countries…………………………………………………………………………………...35
16 Distribution of Longline Tuna Fishing Effort in the WCPO for Distant Water Fleets (Green), Foreign
Offshore Fleets (Red), and Domestic Fleets (Blue) for the period 2000 – 2014………………………….36
17 Distribution of 2013 WCPO Long-Line Catch by Fleet……………………………………………….38
18 Longline Tuna Vessels Operating in the WCPO………………………………………………………39
19 Illustration of WCPO Long-Line Tuna Fishery Value Chains in 2013 and Estimated Net Economic
Benefits to Pacific Island Countries…………………………………………………………………….....42
20 WCPO tuna access fees from foreign fleets as a % of GDP…………………………………………...43
21 Estimated Employment in FFA Member Countries related to WCPO Tuna Fishery Value Chains…..44
22 ‘Kobe plot’ of the trend in bigeye stock status from 1950 to 2011……………………………………45
23 Bigeye stock ratio of exploited to unexploited potential over time……………………………………46
24 ‘Kobe plot’ of the trend in yellowfin stock status & estimated spawning biomass: 1950 to 2011…….46
25 ‘Kobe plot’ of the trend in skipjack stock status & estimated spawning biomass: 1950 to 2011……...47
26 ‘Kobe Plot’ of current status of skipjack tuna stocks by convention area……………………………..48
27 ‘Kobe Plot’ of current status of yellowfin stocks by convention area…………...…………………….48
28 WCPO ‘Tuna Bank’: Fish Stocks in the Water………………………………………………………..49
29 Trends in WCPO Purse Seine Catch and Capacity…………………………………………………….49
30 Trends in WCPO Purse Seine Catch by Selected Fleets……………………………………………….54
31 Trend in WCPO Purse Seine Catch by Location………………………………………………………55
32 Purse Seine Effort in PNA Waters…………………………………………………………...………...55
33 Purse Seine Vessels Registered to Fish in PNA Waters………………………………………...……..56
34 Trends in WCPO Long-Line Capacity & Catch……………………………………………………….58
                                                                                                      5
35 Classification of stages of development of ocean fishery systems based on analysis of landings…….59
36 Trends in WCPO Bigeye Catch by Fishing Gear……………………………………………………...59
37 Distribution of 2013 WCPO Bigeye Purse Seine Catch by Fleet……………………………………...60
38 Distribution of WCPO Bigeye Catch by Location and Fishing Method (2003 – 2012)……………….60
39 2012 WCPO Tuna Stock Assessment Showing Trends in Status……………………………………...61
40 WCPO Tuna Stock Status Scorecard from ISSF………………………………………………………61
41 Global Fish Production: Data and Projections 1984-2030..…………………………………………...68
42 Projected Global Fish Supply by Species to 2030……………………………………………………..68
43 Trend in Global Catch of Principal Tuna Species……………………………………………………...69
44 Trends in Global Skipjack Tuna Catch, by Location…………………………………………………..69
45 Biological Status of Global Skipjack Tuna Stocks…………………………………………………….70
46 Trend in US Canned Tuna Consumption………………………………………………………………71
47 Values of processed tuna imports to the EU by main countries of origin & % variation 2014/2013….73
48 15-Year Trend in Nominal and Real Prices of Skipjack in Thailand…………………………………..75
49 Trend in WCPO Skipjack Catch & Thailand Price…………………………………………………….76
50 Relationship between Thailand Price & Skipjack Catch………………………………………………76
51 Trends in Delivered Value of WCPO Purse Seine Catch……………………………………………...77
52 Trend in Real Thailand Import Price of Albacore……………………………………………………..77
53 Trend in Real Japan Import Price of Yellowfin………………………………………………………..78
54 Projected Percentage Increase in the Price of Crude Oil, from 2016………………………………….79
55 Current Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from WCPO Tuna Fisheries………………...98
56 Upper Bound of Additional Public Revenues in Real Terms as % of 2013 GDP……………………107


List of Boxes

                                                                                            Page
1 The Western & Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) Region.……………………………………………….12
2 Measuring the Ocean’s Natural Capital…………………………………………………………………18
3 2015 Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries……………………………………………..51
4 The impact of oceanographic conditions on abundance and distribution of WCPO tuna stocks……….65
5 Examples of Seafood Branded by Location: Maine Lobsters…………………………………………..77




                                                                                                    6
Summary for Policy-Makers

Pacific Island countries are endowed with valuable tuna resources. The stocks of four tuna species in
the Western and Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) – a region that includes the Pacific Island countries (PICs)
and extends south below New Zealand and north to the Bering Sea to cover some 8 percent of the global
ocean - collectively form the basis of one of the world’s largest and most valuable fisheries. This fishery
supplies roughly 60 percent of the world’s tuna from what are some of the last healthy tuna stocks. PIC
waters alone cover half of the WCPO region and supply some 34 percent of the world’s tuna catch each
year, with an estimated delivered value to processors on the order of US$3.4 billion in recent years. From
this endowment PICs received net economic benefits on the order of US$500 million in 2013, the majority
of which came from the purse seine fishery in the waters of countries near the equator. While not distributed
evenly, these benefits have been significant for some PICs, for example with public revenues estimated to
be equivalent to 36 percent of GDP in Tuvalu, 32 percent in Kiribati, and 10 percent in FSM, and
constituting a much higher proportion of the total public budget (e.g. 63 percent in Kiribati in 2012).

These resources will need to make bigger economic contributions to help avoid a ‘low-growth future’
in the region. Despite this tremendous natural endowment, the rate of economic growth in many (though
not all) PICs has generally been low over the last decade, and if this trend were to continue over the next
25 years, with only Fiji and Palau’s gross domestic product GDP per capita growing at a rate higher than
two percent annually, many PICs will fall significantly behind other countries, with per capita GDP levels
only moderately higher than at present. One of the few opportunities to avoid this ‘low-growth future’ is
utilization of the region’s tuna resources.

This report describes a scenario for the year 2040 where this might plausibly happen. The report aims
to look forward over the next 25 years, to suggest some viable answers to the questions: in a plausible best
case scenario, how much more could the WCPO tuna resources sustainably contribute to Pacific Island
countries’ economies by the year 2040, and what policy decisions would be required from the countries?
In complement, what would be the impacts and benefits in terms of employment and food security of these
policy decisions? Building upon the 2010 Future of Fisheries report and subsequent Regional Roadmap
for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries endorsed by Forum Leaders in 2015, the report develops a best-case
scenario for the tuna fisheries in the year 2040, identifying the potential additional economic contributions
to PICs, and proposing further detail on likely policy decisions that would need to be taken. The report
does not aim to provide predictions or forecasts of the future, but rather a plausible story based on recent
trends and expected future directions that can communicate risks and opportunities to inform policy-making
– and thereby provide a better understanding of the policy choices in the upcoming decades and highlight
present-day developments.

As a starting point, some of the recent trends in the fisheries have been summarized, including:
    • The purse seine fishing ‘revolution’ and the explosion in these fishing vessels and their catch. Purse
        seine fishing to produce canned tuna has grown exponentially in the WCPO since 1980, with 34
        vessels catching roughly 100,000 metric tons of tuna that year, increasing to a steady state of some
        180 to 220 vessels operating from 1990 to 2006, to 344 vessels catching over 2 million tons in
        2014. Fifty-two new purse seine vessels have been built since 2010 and registered to fish in the
        WCPO. This fleet has grown more efficient over time (notably in the technology used for fish
        aggregating devices) and its composition has changed. While always largely a foreign fleet, the
        number of Pacific Island-based vessels is growing (notably in Papua New Guinea), combined
        catches by Indonesian and the Philippines vessels more than doubled between 1997 and 2014, over
        half of all purse seine vessels operating in the region that have been built since 2010 are from China,
        and during this same time catches by vessels from Japan, Korea, the United States and China,
        Taiwan have been relatively constant.


                                                                                                             7
•   Stagnation and possibly senescence in the longline fisheries. Productivity and profitability in the
    southern albacore longline fishery has declined, even as fishing increased sharply in 2008 with the
    rise of the PIC albacore fleet, which caught as much as 50 to 60 percent of albacore in 2014, and
    more recently the rise of the Chinese fleet. Catch rates have decreased steadily since 2009, hitting
    a low in 2011 for the period since 2002, with only marginal improvements since, even as new (and
    reportedly subsidized) vessels enter the fishery. Similarly, the trend in catches from the tropical
    longline fishery (much of which occurs in waters outside the jurisdiction of PICs) supplying
    sashimi markets has been flat. Over the period from 2003 – 2013, the catch rates for bigeye peaked
    in 2008 and have generally declined since (i.e. kg caught per hundred hooks on a longline), while
    yellowfin catch rates consistently declined from 2010 to 2013. In general, these two fisheries have
    provided relatively little economic benefits for PICs, which have typically captured an estimated 3
    percent of the value of the catch delivered to processors, largely via access fees (though locally-
    based longline vessels have provided higher benefits to PICs such as Fiji, Samoa, etc.).

•   Establishment of a regional management body for the tuna fisheries. The Western and Central
    Pacific Fisheries Commission was established in 2004 to promote the conservation and
    management of WCPO tuna stocks, and includes both PICs and foreign fishing nations, generally
    taking decisions based on consensus. However, given the diversity of actors in the Commission,
    consensus has been elusive in many cases – particularly on issues surrounding the distribution
    among members of the costs that would be imposed by proposed fish stock conservation measures,
    and some PIC representatives have expressed frustration when key decisions on conservation and
    management measures have not been taken. PIC representatives have cited the pace of decision-
    making at the Commission as a rationale for pursuing sub-regional agreements and governance
    arrangements, such as the vessel day scheme implemented under the Palau Arrangement, and the
    recent Tokelau Arrangement.

•   A new model of cooperation by a sub-regional coalition of PICs to manage purse seine fishing
    access. The eight Parties to the Nauru Agreement (PNA) and Tokelau established a ‘vessel day
    scheme’ (VDS) to limit purse seine fishing access to their waters and allow transferability and
    greater flexibility in access terms; Tokelau joined the VDS in 2013. As a result, access fees are
    estimated to have increased by at least a multiple of four between 2009 and 2015. An estimated 13
    percent of the delivered value of the total purse seine catch was captured by PICs via access fees
    in 2014. While these countries have generally held the limit on purse seine access through the
    VDS, throughout the WCPO catch and effort continue to grow. Current information suggests that
    fishing effort and catch have grown more in the waters outside of the PNA countries, notably in the
    waters of Indonesia and the Philippines as well as some high seas pockets in 2014. Following the
    model of the purse seine vessel day scheme, similar arrangements have been introduced for the
    longline fisheries. In 2015 the same countries began a VDS for the tropical longline fishery, and in
    late 2014 ten countries signed the Tokelau Arrangement to implement a similar scheme for access
    to the southern albacore long-line fishery in their waters.

•   Failures of state-led efforts to capture more of the tuna value chains in the Pacific Islands. Most
    of the Government-led enterprises created in the 1980s or 1990s are no longer operating, but a
    number of private-led companies are currently processing catch in PNG, the Solomon Islands, Fiji
    and to a lesser extent RMI. In total the WCPO tuna fisheries value chains likely employ less than
    0.5 percent of the region’s current labor force. Less than 10 percent of the WCPO purse seine catch
    is processed locally, and Bangkok remains the world’s largest tuna canner (despite increasing labor
    costs and several PICs’ trade preference with the EU market).

•   Overall, a relatively steady global market for tuna products. In terms of canned tuna supplied by
    the purse seine fishery and southern longline fishery, the three main markets in the European Union,
    U.S. and Japan are considered as ‘mature’ with relatively flat growth trends. The price of skipjack
                                                                                                      8
        in Bangkok has declined significantly in recent years, attributed to the growth (or ‘glut’) in supply
        – largely from increasing catch volumes in the WCPO. The sashimi market supplied by the tropical
        longline fishery was pioneered by Japan but has since become global with the remainder destined
        for the U.S., Korea, China, the European Union and Taiwan, China.

    •   Decline of the WCPO bigeye tuna stock, while fishing on other stocks approaches limits
        recommended by scientists. The size of the region’s bigeye stock has shown a steady decline since
        the 1970s, reaching overfished status in the last five years. At the same time, the growth of purse
        seining has taken a larger share of the bigeye catch, accounting for 41 percent of the WCPO bigeye
        catch in 2014. The other three WCPO tuna stocks: albacore, skipjack and yellowfin, remain
        relatively healthy but approaching limits. While these stocks are not currently considered
        overfished, they are not likely to continue to support the growth in fishing effort and catch seen in
        the past, according to current scientific assessments.

Against the backdrop of these trends, a number of key external forces are expected to drive the
performance of WCPO tuna fisheries over the next 25 years, including climate change, markets and the
economy, science and technology, demographic changes and external governance. Expected changes
include:
    • Climate change. Modeling conducted to date by the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC)
         on two of the region’s four tuna stocks, skipjack and bigeye, suggest that in twenty years the sizes
         of the stocks will not be affected by climate change, but the distribution of the stocks may begin to
         shift towards the central and eastern Pacific, changing the catch rates in the waters of many PICs
         with potentially significant implications for purse seine by-catch rates of bigeye. The potential re-
         distribution of tuna stocks throughout the WCPO (and beyond) due to climate change will reinforce
         the need for flexible management systems that can cope with spatial shifts in fishing activity, e.g.
         to avoid the need for eastern countries to continually purchase purse seine vessel days from
         countries in the west, and the importance of maintaining healthy and resilient tuna stock sizes.
    • Markets and the economy. Globally, the supply of tuna is approaching natural limits with little
         further increase expected, and likely to remain highly dependent on the WCPO region. In
         aggregate, demand for tuna may see a modest increase given flat supply and population growth,
         though with little change for canned tuna where declining mature markets may be balanced by
         emerging new ones. A slow increase in price for both canned and fresh tuna may be expected, but
         the same may also be said for fishing costs as crude oil prices are projected to double in real terms
         by 2040.
    • Science and technology. Fishing technology is expected to continue to change in order to enhance
         efficiency (this is already ongoing in the purse seine fleet, and eventually would be in the longline
         fleet with the return of economic incentives), as well as product quality. Fisheries monitoring and
         surveillance technology can be expected to advance to significantly reduce enforcement costs,
         including expanded satellite tracking of vessels, use of unmanned aircraft systems for patrols and
         electronic fishing catch and effort monitoring.
    • Demographic change. The overall population of the Pacific Island countries is expected to grow
         by some 50 percent over the next twenty years, together with rapid urbanization. In 2040 coastal
         fisheries production would be expected to remain largely stagnant (as it likely has since at least
         2005), with concerns from SPC that a food fish gap could open in some PICs.
    • External governance. The trade preferences that several PICs currently enjoy with the European
         Union can be expected to erode in comparison to other producers, further reducing the ability of
         regional tuna processors to compete in the global marketplace. At the same time, foreign fishing
         subsidies for tuna fleets can be expected to continue in some form in a number of cases. The
         Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission can be expected to slowly take regulatory
         measures to conserve bigeye stocks, which would affect PICs.


                                                                                                            9
Taking into account past trends and expected external drivers of performance, the following potential
scenario can be described for the region’s tuna fisheries in 2040, dependent upon implementation of
the policy decisions outlined in the Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries: By 2040, sub-
regional coalitions of PICs are entrenched around the three tuna fisheries – purse seine, tropical longline
and southern longline, with norms of transparency and trust established, as well as flexible formulas to
distribute the returns on access in order to accommodate spatial shifts in the stocks as impacts from climate
change are felt. Countries continue to see greater benefits from cooperation to manage the tuna stocks as
shared natural capital assets, and many count upon their annual returns for stability funds and public
investment. Working together, these coalitions set targets for maintaining minimum sizes of the four tuna
stocks as a basis for firm and sustainable catch limits from the waters under their jurisdiction, based on
regular assessments from the world’s top tuna biologists at SPC. The coalition of countries around the
equator - comprised largely of PNA members - operates a well-functioning organization governed by a
permanent board of global experts from within the region, with a secretariat of professional staff from
strong education and training programs within the region, built over recent years with public revenues from
the fisheries. Similarly, the Tokelau Arrangement’s successor is governed by a permanent board with a
well-staffed secretariat. Staff in both organizations are highly skilled and focus on managing registries of
tuna catch quota, monitoring trends in use and synthesizing key biological, ecological and economic
research for the board, as well as managing quota auctions. The Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency
(FFA) provides monitoring and surveillance support, among other services, to the coalitions, and is
recognized as a world leader in cutting-edge surveillance technology.

Seeing a future constraint on returns and potential external influence from the WCPFC, PNA members
moved quickly in 2017 - 2018 to invest in research and development for by-catch reduction, and to
implement an innovative fish aggregating device (FAD) licensing scheme to spur industry investment –
particularly given projected eastward shifts in distribution of the stock. The combination of technology
advances and some initially painful catch reductions, coordinated with similar action through the longline
VDS, placed the bigeye stock on a slow recovery path, with biomass eventually and steadily increasing
towards 40 percent of unfished levels. Albacore, skipjack and yellowfin stocks continue to remain healthy
in 2040, with a slightly stricter target reference point to provide some reserve should climate change make
it necessary. These stocks provide the world’s last healthy tuna stocks and have become an even more
international fishery system, as global demand for tuna products has remained steady with Asian and
Middle Eastern markets becoming more mature.

Inclusion of Indonesia in the purse seine and tropical longline arrangements, and the Philippines in the
former, enhanced the total allowable catch limits for both and placed most of the world’s skipjack under
robust management. Strong restrictions for fishing on the high seas, linked to access to national waters, was
recognized in 2020 by the WCPFC together with robust management and monitoring, and even with
shifting stocks, high seas fishing is minimal. Some three quarters of the southern albacore longline fishery
operates on rules set through successors to the Tokelau Arrangement, with profitability on an upward trend.

As an example, gradually over the years PNA members enhanced the flexibility of fishing vessel day trading
among them while increasing durability of allocations – with some countries moving slowly in order to
give domestic fleets time to adjust and improve efficiency (and thereby maintain contributions to local
value added). Vessel days with longer duration were progressively issued to companies for higher returns
(e.g. for a five-year duration instead of one year), or in some cases in consideration of local investment.
Continued trials in pooling with successful results, as well as improved auction designs, led to an agreement
whereby the PNA members directed the secretariat to pool all access rights, allocated via auctions, with
revenues distributed to parties via the agreed formula. Several parties opt to continue to invest access
revenues in processing clusters, reducing the total fishing effort allowed and their distribution accordingly.
After years of investment in effort adjustments at the individual vessel level, the parties made sufficient
preparations for a transition of rules towards a quota-system. Secondary markets for quota developed,
                                                                                                           10
regulated by the parties and enhancing overall fleet efficiency. Increased efficiency of fishing operations,
together with the enhanced visibility and reduced risk for firms, led to significant investment in technology
for higher quality products, generating value throughout the supply chain. As a result of healthy fish stocks
and a well-functioning access market, revenues are between 50 percent higher and double 2015 levels in
real terms (after management costs and concessions for domestic processing are subtracted).

Building off of healthy stocks and efficiently-regulated access, the PNA countries (plus Indonesia and the
Philippines) have created a trading company that controls much of supply to processors and in some cases
direct to retailers, supported by freezing/storage facilities in key hubs throughout the region. A number of
PICs have well-developed vessel support systems that provide services to the fleets. Utilizing the pooled
access regime, several countries exchange revenue distributions for allocations to secure access for coastal
tuna fisheries developed through nearshore FAD networks to help ensure sufficient flow of food fish. This
process began in the 2020s in advance of continued stagnation in coastal fisheries. Some countries have
established dedicated coastal community funds with tuna revenues, to invest in reef restoration and key
infrastructure and social goods. Additionally, countries with relatively large populations near ports or
transshipment hubs, e.g. PNG and Solomon Islands, trial measures to support greater retention and local
sale of purse seine by-catch (not including bigeye).

As a result of the policy strategies and decisions pursued under the Regional Roadmap for Sustainable
Pacific Fisheries, sustainable public revenues are some US$177 to 345 million per year higher for PICs in
real terms, after concessions for onshore investment and investments in administration, monitoring and
surveillance are subtracted. A number of countries have increased local value added by a combined US$88
million per year in real terms, due to processing clusters and vessel service hubs (though many processing
facilities operate under capacity and at a loss given erosion of European trade preferences). These efforts
have created some 7,500 to 15,000 additional jobs in the region for processing, without including the
additional employment from service hubs. Over time an Oceanic Tuna Export Company (OTEC) could
develop and generate significant profits shared, as well as employment at storage facilities throughout the
region.

The policy strategies leading to this potential scenario in 2040 can be summarized as:
   1. Regional cooperation around a shared resource, eventually expanded to include key resource
       owners like Indonesia and the Philippines,
   2. Hard fishing effort and catch limits that maintain the tuna stocks as valuable natural capital assets
       in the water that are used sustainably (and help constrain supply and hence increase price), with
       proactive efforts and up-front investments to rebuild the bigeye stock before further declines,
   3. Flexible access and eventually output rights for fleets, that enhance the value of the fisheries
       without increasing production, and provide a tool for interested PICs to lever greater foreign
       investment in processing,
   4. Significant investment in skills and capacity to develop the world’s top tuna managers as well as
       to monitor compliance with catch limits and access rights and thereby prevent illegal fishing, and
   5. Inclusion of coastal communities in the fisheries where feasible, through dedicated access and
       inshore FAD networks, as well as targeted investments maintain food security with coastal fish
       supplies stagnating and growing populations.

A key point of emphasis in these strategies is continued and expanded investment in policy delivery
capacity, notably in terms of regional agencies that support the information base for setting fishing limits
and the monitoring of compliance, the secretariats of sub-regional coalitions setting fishing limits, and the
national agencies developing and implementing policy within countries’ waters. Expanded staffing, training
and partnerships with regional and international organizations could help ensure the delivery capacity is in
place, together with dedicated regional programs and activities towards this end.



                                                                                                          11
I. Introduction and Objectives of the Report

1.1 Introduction: The importance of tuna resources to economic growth in the Pacific Islands
Pacific Island Countries’ economic growth aspirations are not on track to be achieved. One of the principal
objectives shared between the eleven Pacific Island member countries of the World Bank (including Papua
New Guinea) 1 is economic growth that is inclusive and equitable, as articulated in the Framework for
Pacific Regionalism (the region’s overarching policy framework for collective action) (Pacific Islands
Forum, 2014). However, the rate of growth in many of these countries has generally been low over the last
decade, and if this trend were to continue over the next 25 years, with only Fiji and Palau’s gross domestic
product (GDP) per capita growing at a rate higher than two percent annually, many Pacific Island countries
(PICs) will fall significantly behind other countries, with per capita GDP levels only moderately higher
than at present.

One of the few opportunities to                       Box 1: The Western & Central Pacific Ocean (WCPO) region
                                                      The WCPO region is defined by the wide range of the Pacific Ocean covered
avoid this ‘low-growth future’ is                     under the Convention on the Conservation and Management of High Migratory
utilization of the region’s tuna                      Fish Stocks in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean, and includes both the
resources. Potential drivers of                       national waters of a number of countries as well as areas beyond national
economic growth are limited in the                    jurisdiction (WCPFC, 2010). Although the western boundary notionally
Pacific due largely to the geography                  extends to the East Asian seaboard, it is understood that the Convention Area
and the constraints of isolation.                     does not include the South China Sea. In the east, the Convention Area adjoins,
PICs’ resource endowments such as                     or overlaps, the area of competence of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna
the tuna stocks and the economic                      Commission. The southern boundary extends to 60 degrees south and the
activities they support, may be some                  northern boundary extends to Alaska and the Bering Sea (WCPFC, 2010).
of the most economically viable
growth areas for the region.

The Pacific is endowed with some of
the world’s largest tuna stocks. As
units of analysis, the entire Pacific
Ocean is divided into either (i) the
Western and Central Pacific Ocean
(WCPO) - covering over 8 percent
of the global ocean, or (ii) the
Eastern Pacific Ocean (EPO), where
each contains separate stocks 2 of
tuna whose interactions are
relatively limited (see Box 1 and
Figure 1) (Hampton et al., 1999).
Tuna is a general term referring to
several species of fish, and scientists
often categorize some 61 species as
‘tuna and tuna-like fish’, 14 of
which are considered ‘true tuna’                      Western and Central Pacific Ocean (area of the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries
(SPC, 2015).                                          Commission (WCPFC) inside the red lines. Source: Harley et al, 2011.




1
  Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, Kiribati, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Samoa, Solomon
Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. See: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/pacificislands/overview accessed on August 10, 2015.
2
  A ‘fish stock’ is an operational rather than biological term, defined by FAO as the living resources in the community or population from which
catches are taken in a given fishery (where the fish stock may be one or several species of fish, and also includes commercial invertebrates and
plants) (FAO Fisheries Glossary).
                                                                                                                                            12
The WCPO region contains stocks of four tuna species that are commercially harvested:
   • albacore (Thunnus alalunga), separated into two discrete stocks by the
      equatorial area (where they are rare): a northern and a southern
      component, long-lived and often caught between 1.5 and 10 years old
      at a length of 45 to 50 cm, generally in deeper waters with longlines;

     •     bigeye (Thunnus obesus), long-lived and among the largest of the
           world’s tuna species, bigeye are broadly distributed in the WCPO both
           horizontally and vertically in the water column, typically caught either
           as juveniles (3 months to 1.7 years old) at a length between 20 to 75 cm
           or between 100 and 180 cm (2 to 10 years old) the latter by longline;

     •     skipjack (Katsuwonus pelamis), fast-growing and short-lived species
           (few live longer than three to four years), surface-schooling species
           distributed year-round in warmer, tropical waters, with seasonal
           expansion into northern and southern sub-tropical waters, typically
           caught at a length between 40 to 70 cm; and

     •     yellowfin (Thunnus albacares), fast-growing species distributed
           throughout WCPO tropical and sub-equatorial waters, typically
           spending most of their time in warmer mixed surface waters and caught
           either as juveniles (3 months to 1.5 years old) at a length between 20 to
           70 cm or between 90 to 160 cm (1.5 and 6 – 7 years old) (SPC).

These WCPO tuna resources collectively form the basis of one of the world’s largest and most valuable
fisheries. Their movements cover a massive area of the WCPO, and the fleets that hunt them travel
thousands of kilometers to do so (see for
example Figure 1). The movement of the Figure 1. Long-Distance Movements of Tagged Yellowfin Tuna
four tuna stocks within the WCPO occurs
in large part within the waters under the
jurisdiction of Pacific Island countries. In
particular, the 11 Pacific Island country
members of the World Bank (including
Papua New Guinea) control over 55
percent of this WCPO area 3 and indeed
almost 5 percent of the global ocean (see
Table 1 below). From these waters alone,
34 percent of world’s global tuna catch 4
is supplied each year, with an estimated Source: Secretariat of the Pacific Community, in Gillett (2014)
delivered value 5 of over US$3.4 billion
annually (FFA, 2014).




3
  WCPO convention surface area estimated at 30 million square kilometers, from https://portals.iucn.org/library/efiles/html/EPLP-
072/section11.html#fn1
4
  Global tuna catch defined as the global catch of the 4 main species (albacore, bigeye, skipjack and yellowfin), totaling 4.61 million metric tons
in 2013.
5
  The term ‘delivered value’ is defined here in terms of the price paid by processors in Thailand for supply of tuna. This differs from the
synonymous terms of ‘first-sale value’, ‘ex-vessel value’ and ‘landed value’ which refer to the price paid to the harvester for the tuna, often by a
trading company who will transship the catch to the processor.
                                                                                                                                                  13
Table 1: Pacific Ocean under the Jurisdiction of World Bank member countries as Exclusive Economic
Zones
 Country                                                   Land Area (sq. km.)*   EEZ (sq. km.)**
 Federated States of Micronesia                            702                    2,992,597
 Fiji                                                      18,274                 1,281,122
 Kiribati                                                  811                    3,437,345
 Palau                                                     459                    604,289
 Papua New Guinea                                          462,840                2,396,575
 Republic of the Marshall Islands                          181                    1,992,232
 Samoa                                                     2,821                  131,812
 Solomon Islands                                           27,986                 1,597,492
 Tonga                                                     717                    664,853
 Tuvalu                                                    26                     751,797
 Vanuatu                                                   12,189                 827,891
 TOTAL                                                     527,006                16,678,005
* CIA World Factbook; ** Claus et al, 2014; via www.seaaroundus.org


1.2 Objectives of the Report
The objective of this report is to suggest some viable answers to the questions: in a plausible best case
scenario, how much could these tuna resources contribute to Pacific Island countries’ economies by the
year 2040, and what policy decisions would be required from the countries? In complement, what would
be the impacts and benefits in terms of employment and food security of these policy decisions? To answer
these questions, the remainder of the report is organized as follows:
   (i) Methodology: defining the key drivers of performance for the use of these resources;
   (ii) Baseline: in terms of the current economic contributions from the resources and past trends in the
         key drivers of performance;
   (iii) Key Drivers of Change: describing expected changes in the direction of indicators of key external
         drivers of the fisheries’ performance, and potential key policy strategies or decisions that might be
         taken by PICs in this context; and
   (iv) Opportunity Scenario in 2040: describing a plausible best-case scenario in 2040 based on potential
         policy strategies and expected changes in given the key drivers.

The building blocks for this report are the 2010 Future of Fisheries report and subsequent Regional
Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries endorsed by Forum Leaders in 2015. In 2010 the Pacific Islands
Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) and the Secretariat of the Pacific Community (SPC) prepared a report
identifying broad focal areas to achieve a best-case scenario for the development of the region’s fisheries
over a 25-year period from 2010 to 2035 (Gillett and Cartwright, 2010). With the aim of informing long-
term strategic approaches to the region’s fisheries, the report led to a ‘status check’ on progress in 2015,
and the development of a Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries with strategies and
measurable targets to help achieve the best-base scenario described in 2015, within the context of the
Framework for Pacific Regionalism (FFA and SPC, 2015). This Roadmap was endorsed by the leaders of
the member countries of the Pacific Islands Forum, during the 46th Forum meeting in Port Moresby during
September of 2015 (Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2015).

This study aims to build upon the Future of Fisheries report and subsequent Roadmap, by building upon
the best-case scenario for the tuna fisheries to the year 2040, identifying the potential economic
contributions to the region from achieving this best-case scenario by building upon the 10-year targets in
the Roadmap, and proposing further detail on likely policy decisions that would need to be taken by Pacific
Island countries within the context of implementing the Roadmap in order to achieve the best-case scenario.




                                                                                                           14
II. Methodology

In developing a best-case scenario for the economic contribution of WCPO tuna fisheries to the economies
of Pacific Island countries, the following methodology describes:
    • The units of analysis for WCPO tuna fisheries,
    • Measurement of the economic contribution of these fisheries, and
    • Construction of the best-case scenario for 2040.

2.1 Defining the Units of Analysis within Western and Central Pacific Ocean Tuna Fisheries
Throughout the WCPO and particularly the waters of Pacific Island Countries, these four stocks of tuna
move widely and are hunted by industrial fishing vessels with sophisticated technology, collectively
forming one of the world’s largest fisheries by any measure – value, volume and range. This collective
WCPO tuna fishery is actually a diverse range of fisheries 6 and accompanying supply chains, which are
often defined by the method of fishing used and include:
                                                                      Figure 2. The Main Tuna Fishing Methods in the Pacific
       •    Small-scale artisanal operations in
            the coastal waters of Pacific Island
            countries;

      •     Industrial purse-seine operations
            capturing multiple species but largely
            targeting skipjack (70 – 85 percent of
            total catch) and yellowfin (15 – 30
            percent), where a fishing vessel sets a
            net in a circle around a school of tuna
            by first releasing one end attached to
            a buoy or skiff, and then releasing
            more of the net as the vessel moves
            around in a large circle until the two
            ends are brought together and
            retrieved, and the purse seine wire
            that runs through the rings around the
            lower weighted edge of the net is
            hauled to cinch the bottom closed;

      •     Industrial     longline    operations
            comprised of a number of different
            discrete    fleet    segments     and Source: Gillett, 2014
            operations whereby vessels pull
            longlines (comprising a mainline to which branch lines with baited hooks are attached at intervals)
            along the surface of the water behind it, and which can be grouped as (i) tropical longline fisheries
            largely targeting yellowfin and bigeye (including ‘offshore’ sashimi longliners from Taiwan,
            China and from mainland China, and domestic fleets from Indonesia, Philippines, PNG, the
            Solomon Islands, FSM, RMI and Vietnam; and ‘distant-water’ vessels from Japan, Taiwan, China
            and mainland China, and Vanuatu, operating primarily in the eastern tropical waters of the
            WCPO), and (ii) southern longline fisheries largely targeting albacore (including Pacific Island
6
  The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) defines a fishery as a geographical place, activity, or unit that is involved in
raising and/or harvesting fish. As a unit of analysis, a fishery is typically defined in terms of some or all of the following, people involved,
species or type of fish, area of water or seabed, method of fishing, class of boats and purpose of the activities (FAO Fisheries Glossary).
                                                                                                                                                   15
            fleets and ‘distant-water’ fleets from Taiwan, China and mainland China operating in sub-tropical
            waters in the southern area of the WCPO); and

      •     Industrial pole-and-line operations 7 by domestic fleets from Indonesia, Solomon Islands, French
            Polynesia and the distant water fleet from Japan, targeting skipjack year-round, as well as seasonal
            sub-tropical skipjack fisheries in the national waters of Australia, Japan (extending eastwards to
            include albacore also) and the United States (i.e. Hawaii) (King, 2007; Gillett, 2014; SPC, 2015).

In terms of both the volume and value, the two largest of these fisheries are the purse seine fishery and the
longline fishery – both tropical and southern albacore (Williams and Terawasi, 2015), which will be the
two units of analysis for this report. Although roughly 10 percent of the WCPO tuna catch was taken by the
pole and line fishery in 2014 for consumption in Japan in various forms or canning in the Solomon Islands,
this fishery has been less productive than the purse seine fishery, and the 120 vessels based in the region
30 years ago have dwindled to 5 (Gillett, 2014). As such, this report does not focus on the pole and line
fishery, though certainly market preferences and operating conditions may change in the future that make
this fishery more attractive in the region.

The WCPO purse seine and longline tuna fisheries support global supply chains, which in aggregate form
complex and multi-layered systems. Fish is one of the world’s most traded agricultural commodities (World
Bank and FAO, 2009; FAO, 2014), and WCPO purse seine and tropical longline tuna fishery supply chains
are no exception. These often originate in Pacific Island waters and end with consumers in Europe, Japan
or North America (Gillett, 2014). As such, for purposes of analyzing the economic benefits they provide,
these fisheries should be considered as dynamic systems that include all of the components of the supply
chains, beginning with the finite natural resource stock, which produces a flow of benefits to users along
the chain – illustrated as a generic and simple value chain in Figure 3 (Ostrom, 1990; Hilborn and Walters,
1992; Charles, 1995; Lackey, 2005; Garcia and Charles, 2007).

Figure 3. Generic components of a simple commercial fisheries value chain

          Ocean Ecosystem                                       Harvest                      Processing              Wholesale & Retail

                                                             Communities
           Ecological unit
                                                                 Families                       Individuals,             Distributors,
                                                                                                groups,                  groups,
                                                           Fishing Fleet(s)                     companies,               companies
            Fish stock(s)                              •   Fishers                              etc.                     who sell to
                                                       •   Technology (incl.                    transforming             other
                                                           suppliers and servicers)             raw fish into            retailers or
                                                       •   Methods                              the product              final
                                                       •   Effort                                                        consumers

Source: Adapted from Charles (2001), drawing from Orbach (1980)


While simple, predictable, mechanistic systems were referred to as ‘clockworks’ by Boulding (1956), given
the interaction of biophysical variables in a given ocean ecosystem that determines the size and abundance
of a fish stock(s) that is targeted by a group of fishers and their methods, fishery systems are complex,
imperfectly predictable, dissipative structures that could be referred to as ‘soft watches’ based on Salvador
Dali’s allegory in a 1931 painting to indicate that things may not be as rigid as usually assumed (Garcia and
Charles, 2007). In fact, a given fishery system is actually a plexus of subsystems, while also part of broader
natural and human systems and is affected by the global environment, economy, and society within which
7
 The method of pole and line fishing refers here to vessels fishing with barbless, un-baited hooks on short lines attached to poles to catch tunas
(King, 2007).
                                                                                                                                                 16
it exists (Garcia and Charles, 2007). For this reason, the units of analysis in this report will be the WCPO
purse seine tuna fishery, the tropical longline tuna fishery and the southern albacore longline fishery value
chains.

2.2 Measuring the Current and Future Economic Contribution from these Fisheries
Given that the WCPO tuna fisheries support global value chains, the current economic contributions to
Pacific Island countries can be measured at each component of the chain, as follows:

Figure 4. Current Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from WCPO Tuna Fisheries
                                            Revenue from the                          Benefits Captured by Pacific
                                         Fisheries allocated along                         Island Countries
                                         the Global Value Chain
                                                  Distr/
        Wholesale & Retail                       Marketing
       Distributors, groups,                      Costs
   companies who sell to other                 • Labor
   retailers or final consumers                • Capital
                                               • Other inputs

           Processing
                                                 Processing
       Individuals, groups,                                      •   Domestic ownership of enterprises
                                                   Costs         •   Employment in local plants
                                                                                                            Pacific
          companies, etc.
    transforming raw fish into                 • Labor           •   Taxes                                  Island
            the product                        • Capital         •   Locally sourced inputs                Countries
                                               • Other inputs

             Harvest                                Labor
        Fishing Fleet(s)
    •   Fishers                                  Other Inputs    • Local labor on vessels
    •   Technology (incl.                                        • Purchase of domestic goods &
        suppliers and servicers)                   Capital         services
    •   Methods                                                  • Domestic ownership of fleets
    •   Effort                                                   • Vessel joint ventures
                                                                 • Taxes on capital
                                                  Resource       • Access fees
        Ocean Ecosystem                             Rent


         Ecological unit

                                                                                     Source: Adapted from IFC (2000)
                                                 Note: Pacific Island labor is shown as a benefit, rather than a cost of
         Tuna stock(s)                                                  production, given high regional unemployment




As shown above, the economic contributions from fishery value chains are often measured by their annual
contributions to a country or group of countries’ economy, typically in terms of GDP. However, annual
measures such as GDP indicate a growth in contributions from one year to the next, but do not indicate
whether such growth is sustainable, or alternatively if it has been achieved at the expense of future benefits
(for example through capital and other input expansion in the harvesting sector at the expense of resource
rent in Figure 4 above) (World Bank, 2012). For this reason, many countries have adopted wealth
accounting principles to supplement GDP (though not yet in Pacific Island countries), by measuring
                                                                                                           17
changes in the size of the underlying assets 8 that support human well-being – such as the tuna stocks
illustrated in Figure 4 above (World Bank, 2012). A country’s total wealth is comprised of three classes of
assets: (i) natural capital such as tuna stocks in the ocean, (ii) produced capital (machinery and structures,
urban land), and (iii) intangible capital (skills, expertise, etc. with which labor is applied) (World Bank,
2006). With this in mind, GDP is considered as essentially the annual economic returns to a country from
its assets (World Bank, 2006). When countries fail to account for their assets such as natural capital and
rely solely on GDP, “it’s like grading a corporation based on one day’s cash flow and forgetting to
depreciate assets and other costs,” according to Joseph
Stiglitz, winner of the Nobel Prize for Economics Box 2. Measuring the Ocean’s Natural Capital
(World Bank, 2012).
                                                              Recent efforts have been undertaken to measure
Renewable natural assets such as the WCPO’s tuna the ocean’s natural capital on a global scale. In
stocks are considered as a true gift of nature, or 2015, WWF estimated the asset value – i.e. the
endowment, because they can potentially supply a value of the services provided – of fisheries,
sustainable stream of benefits that can be reinvested to mangroves, coral reefs and seagrasses, at some
grow the value of the country’s capital and therefore US$6.9 trillion, with an annual return on all
wealth (World Bank and FAO, 2009). Because the ocean ‘assets’ (a ‘gross marine product’) of some
value of an asset is both the current and future benefits US$2.5 trillion.
it can provide in an assumed lifetime, taking a greater
amount of benefits from a renewable natural asset now Source: Hoegh-Guldberg et al (2015)
than it can sustain will reduce the future stream of
benefits from that asset, and thus its present value. Essentially, one is robbing the future to pay the present.
The value of renewable natural assets such as tuna stocks is therefore linked to their environmental well-
being, where increases in stock size lead to higher values and conversely a reduction in asset value may
reflect resource degradation. More specifically, the asset value is measured as the present value of the future
consumption (i.e. value of consuming current and future benefits from all economic items, in this case given
as the economic profits 9 generated along the fishery value chains).

Economic growth is an engine of poverty reduction (World Bank, 2015). Taking natural capital accounting
into consideration, efforts to increase shared economic growth and hence poverty reduction from the
region’s tuna fisheries are linked to sustainably increasing the present value of these assets, i.e. the
sustainable benefits they can produce, rather than just their annual contribution to GDP (World Bank and
FAO, 2009). Essentially, the economic returns from the fisheries and the contribution they can make to
poverty reduction are tied to the abundance of fish in the ocean. For this reason, to the extent possible, this
report will refer to both:
    (i)      the annual contribution of the WCPO purse seine and longline tuna fishery value chains to
             Pacific Island countries’ GDP, and
    (ii)     the value of the region’s underlying natural capital asset (i.e. the present value of the stream of
             profits generated along the tuna fishery value chains).

In addition, given the transaction costs in translating national gains in economic growth into gains for the
bottom forty percent of a country’s income distribution (World Bank, 2015), the report will include
information on the current and potential direct contribution of the fishery value chains to Pacific Island
employment and food security.




8
  An asset is defined as an item of economic value or able to produce a flow of benefits such as income (World Bank, 2006).
9
  Economic profits refers here to the profits generated by the fishery, as a very broad proxy for the more specific concept of resource rent which is
generated through fishing activities and captured along the value chain, based on Ricardo’s theory of land rents whereby a natural resource is in
fixed supply and thus the owner can charge a rent for its use (World Bank and FAO, 2009). Figure 4 above shows resource rent captured at the
harvesting segment by Pacific Island countries, largely through access fees.
                                                                                                                                                 18
2.3 Developing a Plausible Scenario for Change to 2040 to this Economic Contribution
To construct a plausible best-case scenario for the contribution of WCPO tuna fishery resources to Pacific
Island countries’ economies in 2040, the report draws upon the relatively recent field of scenario
development, together with secondary data collected from WCPFC and SPC databases and published
reports, supplemented by literature review and consultations with experts (see Annex I for an overview of
the field of scenario analysis). Scenarios tell compelling stories that capture the imagination and
communicate future risks or opportunities, often for policy decisions (Swart et al., 2004). They are neither
predictions nor forecasts, but rather should be thought of as coherent and plausible stories, told in words
and numbers, about the possible co-evolutionary pathways of combined human and environmental systems
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000; Swart et al., 2004; Carpenter et al., 2005). Each scenario is one plausible
alternative image of how the future might unfold under particular assumptions, and a set of such scenarios
can support understanding of possible future developments in complex systems and policy making
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000; Carpenter et al., 2005). In this way, they assist policy-makers to understand the
upcoming choices that need to be made and highlight developments in the present (Carpenter et al., 2005).

Specific methodology for construction of a scenario for Pacific Island tuna fisheries in 2040. Building off
of the experiences to date, the report will develop an ‘opportunity’ scenario, whereby a plausible and
desirable vision of the future will be prescribed, based on expected future directions of the fisheries and
given key policy decisions. As such, the study will: (i) begin with the baseline or current contributions and
trends based on data available as of 2015, and (ii) articulate the description of a plausible, best-case scenario
for the contribution of tuna fisheries to Pacific Island economies in 2040, given key policy decisions that
would need to be taken by Pacific Island countries and the expected changes to other key drivers of
performance in these fisheries. While robust scenarios of alternative future pathways for WCPO tuna
fisheries could take years to build, the scenario developed here will rather suggest an initial narrative in
order to highlight possible opportunity and the key policy decisions that would arise over the next 25 years,
which would require more detailed scenarios and modeling to better understand. The methodology includes
the following steps, described in the remaining sections and chapters of the report:

Figure 5. Methodology for Developing the 2040 Opportunity Scenario for Pacific Tuna Fisheries
                                                              1. Establish first principles (as boundaries
                 Chapter II                                      for the scenario)
          (remainder of this chapter)                         2. Define the indicators for the analysis (i.e.
                                                                 key ‘non-policy’ drivers that will shape
                                                                 the scenario and indicators of each)



                 Chapter III                                  3. Establish the baseline in 2015



                                                              4. Identify ‘most likely’ changes to the
                 Chapter IV                                      indicators for the key ‘non-policy’ or
                                                                 external drivers
                                                              5. Identify key policy decisions



                                                              6. Indicate potential net economic benefits
                                                                 From key policy decisions
                  Chapter V
                                                              7. Based on previous steps, describe a
                                                                 plausible best-case scenario for 2040


                                                                                                                19
These steps are described in more detail below:

    1. Step One: Establish first principles (as boundaries for the scenario): Any discussion of potential
       scenarios and policy decisions concerning regional resources such as the WCPO tuna stocks, takes
       place in the context of the shared values, goals and policies of the Pacific, most recently articulated
       in the Framework for Pacific Regionalism (Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat, 2014). The
       Framework states the following Pacific regional values that will guide policy-making:
           • We value and depend upon the integrity of our vast ocean and our island resources.
           • We treasure the diversity and heritage of the Pacific and seek an inclusive future in which
                cultures, traditions and religious beliefs are valued, honored and developed.
           • We embrace good governance, the full observance of democratic values, the rule of law,
                the defense and promotion of all human rights, gender equality, and commitment to just
                societies.
           • We seek peaceful, safe, and stable communities and countries, ensuring full security and
                wellbeing for the peoples of the Pacific.
           • We support full inclusivity, equity and equality for all people of the Pacific.
           • We strive for effective, open and honest relationships and inclusive and enduring
                partnerships—based on mutual accountability and respect—with each other, within our
                sub-regions, within our region, and beyond.

        The Framework elaborates the following principal objectives:
           • Sustainable development that combines economic, social, and cultural development in
               ways that improve livelihoods and well-being and use the environment sustainably;
           • Economic growth that is inclusive and equitable;
           • Strengthened governance, legal, financial, and administrative systems; and
           • Security that ensures stable and safe human, environmental and political conditions for
               all.

        These values and objectives provide a set of first principles for development of the scenario for
        Pacific tuna fisheries in 2040. As such, the scenario developed will be consistent with these
        principles, and bounded by them. For example, a scenario that significantly enhances economic
        growth at the expense of social development or environmental sustainability would not be an
        option.

    2. Step Two: Define the indicators for the analysis: Key indicators for the scenario analysis include
       (i) the indicator variable for success in 2040 (i.e. the dependent variable), (ii) the key policy
       decisions that will determine success (i.e. the independent variable), and (iii) the most likely values
       for the indicator variables of other key drivers of success (i.e. controlled variables). Each of these
       three types of indicators are further defined below:

            i.   The dependent variable (i.e. ‘the opportunity’) is defined as the contribution of the purse
                 seine and longline tuna fisheries to Pacific Island countries’ economies in 2040. As
                 mentioned previously, the indicator most commonly used is the contribution to GDP,
                 which reflects essentially an annual return on the country or countries’ assets, including
                 natural capital assets such as tuna stocks. For this reason, the report uses contribution to
                 GDP as the indicator variable for the opportunity the fisheries could provide in 2040, but
                 also to the extent data permits, references the underlying status and value of the natural
                 capital asset, as measured by the present value of the stream of benefits generated along
                 the tuna fishery value chains. As such, the biological status of the fish stocks is incorporated
                 into this dependent variable. Additionally, although not the dependent variable, the report
                 also indicates the impact of this opportunity on Pacific Island employment as well.

                                                                                                              20
                 ii.   The independent variable (i.e. ‘the policy decisions needed’ or key policy drivers) is
                       defined as the fisheries governance reforms under the control of Pacific Island decision-
                       makers – notably to maintain an abundance of the resource to support optimal harvests and
                       the wider ecological support functions needed - that would be required to achieve the target
                       for the dependent variable in 2040. This variable is considered endogenous to the decision-
                       makers in Pacific Island countries, and will be described fully in terms of the dependent
                       variable. These governance reforms will be discussed in terms of policy decisions to be
                       taken, institutional changes and organizational capacity to deliver the reforms.

                iii.   The controlled variables (i.e. ‘the key non-policy or external drivers’) are defined as the
                       main ‘non-policy’ or external drivers that will shape future events for the tuna fishery
                       systems under analysis (i.e. in addition to the governance driver in step ii above). Previous
                       scenario analyses have identified a number of key direct and indirect external drivers that
                       affect the performance of systems such as Pacific Island tuna fisheries. For example, in
                       supporting the development of business strategies, Porter (1979, 2008) categorized five
                       major forces generally affecting industries. Subsequently, Doyle and Windheim (2014)
                       adapted this approach to examine the societal forces shaping environmental quality. The
                       four forces or key drivers they identified as affecting environmental quality (and the value
                       chains dependent upon it) include: (i) governance (policy, law, regulation, regulatory
                       environment); (ii) science and technology (technology methods and innovations,
                       innovation ecosystem, intellectual property); (iii) markets and economy (market size,
                       profitability, micro and macro-economic trends, investment); and (iv) behavior (consumer
                       and industry perceptions and response, non-compulsory actions and choices). Building
                       upon this approach, as well as the range of drivers identified in the 2010 Future of Fisheries
                       report (Gillett and Cartwright, 2010), the following three key direct and two key indirect
                       external drivers have been selected, together with the most important or priority indicator
                       variables for each, in order to help articulate a technically and economically plausible
                       scenario for the best-case economic contribution of WCPO tuna fisheries to Pacific Islands
                       in 2040, while drawing upon relevant experiences from other countries and considering
                       global and regional trends that could shape the opportunity:

                       Direct Drivers 10

                               1. Climate change:
                                      • Change in the abundance and distribution of tuna stocks

                               2. Markets and the economy:
                                     • Global price for various tuna products, reflected changes as well as trends
                                         in global supply from other oceans, including consumer preferences
                                     • Fixed and operating costs along the Pacific tuna fishery value chains
                                         (notably harvesting costs, particularly fuel, but also processing and
                                         distribution costs such as labor, utilities, etc.)

                               3. Science and technology:
                                      • Harvesting technology (fishing vessels, gear, methods, storage)
                                      • Fishery monitoring and enforcement technology




10   Both direct and indirect drivers are not listed in order of any priority or impact.
                                                                                                                  21
            Indirect Drivers

                  4. Demographic change:
                        • Changes to Pacific Island population size, and subsequently change in
                           Pacific Island demand for animal protein, notably the change in fish
                           demanded by the population (kg/year), as a driver of local demand for the
                           region’s tuna resources

                  5. External Governance:
                        • Trade barriers (tariffs and standards) and preferences
                        • Foreign fishing subsidies and fleet capacity policies
                         • Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission policies

            The above variables for each of the key external drivers are considered exogenous (based
            on their temporal and spatial scale), over which Pacific Island decision-makers (largely)
            do not have any control. This reflects basic bio-economic functions that show the
            profitability of fish harvesting operations as a function of product price, the harvesting
            technology employed, the fixed costs of harvesting, the operating costs of harvesting, the
            fishing effort expended and the abundance of the resource targeted (Anderson and Seijo,
            2010). The fishing effort that vessels expend in Pacific Island waters, and indirectly the
            abundance of the tuna resources targeted, are considered endogenous to regional decision-
            makers and subject to governance, while the remaining variables (e.g. price, the harvesting
            technology employed, fixed and operating costs for harvesting inputs and regulations of
            foreign market access) are subject to factors beyond the spatial and/or temporal control of
            Pacific decision-makers.

3. Step Three: Establish the baseline from data available in 2015: The evolution of the region’s tuna
   fisheries value chains since the 1950s will be described, together with their current economic
   contributions, as the starting point for the scenario. Data and information used will be based on the
   latest available as of 2015, which generally reflects catch data and economic indicators as of the
   end of 2013 or where possible end of 2014.

4. Step Four: Identify ‘most-likely’ changes to the priority variables of the key ‘non-policy’ or
   external drivers of tuna fisheries’ economic contribution to Pacific Islands: The most likely future
   changes to the priority variables for each of the key ‘non-policy’ drivers (drawing as needed upon
   any additional variables upon which the priority variables are dependent) will be described,
   essentially as ‘mini-scenarios’. Each mini-scenario would state past trends, current measures, and
   assumptions about the step-wise changes in the values of the variables (or the direction of the
   change in values), including assumptions about the relationships between changes in the variables
   over time (indicating any specific linkages and interactions between the key ‘non-policy’ drivers).

5. Step Five: Identify the key policy decisions PICs would need to take in order to attain the
   opportunity scenario (i.e. prescribed vision of the future) in 2040, given the ‘most likely’ changes
   to key ‘non-policy’ or external drivers. Given the expected changes to key external drivers, the key
   governance reforms (i.e. policy decisions) PICs would need to take in order to attain a best-case or
   opportunity scenario in 2040 will be proposed.

6. Step Six: Describe the opportunity scenario in 2040: Starting from the baseline, the ‘mini-
   scenarios’ for the most likely changes in the priority variables of key external ‘non-policy’ drivers
   and the proposed key policy decisions will be combined into a narrative storyline that describes the
   resulting and plausible best-case scenario for the economic contributions of the purse seine and
   tropical longline tuna value chains to Pacific Island countries in 2040. This scenario will
                                                                                                     22
                               incorporate the ‘best-case’ scenario from the Future of Fisheries report, and 10-year targets from
                               the Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries as milestones.

              7. Step Seven: Summarize the impact of achieving the opportunity scenario. Available measures for
                 the dependent variable will be summarized (including the status and value of the underlying natural
                 capital asset), i.e. the economic contribution of the tuna fishery value chains to Pacific Island
                 countries under the opportunity scenario, as well as measures of livelihoods.

Figure 6. Summary of Conceptual Framework for Developing the 2040 Opportunity Scenario


                                        Baseline: from information available in 2015
                  •            Trends in growth of Pacific tuna fisheries since 1950s
                  •            Current value chains
                  •            Current contributions to GDP, employment, sustainability
 Key Policy Decisions Needed




                                                            Markets & the Economy




                                                                                    Science & Technology



                                                                                                           Demographic Change




                                                                                                                                External Governance
                                           Climate Change




                                                                                                                                                      Key External
                                                                                                                                                      Drivers of
                                                                                                                                                      Change




                                  Pacific Tuna Fisheries Opportunity Scenario in 2040
               •               Based on ‘most likely’ changes to indicators for key external drivers
               •               Combined with proposed key policy decisions
               •               Summarized in an opportunity scenario for 2040, with economic benefits described




                                                                                                                                                            23
III. Baseline

3.1 Historical Development of Tuna Fisheries Value Chains in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean
Any discussion of the starting point is enriched by a brief understanding of the historical context. Tuna have
provided an important source of food for Pacific Island populations for centuries, and now collectively
support one of the world’s largest and most valuable fisheries (SPC, 2015). While traditional tuna fisheries
have existed for centuries, the region’s modern tuna fisheries date back to the Treaty of Versailles in 1919,
when Japan gained control of many German colonial territories in the region (including what is now Palau,
FSM, RMI and the Northern Mariana Islands) and began to invest in food production systems (Gillett,
2007). By the 1930s industrial tuna fishing accelerated with 116 pole-and-line vessels based in Japanese
territories in the region, and increasingly Japanese longline vessels fishing in the area (Barclay, 2010). After
a pause during World War Two, this activity recommenced in 1952 with Japanese public investment in
both distant-water pole-and-line and longline fleets to enhance food production, generally in Fiji, American
Samoa, Vanuatu, New Caledonia and French Polynesia (Barclay, 2010). The longline vessels mostly caught
albacore for export to canneries in Hawaii and the U.S. mainland during this period, while technology
continued to develop rapidly (Gillett, 2007). Similarly, the U.S. followed suit with canneries first
established in Pago Pago in 1953 (Barclay, 2010). As Japanese pole-and-line operations were limited by
the distance achievable from a shore base with live bait, by the 1970s based had been established in PNG
(1970), the Solomon Islands (1971), and Fiji (1976) – many in local joint ventures (Barclay, 2010). Total
production from the pole-and-line fishery would eventually peak in the mid-1980s, just after the onset of
the biggest development in industrial tuna fishing: purse seining.

Purse seining was a ‘revolution’ in tuna fishing in the WCPO. This development began when the California
pole-and-line fishery started to re-orient towards purse seine fishing in the 1950s, in response to competition
from Japanese fleets (Barclay, 2010). Fueled by public support, new technology and innovation allowed
purse seining to be adapted to tropical waters, and by the 1970s efforts were increasing to encourage U.S.
purse seining in the region in order to supply the canneries in Pago Pago (Barclay, 2010). However, in the
early 1980s a confluence of factors drew more U.S. purse seine vessels to the region, including early
successes, difficulties in Mexico and Costa Rica, a new agreement with U.S. trust territories in the region,
a strong El Nino event in 1982-83 that reduced catch in the Eastern Pacific, and a public outcry against by-
catch of marine mammals in tuna harvests in the Eastern Pacific, among others (Barclay, 2010). At the
same time, Japanese fleets began to transition from pole-and-line to purse seine methods, which could
generate much greater volumes (Barclay, 2010). The results have been dramatic: purse seine fishing caught
some 100,000 metric tons in the WCPO in 1980, growing to over 1.8 million metric tons per year in 2013
and now an estimated 2 million metric tons in 2014 (SPC, 2015; Williams and Terawasi, 2015).

Figure 7. Increasing Number of Purse Seine Vessels Operating in the WCPO




Source: Williams and Terawasi, 2015 (Note: does not include coastal Japan purse seine fleet, nor domestic Indonesia, Philippines
and Vietnam purse seine fleets.)



                                                                                                                            24
As the purse seine fleet has grown, so too has the technology deployed, particularly with drifting fish
aggregating devices (FADs) that may be located electronically and in some cases transmit information on
the size of tuna aggregations underneath them (Hampton, 2006). While some 40 to 60 percent of the sets
of purse seine nets in the water for tuna have generally been associated with FADs over the years, the
technology around FADs has developed rapidly in the last ten to fifteen years, contributing to a greater
catch of bigeye tuna by purse seine vessels (WPRFMC, 2015).

Collectively, the various harvesting units in the WCPO produced a record yield of an estimated 2.86 million
metric tons (mt) of tuna in 2014 (see Figure 8 below), constituting roughly 60 percent of the world’s tuna
catch and approximately 8 times the harvest of all coastal fish stocks of the region combined (Williams and
Terawasi, 2015; Gillett, 2014). In many cases, these represent some of the last tuna stocks still healthy
enough (i.e. with sufficient abundance as measured by biomass) to support the estimated annual maximum
sustainable yield, roughly equivalent to the total annual tuna catch from all other major tuna fishing areas
of the world combined – i.e. in the Eastern Pacific Ocean, the Indian Ocean and the Atlantic Ocean
(WCPFC, 2013; Gillett, 2014).

Figure 8. Total WCPO Tuna Catch in 2014




Source: Williams and Terawasi, 2015

Per the above, the provisional estimates for the break-down of the 2014 WCPO tuna catch by fishery are as
follows:
    • Purse seine catch: 2.02 million metric tons, comprised of approximately 1.60 million metric tons
         of skipjack, 0.36 million metric tons of yellowfin, and 0.07 million metric tons of bigeye
         (differences due to rounding);
    • Longline catch: 268,795 metric tons;
    • Pole and line catch: 203,736 metric tons; and
    • Troll and other small-scale gear catch: 367,469 metric tons (mostly in eastern Indonesia and the
         Philippines) (Williams and Terawasi, 2015).

In terms of the specific break-down of the 2014 WCPO tuna catch by species are as follows:
     • Skipjack: 1.96 million metric tons;
     • Yellowfin: 608,807 metric tons;
     • Bigeye: 161,299 metric tons; and
     • Albacore: 132,849 metric tons (Williams and Terawasi, 2015).

Given that the benefits generated from fish stocks occur throughout the system, measuring the economic
benefits of WCPO tuna fisheries requires assessing the contributions along the entire value chain. The
following sections provide the baseline or current economic contributions to Pacific Island countries from
                                                                                                         25
the purse seine tuna fishery and the tropical longline tuna fishery. While these fisheries form complex,
global value chains, the best available information for each is summarized along three general segments of
the chain: (i) resource owners and harvesting; (ii) processing (including distribution); and (iii) retailing. In
terms of products, globally some 72 percent of tuna catch is canned, another 14 percent is used as sashimi,
and the remaining 14 percent provides a range of other products (e.g. fresh steaks, etc.) (Conservation
International, 2015).

3.2 Measuring the Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from the Purse Seine Tuna Fishery
Resource owners (i.e. jurisdiction). As mentioned above, the purse seine fishery value chain produced an
estimated 2.02 million metric tons in 2014 (79 percent of which was skipjack, 18 percent yellowfin and 3
percent bigeye), caught almost entirely in the tropical waters of the equatorial band, with the highest catches
in the zone between 5 degrees N and 10 degrees S, as shown in Figure 9 below (Williams and Terawasi,
2015). The provisional data behind these totals are available from FFA, and indicate that in 2014, some 77
percent of the total WCPO purse seine catch was taken in the waters of the 8 Parties to the Nauru Agreement
(PNA): Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Republic of
Marshall Islands (RMI), Solomon Islands and Tuvalu; plus Tokelau – and almost 50 percent of the total
was taken in the waters of Kiribati and PNG (FFA, 2015). An additional 16 percent was caught in the
national waters of other countries in the WCPO such as Indonesia and the Philippines, and the remaining 7
percent was caught in international waters – i.e. the ‘high seas’ which in some cases resemble ‘doughnut
holes’ between the estimated national boundaries of Pacific Island countries (FFA, 2015).

Figure 9. Distribution of Purse Seine Tuna Catch in the WCPO from 2011 - 2013




Source: WCPFC, 2014


As mentioned previously, FFA provides data available on the location of the purse seine tuna catch,
allowing for a picture of where the harvests have taken place and the resource owners or jurisdictions, as
follows:

                                                                                                             26
Table 2. Break-Down of WCPO Purse Seine Tuna Catch by Water in 2013 and 2014 (metric tons)
                                                 2013                           2014
 Waters where harvest took place     Purse Seine % of Total         Purse      Seine %       of
                                     Catch                          Catch              Total
 FSM                                 210,453        10.9            135,871            6.6
 Kiribati                            282,466        14.6            679,294            32.9
 Nauru                               161,795        8.4             177,049            8.6
 Palau                               310            0               2,825              0.1
 PNG                                 591,252        30.5            342,981            16.6
 RMI                                 39,635         2.0             74,803             3.6
 Solomon Islands                     107,629        5.6             66,595             3.2
 Tokelau                             15,856         0.8             23,748             1.1
 Tuvalu                              52,892         2.7             96,040             4.6
 Sub-Total PNA + Tokelau             1,462,289      75              1,599,207          77
 American Samoa                      497            0               1,763              0.1
 Cook Islands                        8,338          0.4             12,765             0.6
 Indonesia                           215,651        11.1            145,017            7.0
 Japan                               14,441         0.7             6,218              0.3
 Korea                               234            0               44                 0
 New Zealand                         12,754         0.7             10,158             0.5
 Philippines                         101,711        5.3             123,655            6.0
 Samoa                               32             0               288                0
 Taiwan, China                       4,510          0.2             4,510              0.2
 U.S. + territories (except American 4,501          0.2             5,592              0.3
 Samoa)
 Vietnam                             22,484         1.2             22,483             1.1
 Wallis and Futuna                   0              0               162                0
 Sub-Total Other National Waters     385,316        20              332,653            16
 International waters                69,831         5               134,547            7
 TOTAL                               1,937,236      100             2,066,047*         100
*Total of FFA 2014 data differs by 2 percent from Williams and Terawasi (2015) total of 2,020,000 submitted to WCPFC scientific committee
Source: FFA (2015) http://www.ffa.int/node/425

                             Figure 10. Breakdown of 2014 WCPO Purse Seine Tuna Catch
                                                    by Location
                                              Other WCPO     High Seas
                                             National Waters
                               Philippines
                                                                       FSM

                                          Indonesia
                                                                                           Kiribati
                                       Tuvalu
                          Tokelau


                  Solomon Islands                PNG
                                                                       Nauru
                               Palau


                                                                                          Marshall Islands
                                                                                                Source: FFA (2015)

As shown above, some 77 percent of the WCPO purse seine tuna was caught in the waters of Pacific Island
countries in 2014, and almost 50 percent in the waters of Kiribati and PNG alone. As resource owners, i.e.

                                                                                                                                            27
having jurisdiction over tuna harvests within these waters, Pacific Island countries can charge harvesters a
rent for access to the fish stocks, essentially applying the theory of land rents to accessing fishing grounds
under nations’ control (World Bank and FAO, 2009). The greater the profitability of fishing, the higher the
rent is that the harvesters can afford to pay to the resource owners, i.e. the Pacific Island countries with
jurisdiction over access to the waters where the tuna are often found. The returns to Pacific Island countries
as resource owners, via payment of access fees by harvesters, has grown steadily in the five years since the
introduction of the vessel day scheme (VDS) by the PNA member countries and Tokelau (see Figure 11
below) (FFA, 2014).

Figure 11. Estimated Tuna Access Fees Received by Pacific Island Countries




Source: FFA, 2014


The VDS sets a collective cap on purse seine fishing effort in PNA waters, translates that cap into a common
currency (a fishing day by a vessel – i.e. vessel days), agrees on a minimum ‘benchmark’ price that countries
will charge harvesting units for vessel days (though countries may charge more, in some cases testing
auctions), and allocates the cap of vessel days to the countries according to an agreed formula (Havice,
2013). While the agreed price of vessel days is publicly available, i.e. the minimum ‘benchmark’ price, the
distribution among the member countries often is not easily accessible. Thus calculating the distribution of
the fees in Figure 11 is difficult (even more so given that some vessels receive concessional access fees if
licensed as local fleets, including vessels licensed under the Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement).
According to the Palau Arrangement establishing the VDS, the distribution of vessel days is based on
formulas that rely at least in part on the 7-year moving average of the distribution of purse seine effort in
the waters of member countries (PNA, 2015). For indicative purposes only, the 2007 – 2009 moving
average of the distribution of the purse seine catch among member countries available from SPC has been
applied to the total purse seine foreign access fees (including revenues from the U.S. Treaty but excluding
concessionary access fees received under the Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement) shown in Figure
11 above, as follows:




                                                                                                           28
            Figure 12. Indicative Growth in Purse Seine Foreign Access
                               Fees Received by PICs
  450,000,000
  400,000,000
  350,000,000
  300,000,000
  250,000,000
  200,000,000
  150,000,000
  100,000,000
   50,000,000
            -
   US$          2010            2011           2012           2013            2014           2015

         FSM      Kiribati   RMI       PNG     Sols    Tuvalu      Nauru     Tokelau      Palau

Note: Does not include fees received from domestic vessels, including vessels operating under the Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement
(FSMA) for Regional Access


The above fees again are indicative only of the break-down between Pacific Island countries, using the
2007 – 2009 distribution of catch among countries’ waters as a proxy. The actual distributions and fees
received in each country differ from Figure 12, based on the specific allocations of days and the price of
sales in each country. Nonetheless, the use of the 2007 – 2009 distribution provides a consistent and useful
proxy or indicator of the magnitude of fees received by Pacific Island countries for access by foreign purse
seine tuna vessels. Of note, this would only represent gross benefits to the countries as resource owners,
rather than net benefits, as Pacific Island countries’ (as well as donors’) expenditures on fisheries
management have not been subtracted. While data on Pacific Island country public expenditures for
fisheries management are scarce, the best available information provides an annual expenditure on the tuna
fisheries combined of some US$50 million (Govan, 2015). However, this should be interpreted with some
caution, as significant transaction costs in negotiating access arrangements or managing resources may be
borne by other public agencies and departments not included in the study (of note, significant tuna fisheries
management costs in the Pacific are borne by regional agencies and often via donor funding sources).

Harvesting Units (including tuna trading companies working with harvesters). Within WCPO waters, a
number of mobile fleets follow the tuna stocks as they move across both national boundaries and the high
seas, including four main distant water fleets from Taiwan, China; Japan; Korea and the United States;
collectively responsible for some 47 percent of the catch in 2013, as well as a growing Pacific Islands fleet
(23 percent of the catch) and (largely) domestic fleets operating in Indonesia and the Philippines (20 percent
of the catch) (WCPFC, 2014; Terawasi and Williams, 2015). In total, although some 76 percent of the
WCPO purse seine catch volume in 2013 was taken in Pacific Island country waters, approximately 77
percent of the WCPO purse seine catch was taken by fleets foreign to the Pacific Islands (see Figure 13
below).




                                                                                                                                        29
                           Figure 13 Distribution of Purse Seine Catch by Fleet




           China               Chinese Taipei    Ecuador            El Salvador        Indonesia
           Japan               Korea             New Zealand        Pacific Islands:   Philippines
           Spain               United States     Vietnam

Source: WCPFC Data Catalogue


Table 3. Catch levels and description of WCPO purse seine fleet segments
     Four largest distant-water purse seine fleets: 47 percent of WCPO purse seine catch in 2013
 Taiwan, China (212,480 metric tons caught in 2013, 11 percent of the total purse seine catch): This fleet
 has operated in WCPO for some time, with 34 vessels active at the end of 2014, remaining relatively
 constant over the years (due to limits imposed by the Government on fleet size to 34 vessels after a rapid
 expansion in the 1980s and 1990s), as the number was 33 in 2011. Imports of used vessels were
 traditionally prohibited by the Government, encouraging the development of a domestic ship-building
 industry. Some 90 to 95 percent of the fleet’s catch has historically been transshipped from Pacific Island
 ports to Bangkok canneries via one of the major trading companies, with the remaining 5 to 10 percent
 sold to Japan for Katsuobushi 11. Despite the self-imposed cap on the fleet size, the domestic ship-
 building industry has been developing increasingly more efficient vessels, in some cases pre-fabricating
 materials for construction in other countries for their fleets.
 Japan (206,999 metric tons caught in 2013, 11 percent of the total purse seine catch): With 40 vessels
 active in the WCPO in 2014, the fleet has historically been one of the largest in the region, typically
 equipped with ‘ultra-low’ temperature (<60 degrees C) freezers on board for storing a portion of the
 purse seine catch (usually yellowfin or bigeye) for sale in lower-quality segments of the Japanese Sashimi
 market. Fishing only in Japanese coastal waters from May to October, these vessels have typically fished
 in the WCPO throughout the year, in both national waters and the high seas, but particularly in PNG, the
 Solomon Islands and FSM. These vessels were traditionally required to offload in Japan rather than
 transship from Pacific Island ports, so incurred higher costs, however in recent years new and larger
 purse seine vessels have been constructed, equipped with helicopters to reduce fuel time searching for
 fish (which Korean, Taiwan, China and U.S. fleets have used for some time).

 Korea (225,632 metric tons caught in 2013, 12 percent of the total purse seine catch): The fleet included
 28 vessels in 2014, exactly the same number as active in 2010 and owned by three large companies,
 Dongwon Industries, Sajo/Oyang and Silla Co. Ltd. These fleets have typically been extremely efficient,
 catching 10,000 metric tons per vessel annually in 2009, and utilizing both national waters of all PNA
 members and the high seas, though the exact distribution is not available. The fleet has traditionally
 transshipped in a number of Pacific Island ports including Pohnpei, Majuro, Honiara and Tarawa, with
 carriers transporting fish for processing either domestically in Korea or in Bangkok.

 United States (254,342 metric tons caught in 2013, 13 percent of the total purse seine catch): The fleet
 included 40 vessels in 2014, an increase from 35 vessels in 2009 (18 of which were older vessels from

11
     Japanese name for dried, fermented and smoked skipjack tuna.
                                                                                                          30
the 1980s and 1990s and 17 of which were newer vessels built in Taiwan, China). The older segment of
the fleet traditionally landed catch at Pago Pago for processing for the U.S. market, but most of the newer
fleet operated similarly to the Asian fleets and transshipped to Bangkok or Latin America, often through
Pohnpei or Majuro. Part of the cost of access for U.S. fleets has been traditionally borne by the U.S.
Government through treaty with Pacific Islands, essentially as a subsidy.

            Other distant water fleets: 10 percent of the WCPO purse seine catch in 2013
China (81,871 metric tons caught in 2013, 4 percent of the total purse seine catch): State-owned
enterprises in China have traditionally maintained a number of purse seine vessels operating worldwide,
utilizing a Government policy providing tax incentives to shipyards that export vessels (Hamilton et al.,
2011). According to the Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) registry, the fleet
operating in the WCPO has grown from 16 vessels in 2009 (Hamilton et al., 2011) to 69 in 2015, 49 of
which were built in 2010 or after (constituting over half of all the purse seine vessels operating in the
WCPO built since 2010) (WCPFC, 2015b). However the current purse seine fleet that is actually
operational in the region is likely to be much smaller. In 2009, some 81 percent of the fleet’s catch was
transshipped in either Pohnpei or Majuro to Bangkok for processing via a trading company, with the
remaining 19 percent likely sent to China for processing (Hamilton et al., 2011).

    •   Ecuador (21,453 metric tons caught in 2013, 1 percent of the total purse seine catch)
    •   El Salvador (13,276 metric tons caught in 2013, 1 percent of the total purse seine catch)
    •   New Zealand (24,430 metric tons caught in 2013, 1 percent of the total purse seine catch)
    •   Spain (45,010 metric tons caught in 2013, 2 percent of the total purse seine catch)
    •   Vietnam (22,484 metric tons caught in 2013, 1 percent of the total purse seine catch)

       Indonesian and Philippines fleets: 20 percent of the WCPO purse seine catch in 2013
Indonesia (215,582 metric tons caught in 2013, 12 percent of the total purse seine catch): Data is not
readily available on the fleet size nor final markets of catch, though much of it has traditionally been
landed and processed in Indonesia (with some consumed locally, and some exported to Bangkok).

Philippines (148,552 metric tons caught in 2013 - 63,719 of which were domestic, 8 percent of the total
purse seine catch): This fleet grew rapidly in the 1970s and eventually expanded out of Philippines’
waters and into PNG, and then broader WCPO waters. In 2009 the fleet included 40 vessels (excluding
domestic vessels), half of which fished in PNG under an access agreement, and the majority of the rest
were included in PNG’s fleet through charter arrangements. These vessels were older and typically less
efficient than many of the other fleets in the WCPO. Additionally, a number of vessels from the
Philippines have fished in the high seas pockets. Most of the catch from the Philippines fleet has been
landed and processed in PNG, with some 15 percent exported to Bangkok and also a significant
percentage exported to the Philippines. The catch by domestic purse seiners is landed locally and
processed in 7 canneries in the country, many of which are based at General Santos in southern
Mindanao.

               Pacific Islands fleets: 23 percent of the WCPO purse seine catch in 2013
PNG (192,967 metric tons caught in 2013): In 2014 some 51 vessels were flagged to PNG and registered
for the WCPO, including chartered vessels (e.g. from the Philippines). This is relatively stable since
2010, consisting then of: (i) PNG-flagged fleet of 8 to 9 vessels fishing in the country’s waters, one
quarter of which are considered archipelagic waters, and landing locally for processing in PNG canneries;
(ii) a number of foreign-flagged vessels based locally or chartered in order to supply PNG canneries with
at least a portion of their catch (17 – 18 vessels); and (iii) PNG-based foreign-flagged vessels fishing in
the waters of other Pacific Island countries (19 vessels). About 20 percent of PNG canned tuna production
is consumed in PNG and the rest is exported to the EU.


                                                                                                         31
 Solomon Islands (24,769 metric tons caught in 2013): In 2014 the fleet included 5 vessels.

 FSM (24,193 metric tons caught in 2013): In 2014 the fleet included some 10 vessels, up from 7 in 2009.
 RMI (77,634 metric tons caught in 2013): In 2014 the fleet included some 10 vessels, most of which
 have traditionally fished in other Pacific Island country waters. By contrast, most of the fish caught in
 RMI’s waters have been transshipped to Bangkok, with a small volume (on the order of 5,000 tons in
 2009) processed at a loining facility in Majuro.

 Kiribati (72,241 metric tons caught in 2013): The fleet included 14 vessels in 2014, with most of the
 catch in the country’s waters taken by foreign vessels, largely destined for processing in Bangkok.

 Vanuatu (22,484 metric tons caught in 2013): Vanuatu’s fleet included 3 vessels in 2014, all fishing in
 foreign waters (as no purse seining taking place in the country’s waters), almost all of which has been
 transshipped to Bangkok.

 Tuvalu (10,866 metric tons caught in 2013): The fleet included 1 vessel in 2014.

Sources: WCPFC Data Catalogue for 2013 catch levels and distribution; Terawasi and Williams, 2015 for 2014 fleet levels, and Hamilton et al.,
2011 for 2009 fleet comparison and detailed description of fleets.


The WCPFC registry reflects a shifting composition of the WCPO purse seine fleet, with significant
numbers of new vessels constructed since 2010 (WCPFC, 2015b). Not all of these vessels would be
considered ‘large-scale’ (i.e. a fish-hold volume of greater than 335 cubic meters), though throughout the
WCPO some 52 large-scale vessels have been built since 2010 and operating in the region (Restrepo, 2015).
The capacity (i.e. ability to catch fish) of the fleet has continued to grow since the fleet began roughly in
1980, via innovation and improved efficiency as catch per vessel increased from 3,750 tons annually in
1986 to 7,100 tons in 2007 (Hamilton et al., 2011). The number of purse seine vessels has increased from
a range of 180 to 220 between 1990 to 2006, to 344 vessels in 2014 (WCPFC). This indirectly points to
the profitability of the fishery, as the estimated capital cost of new purse seine vessels is on the order of
US$10 million per vessel (Hamilton et al., 2011).

Of note, several large companies provide services to the fleets in the WCPO and buy their catch (rather
than taking a commission on a trade), with guaranteed delivery to processors and often with exclusive
relationships with vessel owners and fleets (and in some cases vertical integration) (Hamilton et al., 2011).
With thin margins and high volumes, trading companies will provide a guarantee of raw material to
processers with advance (e.g. 1 to 2 months) purchase contracts, generally in support of the needs of
Bangkok processors dependent upon foreign fleets and fishing grounds (Hamilton et al., 2011). As of 2010,
three main trading companies purchased over half of the WCPO purse seine catch for processors (as well
as additional catch from other areas) and provided some 90 percent of the supply to Bangkok: Trimarine,
Itochu and FCF Fishery Co. Ltd (Hamilton et al., 2011). Given this level of control over the supply to
Bangkok, these three traders are in a position to exert significant influence over the purse seine value chain.

The net economic benefits from the Pacific Island harvesting fleets (calculated as the intermediate costs,
e.g. fuel, bait, provisions and maintenance, subtracted from the landed value of the catch) to Pacific Island
countries are not disaggregated in publicly available data from the benefits of domestic processing in the
countries. According to FFA estimates (2014), the value added to Pacific Island countries from these two
segments combined was some US$291 million in 2013.

Processing Segment (i.e. canning and loining). The purse seine catch is targeted largely for canning and
subsequently a range of markets for consumption, notably the European and North American markets, as
part of an increasingly globalized supply chain (Hamilton et al., 2011; Gillett, 2014). A number of countries
have developed processing clusters to capture economies of scale (together with high labor productivity

                                                                                                                                         32
and in some cases tariff preferences), and as of 2010 Thailand was the world’s leading tuna canner, followed
by Japan, Ecuador and the Philippines (Hamilton et al., 2011). Many of the larger companies in these
clusters source tuna from around the world (with WCPO providing the largest proportion), but have suffered
from overcapacity in the past, utilizing some 80 to 85 percent of processing capacity in 2010 for example
(Hamilton et al., 2010). Although the balance between different channels for processing is constantly
shifting due to market conditions, fishing areas, processing facility requirements, etc. (Gillett, 2014), the
break-down from the WCPO’s tuna catch in 2010 is indicative:


            Figure 14 Distribution of Processing of WCPO Purse Seine
                                  Catch in 2010
                                          Pacific
                                Vietnam
                    China

                            Korea                        Thailand
                       Philippines



            Ecuador
                                             Japan

         American Samoa



Source: Hamilton et al., 2011


Thailand is far and away the world’s leading tuna processor, although not the only processor, as a number
of other significant processing clusters exist as destinations for WCPO tuna. The major processors for
WCPO tuna include:

     •    Thailand: As of 2010 Thailand processed about a quarter of the world’s canned tuna products,
          typically processing volume on the order of 750,000 metric tons of catch annually (Hamilton et al.,
          2011). The country became the world leader in the early 1980s, benefiting from a well-established
          food processing industry in general and excellent shipping logistics, as well as being strategically
          positioned to source supply from both the Pacific and Indian oceans (Hamilton et al., 2010).
          Although the number of processors has typically been on the order of 30, the industry has been
          dominated by two companies: Thai Union (the world’s largest vertically-integrated canned tuna
          company) and Sea Value, both of whom source almost all of their tuna supply through tuna trading
          companies (Thailand does not have a significant domestic purse seine fleet) – with these purchasing
          contracts essentially setting the global price for tuna (Hamilton et al., 2010). In the past Thai
          processors have sourced some 90 percent of their tuna from the WCPO (on the order of 700,000
          tons in 2010), with almost half of all canned tuna products exported to the United States (23
          percent), the EU (15 percent) and the Middle East (12 percent - with Egypt as the biggest destination
          in the region), and with Australia (6 percent), Canada (6 percent) and Japan (5 percent) also serving
          as important markets – many of whom Thailand has negotiated free trade agreements (Hamilton et
          al., 2011). Additional major processors include:
     •    Japan: includes canneries generally producing for the domestic market;
     •    Philippines: in 2009 seven canneries processed 220,000 metric tons of tuna, estimated to be sourced
          one third from domestic waters and two thirds from elsewhere in the WCPO, with almost all
          products exported (some 60 percent to Europe and another ten percent to the U.S.);

                                                                                                            33
   •    Korea: had 5 major canneries in 2009 processing some 110,000 to 130,000 metric tons of tuna,
        entirely for domestic consumption;
   •    Pacific islands: PNG dominates the processing sector in the Pacific islands with five large plants
        in operation, mostly clustered in Lae, with another 4 large plants under construction (see Table 4
        below). Estimated volume of tuna processed in the country was on the order of 100,000 metric tons
        in 2013 (FFA, 2014). The growth of the PNG processing sector has been driven by a Government
        policy of providing concessional access to its major tuna resource in return for onshore investment
        in processing plants, and aided by duty free access for processed product to EU markets. Despite
        this growth, PNG processing plants have typically operated below capacity and, in common with
        other plants in the region, are known to have considerably higher operating costs than their
        counterparts in Thailand, Philippines and Vietnam. Elsewhere there is a large canning/loining
        operation at Noro in Solomon Islands - with total volume processed in the country in 2013 of 15,200
        metric tons (FFA, 2014), a large canning/loining operation at Levuka in Fiji, and a medium scale
        plant at Majuro in the Marshall Islands – with total volume of 10,000 metric tons processed in 2013
        (FFA, 2014), all of which typically operate below capacity and struggle for profitability. The
        constraints to viable processing in the region include high energy and shipping costs, and relatively
        low labor productivity. Despite these constraints several other PICs, particularly those with access
        to large tuna resources such as Kiribati, are seeking to attract similar investments. Smaller plants
        in Fiji, Solomon Islands and elsewhere are mostly involved in processing longline catch, producing
        fresh/ frozen whole fish or fresh and/ or cooked loins.

                            Table 4. Tuna Processing Plants in Pacific Island Countries
       Country                Plant         Location   Plant             Product              Current capacity     No. of direct jobs
                                                        size              form                     MT/ yr          (fishing & processing)
Papua New Guinea         Frabelle          Lae         L        Canned                                   20,000                       1,868
Papua New Guinea         Majestic          Lae         L        Canned                                   10,000                       6,900
Papua New Guinea         IFC               Lae         L        Canned                                    5,000                       1,000
Papua New Guinea         RD Tuna           Madang      L        Canned                                   25,000                       3,500
Papua New Guinea         SST               Wewak       L        Loins                                    20,000                       1,200
Papua New Guinea         Nambawan                              Under construction in Lae (6,900 direct jobs estimated)
Papua New Guinea         Sapmer                                Under construction in Lae (2,500 direct jobs estimated)
Papua New Guinea         Dongwong                                Under construction (4,600 direct jobs estimated)
Papua New Guinea         Hailisheng                              Under construction (4,200 direct jobs estimated)
Solomon Islands          SolTuna           Noro        L        Canned/ cooked loins                     24,000                       1,669
Solomon Islands          SSI               Honiara     S        Fresh/ frozen                             2,000                          60
Fiji                     PAFCO             Levuka      L        Canned/ cooked loins                     11,000                         812
Fiji                     Golden Ocean      Suva        M        Fresh/ frozen                             3,000                         647
Fiji                     Viti Foods        Suva        S        Canned                                   10,000                         230
Fiji                     Sealand Fish      Suva        S        Fresh/ frozen                                n/a                         30
Fiji                     Blue Ocean        Suva        S        Fresh/ frozen                                n/a                         10
Fiji                     TriPacific        Suva        S        Fresh/ frozen                                n/a                        108
Fiji                     Tosa Busan        Suva        S        Fresh/ frozen                                n/a                         38
Kiribati                 Kiribati Fish     Tarawa      S        Fresh/ frozen                               160                          58
Marshall Islands         Pan Pacific       Majuro      M        Loins                                     2,000                         170
Marshall Islands         MIFV              Majuro      M        Fresh-frozen                              1,500                         168
                                                                Totals:                                 133,660                     12,867
Source: Data gathered by IFC from industry sources


   •    Ecuador: imported some 70,000 tons of tuna caught by purse seine vessels in the WCPO in 2009,
        with most of the product destined for the European market, and to a much lesser extent the U.S.
        and a small portion to Latin America;
   •    Vietnam: had 3 major tuna canneries in 2009, importing some 35,000 metric tons of tuna from the
        WCPO, with final products destined for the U.S. and Europe; and
   •    Indonesia: had a number of canneries supplied almost entirely from local vessels fishing in
        domestic waters, and then exporting to Europe, the U.S. and Middle East among others (Hamilton
        et al., 2011).

                                                                                                                                         34
In terms of the net economic benefits from this segment of the value chain to Pacific Island countries, as
mentioned previously the estimates are combined with those of the Pacific Island harvesting fleets (reported
as an aggregate US$291 million in value added in 2013).

Retailing Segment. Canned tuna developed in the 1950s as a low-cost protein alternative to canned salmon,
and has since become a global commodity (i.e. high volume, low price, low profit margins) (Hamilton et
al., 2011). In 2008, global canned tuna consumption was equivalent to over 3.1 million metric tons of tuna,
or some 250 million cases of canned tuna (with one ton of tuna catch, i.e. whole round tuna, equivalent to
roughly 80 cases of canned tuna), valued at approximately US$7.5 billion:

Table 5. Total global canned tuna consumption by region in 2008*
 Market                             Cases (no. millions)                                        Whole round weight equiv. (mt)
 EU                                 76                                                          950,000
 US                                 48                                                          600,000
 Asia                               38                                                          475,000
 Latin America                      35                                                          437,500
 Middle East                        16                                                          200,000
 Australia/New Zealand              8                                                           100,000
 Africa                             7                                                           87,500
 Eastern Europe                     4                                                           50,000
 Others                             19                                                          237,500
 Total                              251                                                         3,137,500
Source: Hamilton et al., 2011; *Although from 2008, no more recent global assessment is available, and the above markets and their proportions
continue to be representative even if the specific volumes differ


While certainly older, these data give an indication of the markets for tuna products from the purse seine
fishery, and likely global distribution of final products from the harvests in Pacific Island waters.

Overview of the WCPO Purse Seine Tuna Fishery Value Chain. Putting these various segments together is
useful for visualizing the magnitude of this global value chain originating in WCPO waters, and the
distribution of economic benefits generated at various stages. Figure 15 provides a crude attempt to depict
this flow of benefits and distribution in one given year (2013), across more than 20 countries and 5
continents around the world. This is a snap shot, and of course will change from year to year.




                                                                                                                                          35
Figure 15. Illustration of the WCPO Purse Seine Tuna Fishery Value Chain in 2013 & Net Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries

                     WCPO Ecosystem                                                                 Harvest                                           Processing
                       Location of Harvest                                                Flag State of Harvesting Fleet                           Location of
                       (catch in metric tons)                                                   (catch in metric tons)                      Canneries/Loining Facilities
                                                                                      Est. Total Value of Catch Upon Delivery                    • Retail Market
                                                                                                to Processors: $4 bn
                                                                                                                                                        Thailand
                                                                                                                                                        (750,000)
                                                                                                                                                 •   North America (29%)
                                                                                                                                                 •   Europe (15%)
                                                                                                                                                 •   Middle East (12%)
                                                                                                                                                 •   Australia (6%)
                                                                                                                                                 •   Japan (5%)
                                                                                                                                                 •   Other (33%)


                                                                                                                                                          Japan
                                                                                                                                                 • Domestic market


                                                                                                                                                          Korea
                                                                                                                                                 • Domestic market


                                                                                                                                                       Philippines
                                                                                                                                                 • Europe
                                                                                                                                                 • North America


                                                                                                                                                    Pacific Islands
                                                                                                                                                 PNG (100,000)
                                                                                                                                                 Sols (15,200)
                                                                                                                                                 RMI (10,000)


            Est. Net Economic Benefits from Foreign                                           Est. Net Economic Benefits from Domestic Harvesting
                 Fleet Access:* US$155 million                                                 Fleets and Pacific Islands Processing: $291 million

                                                            Total Est. Net Economic Benefits in 2013: US$ 446 million                                             36
Source: Drakou and Virdin, 2016
* Net benefits of foreign access = fees - est. management
costs
3.3 Measuring the Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from the Longline Tuna Fishery
Resource Owners (i.e. jurisdiction). As mentioned above, the longline fishery value chains produced an
estimated 0.27 million metric tons in 2014 (34 percent of which was albacore, 27 percent bigeye and 38
percent yellowfin), caught over a wide range throughout the WCPO, with clusters in tropical waters along
the equatorial belt, and sub-tropical waters in the South Pacific (largely targeting albacore) (Williams and
Terawasi, 2015). In 2014 some 37 percent caught on the high seas, another 20 percent was caught in the
waters of five Pacific Island countries (Cook Islands, Fiji, Kiribati, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu), 11
percent in Japan, 10 percent in Indonesia and the remaining 21 percent distributed throughout the waters of
18 different WCPO countries or territories (see Table 5 below: FFA, 2015). More specifically:
    • for the ‘southern longline fishery’, some two-thirds of the albacore was caught in the waters of the
        Cook Islands, Fiji, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu in 2014; and
    • for the ‘tropical longline fishery’, some 27 percent of the bigeye and yellowfin was caught in the
        waters of FSM, Kiribati, RMI, Palau and the Solomon Islands in 2014; another 26 percent in the
        waters of Indonesia and Japan, and 27 percent on the high seas (FFA, 2015).

Figure 16. Distribution of Longline Tuna Fishing Effort in the WCPO for Distant Water Fleets (Green),
Foreign Offshore Fleets (Red), and Domestic Fleets (Blue) for the period 2000 – 2014




Source: Williams and Terawasi, 2015


Based on the provisional data available from FFA (2015), the break-down of the origin of catch by location
is as follows:

Table 6. Break-Down of WCPO Longline Tuna Catch by Water in 2013 & 2014 (in metric tons)
 Waters where harvest                  2013                                2014
 took place                Longline Catch     % of Total Longline Catch              % of Total
 American Samoa            2,383.6            1.0           1,922.6                  0.7
 Australia                 2,086.9            0.9           2,351.4                  0.9
 Cook Islands              8,053.5            3.3           7,771.4                  2.9
 Federated     States   of 2,984.2            1.2           6,178.6                  2.3
 Micronesia
 Fiji                      5,823.3            2.4           5,825.8                  2.2
 French Polynesia          4,927.4            2.0           5,545.2                  2.1
 Kiribati                  6,712.1            2.8           17,918.4                 6.7
                                                                                              37
 Nauru                                 163.2          0.1           265.9                       0.1
 New Caledonia                         2,289.9        0.9           2,421.5                     0.9
 New Zealand                           413.0          0.2           436.0                       0.2
 Niue                                  458.8          0.2           421.3                       0.2
 PNG                                   1,324.1        0.5           1,979.2                     0.7
 Palau                                 2,333.6        1.0           2,102.8                     0.8
 RMI                                   3,012.7        1.2           3,471.4                     1.3
 Samoa                                 2,019.8        0.8           1,091.0                     0.4
 Solomon Islands                       18,697.6       7.7           40,754.3                    15.1
 Tokelau                               0              0             413.4                       0.2
 Tonga                                 4,300          1.8           1,678.9                     0.6
 Tuvalu                                2,434.0        1.0           1,653.7                     0.6
 Vanuatu                               10,153.0       4.2           8,853.9                     3.3
 International waters                  88,826.0       36.6          71,803.3                    26.7
 Indonesia                             23,805.6       9.8           35,700.9                    13.3
 Japan                                 27,419.8       11.3          27,734.8                    10.3
 Philippines                           1,002.0        0.4           786.3                       0.3
 Taiwan, China                         2,668.5        1.1           1,554.0                     0.6
 US + Territories                      2,160.6        0.9           2,125.7                     0.8
 Vietnam                               16,428.0       6.8           16,428.0                    6.1
 TOTAL                                 242,881.2      100           269,189.8                   100
Source: FFA (2015) http://www.ffa.int/node/425


Although Pacific Island countries function as resource owners for a relatively smaller proportion of the
resource base for the WCPO longline fishery, it generates far more valuable products on a unit-basis than
the purse seine fishery, as the latter generates a global commodity with a relatively low price (canned tuna),
whereas the longline fishery provides either albacore for higher-priced canned tuna, or yellowfin and bigeye
for the valuable sashimi market (Hamilton et al., 2011). In 2013, the delivered value of the total WCPO
longline catch was on the order of US$1.3 billion for a total of just over 200,000 tons, compared to the
delivered value of the WCPO purse seine catch of roughly US$4 billion for over 1.8 million tons (FFA,
2014). Essentially the broad unit values indicate a longline fishery three times as valuable on a per unit
basis as the purse seine fishery – acknowledging that there are differences in products and prices within
each of the two fisheries. Thus, although Pacific Island countries have jurisdiction over a far smaller
proportion of the longline fishery than the purse seine fishery, the former is much more valuable on a per
unit basis, and therefore still provides significant rent opportunities.

To date, the rents received by Pacific Island countries as access fees for the longline fishery have been
relatively small – on the order of some US$10 to 15 million per year – compared to the estimated delivered
value of some US$300 million of the fish caught in the countries’ waters (FFA, 2014). In sum, Pacific
Island resource owners have typically received access fees on the order of 3 to 5 percent of the delivered
value of the tuna caught via long-lining in their waters, whereas in 2013 the countries received access fees
equivalent to an estimated 7 percent of the delivered value of the tuna caught in their waters via purse-
seining, and 2015 this number is estimated to rise to 13 percent (FFA, 2014).

Harvesting Units (including tuna trading companies working with harvesters). A number of mobile fleets
follow the tuna stocks as they move across both national boundaries and the high seas within the WCPO,
including large distant water fleets from China; Japan; Korea; and Taiwan, China; as well as fleets from the
U.S., Vietnam, Indonesia, Fiji and Vanuatu (WCPFC Data Catalogue). In addition, a number of other fleets,
many from the Pacific Islands, harvested relatively small amounts of tuna via long-lining (see Figure 17
below and Table 6).


                                                                                                           38
                    Figure 17. Distribution of 2013 WCPO Long-Line Catch by Fleet



                                                  Other
                                        Fiji
                                                                      China

                                  Vietnam

                               U.S.
                                                                          Vanuatu

                                                                         Indonesia
                                  Taiwan, China


                                                                       Japan

                                                          Korea



Source: WCPFC Data Catalogue


Table 7. Distribution of 2013 WCPO tuna longline catch by fleet (in tons)
                       Albacore        Bigeye             Yellowfin     Total        % of Total

 Cook Islands          1,354           208                346           1,908               0.8

 Fiji                  9,561           1,018              2,203         12,782              5.3

 FSM                   750             1,270              850           2,870               1.2

 Kiribati              186             582                175           943                 0.4

 Marshall Islands      7               80                 47            134                 0.1

 New Zealand           302             109                1             412                 0.2

 PNG                   261             32                 1,041         1,334               0.6

 Samoa                 1,642           36                 330           2,008               0.8

 Tonga                 13              7                  126           146                 0.1

 Tuvalu                92              76                 41            209                 0.1

 Vanuatu               10,446          1,989              1,626         14,061              5.8

 American Samoa        2,113           359                412           2,884               1.2

 Australia             647             425                1,139         2,211               0.9

 Belize                14              217                21            252                 0.1

                                                                                                  39
 China                    24,162      10,671    4,638       39,471           16.3

 French Polynesia         3,512       787       615         4,914             2.0

 Indonesia                -           4,513     19,207      23,720            9.8

 Japan                    24,940      11,723    7,778       44,441           18.4

 Korea                    1,155       12,818    5,716       19,689            8.2

 New Caledonia            1,732       51        531         2,314             1.0

 Philippines              -           167       27          194               0.1

 Portugal                 67          106       2           175               0.1

 Spain                    3           23        2           28                  0

 Taiwan, China            17,403      10,600    14,999      43,002           17.8
 US + territories
 (ex Am Sam)              295         4,113     638         5,046             2.1

 Vietnam                  251         2,260     13,917      16,428            6.8

 TOTAL                    100,908     64,240    76,428      241,577           100
Source: FFA (2015)


The WCPFC vessel registry currently lists some 3,085 tuna longline vessels eligible to fish in the WCPO
(though registration does not equate to operation), generally consisting of two broad categories: (i) large
(longer than 24 meters), distant-water freezer vessels that undertake long voyages to various parts of the
region to target both the yellowfin and bigeye tuna in the tropical area as well as albacore in the southern
Pacific (supplying frozen sashimi-grade tuna), and (ii) smaller (shorter than 24 meters), offshore vessels
that are usually domestically-based and take trips of one month or less, serving the fresh or air-freight
sashimi markets or albacore for canneries (Hamilton et al., 2011; Williams and Terawasi, 2015), and
increasingly equipped with freezer capacity.

Figure 18. Longline Tuna Vessels Operating in the WCPO




Source: Williams and Terawasi, 2015

                                                                                                         40
As Figure 18 indicates, longline fleets have declined significantly in recent years, as have catch rates and
profitability (reflecting increased operating costs and a smaller resource base) (Hamilton et al., 2011;
Gillett, 2014). From within the large fleet scattered throughout the WCPO, two major segments can be
distinguished: (i) fleets targeting yellowfin and bigeye in tropical waters for the sashimi market, and (ii)
fleets targeting albacore largely in the sub-tropical waters of the south Pacific for canning (Gillett, 2014).
Both are described briefly in Table 7 below.

Table 8. Description of WCPO Tuna Longline Fleet Segments
 Longline tuna fleets targeting yellowfin and bigeye in tropical waters for the sashimi market
 These fleets operate widely throughout WCPO central (more predominantly yellowfin) and eastern tropical
 waters (focused more on bigeye), notably in the high seas, Kiribati, RMI and Solomon Islands, as well as
 in Japan, Indonesia and the Philippines among others. Some of the major fleets supplying the sashimi
 market include:
     • Taiwan, China (25,599 metric tons of yellowfin and bigeye in 2013) has large, distant water freezer
         vessels that transship frozen tuna to Japan as well as a smaller, offshore fleet that has been
         increasing as a share of the total fleet (particularly as the number of distant-water vessels has
         declined). In 2009, the fleet included 75 distant water vessels operating in the WCPO, and some
         1,200 smaller scale vessels (Hamilton et al., 2011; FFA, 2015).
     • Japan (19,501 metric tons of yellowfin and bigeye in 2013) operates distant-water freezer fleets as
         well as smaller offshore vessels throughout the WCPO, most of which are small, family-owned
         companies. The catch is typically taken straight to Japan or offloaded in WCPO ports and air-
         freighted to Japan. In 2009 Japan operated some 268 distant water vessels (not exclusively in the
         WCPO) and 326 smaller, offshore vessels (Hamilton et al, 2011; FFA, 2015).
     • Korea (18,534 metric tons of yellowfin and bigeye in 2013) operates a fleet consisting mostly of
         larger, distant-water vessels working throughout the WCPO. In 2010 the fleet included 105
         longline vessels operating in a number of WCPO countries’ waters, but also extensively on the
         high seas (Hamilton et al, 2010; FFA, 2015).
     • China (15,309 metric tons of yellowfin and bigeye in 2013) operated a fleet of some 99 distant-
         water vessels in the WCPO in 2009, many of which utilized Suva to re-supply as needed (Hamilton
         et al., 2011; FFA, 2015).
     • Indonesia (23,720 metric tons of yellowfin and bigeye in 2013) has operated a fleet supplying low-
         grade sashimi to U.S. market (Hamilton et al., 2011; FFA, 2015).

 Longline tuna fleets targeting albacore largely in south Pacific waters for canning
 Long-lining principally for albacore for canning takes place year-round largely in the temperate, sub-
 tropical waters of the south Pacific, between the 10 degree S and 30 degree S parallels, as well as temperate
 waters in the north of the WCPO. The fleets include both large, distant-water vessels and smaller, offshore
 vessels, with many of the latter being Pacific fleets from American Samoa, the Cook Islands, Fiji, French
 Polynesia, Kiribati, New Caledonia, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tonga and Vanuatu, among others
 (Williams and Terawasi, 2015). Some of the major fleets supplying albacore to canneries include:
     • China (24,162 metric tons of albacore in 2013) has maintained a fleet of vessels based in Suva,
          with some 80 vessels operating in 2009, fishing largely in the high seas west of Fiji, and in the
          national waters of Fiji, the Solomon Islands and Vanuatu (Hamilton et al., 2011; FFA, 2015).
     • Taiwan, China (17,403 metric tons of albacore in 2013) operated some 38 distant-water vessels
          and some 60 -80 smaller-scale vessels targeting albacore in the WCPO in 2009, usually sold to
          trading companies for canning in Pago Pago (Hamilton et al, 2011; FFA, 2015).
     • Fiji (9,561 metric tons of albacore in 2013) operated some 97 longliners in 2009, catching about
          half albacore for canning in Pago Pago, and the other half bigeye and yellowfin for air-freight to
          Japan and U.S. as sashimi (Hamilton et al, 2011; FFA, 2015).
     • Vanuatu, the U.S. and Japan all catch smaller but significant amounts of albacore as well.

                                                                                                           41
The net economic benefits from the Pacific Island harvesting fleets (calculated as the intermediate costs
subtracted from the landed value of the catch) to Pacific Island countries have not recently been
disaggregated in publicly available data from the benefits of domestic processing in the countries.
According to FFA estimates (2014), the value added to Pacific Island countries from these two segments
combined was some US$35 million in 2013.

Processing/Retailing Segment. The tropical longline fishery supplies tuna to Japan, which pioneered the
now-global sashimi 12 market and consumes some 80 percent (with the remainder destined for the U.S.,
Korea, China, the European Union and Taiwan, China) (Hamilton et al., 2011). Sashimi requires minimal
processing (though there may be some preparation of fish for shipment), and essentially catch is taken
directly to the retailing destination in Japan, where some 300,000 to 400,000 metric tons is estimated by
the Government to be consumed annually (World Fishing & Aquaculture, 2014). The sashimi market is
generally supplied by bluefin tuna (the most valuable species), bigeye, yellowfin and albacore, mostly via
long-lining (Hamilton et al., 2011), with yellowfin providing some 61 percent of sashimi in Japan in 2013
(Conservation International, 2015). For the albacore caught by longline vessels in the WCPO, the majority
is canned in American Samoa and Bangkok (Hamilton et al., 2011).

The WCPO Longline Tuna Fishery Value Chains. The following diagram aims to depict for indicative
purposes only, the flow of resource and product along the longline fishery value chains, assuming that all
bigeye and yellowfin are targeted for sashimi, and albacore for canning.




12
     In Japan the term ‘sashimi’ refers to fresh raw seafood sliced into bite-sized pieces.
                                                                                                       42
Figure 19. Illustration of WCPO Long-Line Tuna Fishery Value Chains in 2013 and Estimated Net Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries

         WCPO Ecosystem                                                     Harvest                                       Processing/Retail
          Location of Harvest                                     Flag State of Harvesting Fleet
   (242,881 metric tons total in 2013)


                                                                                                                                     Japan
                                                                                                                           • Est. 80% global market
                                                                                                     Sashimi Market
                                                                                                    (Bigeye, Yellowfin)
                                                                                                       Est. $1.175 bn
                                                                                                                                     U.S.
                                                                                                                           • Est. 10% global market




                                                                                                                               Thailand
                                                                                                 Canned Tuna Market
                                                                                                     (Albacore)
                                                                                                     Est. $252 m
                                                                                                                           American Samoa




  Est. Net Economic Benefits from Foreign                                     Est. Net Economic Benefits from Domestic Harvesting
        Fleet Access: US$15 million                                            Fleets and Pacific Island Processing: US$35 million


                                       Total Est. Net Economic Benefits in 2013: US$50 million
                                                                                                                                              43
    3.4 Summary of the Economic Contributions of WCPO Tuna Fisheries
    The current estimates described in previous sections, which should be treated with great caution given the
    scattered and limited nature of the data, indicates a ‘delivered’ value of the tuna caught in WCPO waters in
    2013 of some US$5.7 billion. Of this, the tuna caught in the waters of Pacific Island countries had an
    estimated delivered value of some US$3.4 billion in 2013, which provided an estimated net economic
    benefits on the order of almost $500 million to Pacific Island countries (15 percent), as shown in Table 8
    below.

    Table 9. Estimated Contribution of WCPO Tuna Fisheries to Pacific Island Countries’ Economies in 2013
        WCPO Tuna              Value Chain Segment               Est.          Net        Est. Delivered Value         Est. Net Economic
        Fishery Value                                            Economic                 of Catch in PIC              Benefits as % of
        Chain                                                    Benefits (US$ M)         waters (US$ M)               Delivered Value
                          Foreign fleet access                   155                      3,100                        14%
        Purse Seine
                          Domestic harvesting fleets &           291
        Fishery
                          Pacific Island processing
                          Foreign fleet access                   15                       300                          17%
        Longline
                          Domestic harvesting fleets &           35
        Fishery
                          Pacific Island processing
        Total Est. Net Economic Benefits                         US$496 million           US$3.4 bn                    17%

    Provisional estimates for 2014 indicate a number of trends in the economic contribution of WCPO tuna
    fisheries:
       • The delivered value of the WCPO purse seine catch decreased significantly to US$3.2 billion even
           as catch volume increased to a record high, reflecting a decline in the price in Bangkok for canned
           tuna supply;
       • The delivered value of the WCPO longline catch increased to US$1.7 billion, reflecting an increase
           in catch volume even as both prices for supply in Japan and profitability of the fleets decreased; and
       • Even as the value of the purse seine harvest decreased, the portion of that value collected by PNA
           members (plus Tokelau) as access fees increased significantly, from an estimated US$205 million in
           2013 to an estimated US$290 million in 2014 – and now projected to reach some US$390 million by
           the end of 2015 – though this may be further revised (FFA, 2014; Williams and Terawasi; 2015).

    Figure 20. WCPO tuna access fees from foreign fleets as a % of GDP for selected countries
        40

        35

        30

        25
% GDP




        20

        15

        10

         5

         0
                  2010               2011               2012               2013               2014

                      FSM          Kiribati         RMI           Solomon Islands            Tuvalu

    Note: Access Fees estimated based on Distribution of Total Revenues according to 2007 – 2009 distribution of moving average of purse seine
    catch; 2014 GDP figures are an estimate, taking 2013 values and adding 2 percent.
    Sources: GDP at purchaser’s price in current US dollars, from http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD

                                                                                                                                          44
The returns from the region’s tuna assets are not distributed evenly, but rather reflect higher endowments
in the waters of some countries compared others. Additionally, the dependence of Pacific Island countries
upon these returns varies. Figure 20 above highlights the magnitude of the growing contribution of foreign
fleet access fees from the purse seine fishery as public revenues to the economies of five Pacific Island
countries, notably Tuvalu (equivalent to 36 percent of GDP in 2014), Kiribati (32 percent), FSM (10
percent), RMI (4 percent) and the Solomon Islands (3 percent). Collectively, these revenues would be
equivalent in 2014 to 8 percent of the aggregated GDP of these five countries. These fees constitute an even
higher proportion of the public revenues and budget in many cases, estimated for example to provide 63
percent of public revenues in Kiribati in 2012 for example (Bell et al., 2015). By contrast, foreign fleet
access fees to Pacific Island countries from the longline fishery have remained a relatively small US$10 to
15 million (Williams and Terawasi, 2015).

In terms of the contribution of WCPO tuna fishery value chains to employment in Pacific Island countries,
the proportion is far smaller. In 2013 the tuna fisheries overall were estimated by FFA to provide just over
16,000 livelihoods in harvesting and processing through Pacific Island countries and territories (see Figure
21 below), over 10,000 of which were in PNG, and another approximately 1,600 were in the Solomon
Islands (showing a doubling of processing jobs since 2009) (FFA, 2014). In total, the WCPO tuna fisheries
value chains likely employ less than 0.5 percent of the region’s current labor force (World Bank 13).
However it should be noted that livelihoods in processing in PNG have increased significantly, currently to
roughly 14,500, with another estimated 18,000 to result from plants currently under construction or
proposed (see Table 4).

Figure 21. Estimated Employment in FFA Member Countries related to WCPO Tuna Fishery Value
Chains*




*Includes employment in resource management: ‘Govt. Administration, Observers’; Source: FFA (2014)


A particular constraint is the lack of gender-disaggregated data for employment in the region’s tuna
fisheries, which is essential for understanding how women and men participate in the various segments of
the value chains (Weeratunge et al, 2013). More broadly, gender analysis has yet to be integrated into
planning processes, resulting in a knowledge gap about gendered retail and consumption patterns and the
differing constraints on women and men to more effective participation in tuna value chains and markets
(Barclay et al., 2015).



13
     http://data.worldbank.org/indicator
                                                                                                         45
3.5 Summary of the Status of the WCPO Tuna Resource Base
The WCPO purse seine and longline tuna fishery value chains depend on the region’s four main species of
tuna and the ecosystems that support them: (i) albacore, (ii) bigeye, (iii) yellowfin and (iv) skipjack. As the
tuna ‘science provider’ to the region, the assessments conducted by the Secretariat of the Pacific
Community (SPC) serve as the basis for resource management in the region. Simply put, counting fish in
the water is inherently challenging, hence there will always be uncertainties associated with fish stock
assessments. That said, SPC’s tuna assessments are based on models whose predictions have been
compared to observations in order to examine model fit to the data, and critically examined by fishery
scientists outside the organization, e.g. at the annual meeting of the Scientific Committee of the Western
and Central Pacific Fishery Commission, via independent evaluations and through peer-reviewed
publication (Gillett and Bromhead, 2008). SPC’s most recent assessments indicate the following:

Albacore. Assessments divide the albacore stock into two units: (i) the south Pacific albacore stock (south
of the equator) and (ii) the north Pacific albacore stock (essentially north of the equator). According to the
most recent assessment in 2014, the north Pacific albacore stock is not experiencing overfishing (though it
had in the past, and is currently healthy (Albacore Working Group, 2014). In terms of the south Pacific
stock, an assessment was just conducted in 2015 based on data from 1960 to 2013, indicating that fishing
mortality has generally been increasing over time, but concluded that overfishing is not occurring and the
stock is not in an overfished state (Harley et al., 2015). The assessment concluded that increasing fishing
mortality to levels that would provide the maximum sustainable yield would require a significant increase
in fishing effort but likely yield only very small (if any) increases in long-term catch (Harley et al., 2015).
The assessment reiterated the recommendations of the scientific community in 2014, noting that any
declines in the biomass of the stock would render it vulnerable to overfishing, and recommended that
longline catches of albacore in the south Pacific be reduced (WCPFC, 2014).

Bigeye. Based on the most recent stock assessment carried out in 2014, the stock is considered overfished
and requiring a 36 percent reduction in fishing mortality14 from the 2008 – 2011 average (notably a
reduction in catch of juveniles): fishing mortality is estimated to be 1.57 times the level associated with a
stock that could support the maximum sustainable yield, and the spawning biomass 15 has been reduced to
16 percent of the unfished spawning biomass (see Figures 22 and 23 below) (WCPFC, 2014).




14
   Fishing mortality (F) = a mathematical expression of the part of the total rate of deaths of fish due to fishing. Fishing mortality is often
expressed as a rate that indicates the percentage of the population caught in a year (Restrepo, 1999).
15
   Spawning stock biomass (SSB) = the total biomass of fish of reproductive age during the breeding season of a stock (Cooke, 1984).
                                                                                                                                                  46
Figure 22. ‘Kobe plot’ of the trend in bigeye stock status from 1950 to 2011




Note: X-axis is the ratio of current spawning biomass (SB) of bigeye stock to the spawning biomass that would support the maximum sustainable
yield (Sbmsy); Y-axis is the ratio of current fishing mortality (F) to the fishing mortality that would be associated with a stock size that would
support the maximum sustainable yield (Fmsy). The color of the points is graduated from mauve to dark purple through time, and points are
labelled at 5-year intervals. The white triangle represents the average for the current period and the pink circle represents the latest period.
Source: Harley et al., 2014


Figure 23. Bigeye stock: ratio of exploited to unexploited potential over time




Notes: Grey line indicates the limit at which the stock is considered overfished
Source: Harley et al., 2014


Yellowfin. Based on the most recent stock assessment carried out in 2014, the stock is not considered
overfished, though fishing mortality has generally been increasing through time and is currently estimated
to be 0.72 times the rate that will support the maximum sustainable yield (WCPFC, 2014). However, most
recent catch levels are close to or have exceeded the estimated maximum sustainable yield by up to 13
percent, and the scientific community recommends that annual catches should not be increased from 2012
levels (WCPFC, 2014).

                                                                                                                                               47
Figure 24. ‘Kobe plot’ of the trend in yellowfin stock status & estimated spawning biomass: 1950 to 2011




                                                                                                                               Source: Hartley et al (2015)




Note: For ‘Kobe plot’, X-axis is the ratio of current spawning biomass (SB) of bigeye stock to the spawning biomass that would support the
maximum sustainable yield (Sbmsy); Y-axis is the ratio of current fishing mortality (F) to the fishing mortality that would be associated with a
stock size that would support the maximum sustainable yield (Fmsy). The color of the points is graduated from mauve to dark purple through
time, and points are labelled at 5-year intervals. The white triangle represents the average for the current period and the pink circle represents
the latest period.
Source: Harley et al., 2014b


Skipjack. Based on the most recent stock assessment carried out in 2014, the stock is not considered
overfished, though fishing mortality has generally been increasing through time and is currently estimated
to be 0.62 times the rate that will support the maximum sustainable yield (WCPFC, 2014). However, most
recent catch levels are slightly above the estimated maximum sustainable yield, and the current scientific
consensus recognizes that fishing mortality is increasing and stock size declining (to about 52 percent of
the level predicted in the absence of fishing), potentially resulting in a contraction of the geographic range
of the stock and a reduction in availability in higher latitudes (WCPFC, 2014). According to the
assessments, additional purse seine fishing effort in the WCPO will yield only modest gains in long-term
skipjack catches and may result in a corresponding increase in fishing mortality for bigeye and yellowfin
(WCPFC, 2014. As a result, the recommendation of the scientific community is that fishing mortality
should not be increased in order to keep the skipjack stock at approximately current levels (WCPFC, 2014).




                                                                                                                                                48
Figure 25. ‘Kobe plot’ of the trend in skipjack stock status & estimated spawning biomass: 1950 to 2011




                                                                                                                          Source: Hartley et al (2015)




Note: X-axis is the ratio of current spawning biomass (SB) of bigeye stock to the spawning biomass that would support the maximum sustainable
yield (Sbmsy); Y-axis is the ratio of current fishing mortality (F) to the fishing mortality that would be associated with a stock size that would
support the maximum sustainable yield (Fmsy). The color of the points is graduated from mauve to dark purple through time, and points are
labelled at 5-year intervals. The white triangle represents the average for the current period and the pink circle represents the latest period.
Source: Rice et al., 2014


In comparing the status of the WCPO resource base to other tuna stocks around the world, the region’s
skipjack and yellowfin stocks show signs of greater health, as per below:

Figure 26. ‘Kobe Plot’ of current status of skipjack tuna stocks by convention area

                                                        SKIPJACK TUNA
                                                      Overfishing                                                         Overfishing
                                    1.2
                                                                                  ICCAT E
                                     1
                                                                     IATTC
                                    0.8
                           F/FMSY




                                    0.6                                        IOTC
                                                                                         ICCAT W
                                                                                                          WCPO
                                    0.4

                                    0.2

                                     0
                                          0               0.5                 1                 1.5                   2
                                                                         SB/SBMSY

                                     Note:      ICCAT = International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (East Atlantic &
                                                         West Atlantic stocks)
                                                IATTC = Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
                                                IOTC = Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
                                     Sources: ISSF (2015), ICCAT (2015), IOTC (2015), Rice et al (2014b) 16


16
       ISSF:    http://iss-foundation.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2015/03/ISSF-2015-03-Status-of-the-Stocks-Feb-2015.pdf;             ICCAT:
https://www.iccat.int/Documents/SCRS/ExecSum/SKJ_EN.pdf; IOTC: http://www.iotc.org/documents;
                                                                                                                                                49
Figure 27. ‘Kobe Plot’ of current status of yellowfin stocks by convention area




                                                                                                                     Overfishing
                                                      YELLOWFIN TUNA
                                     1
                                   0.9
                                   0.8                                                                WCPO
                                                                                  ICCAT
                                   0.7                                                    IATTC
                          F/FMSY   0.6
                                                                                                            IOTC
                                   0.5
                                   0.4
                                   0.3
                                   0.2
                                   0.1
                                     0
                                         0      0.2        0.4        0.6        0.8         1        1.2          1.4
                                                                        SB/SBMSY

                                    Note:      ICCAT = International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (East Atlantic &
                                                        West Atlantic stocks)
                                               IATTC = Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
                                               IOTC = Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
                                    Sources: ISSF (2015), ICCAT (2015), IOTC (2015), Harley et al., 2014b 17

Additionally, though indicative only of the order of magnitude given the age of the data, the most recent
assessment of by-catch levels (i.e. catches, whether discarded or not, of species other than the principal
target tuna species of skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye, e.g. other finfishes, billfishes, sharks and rays, etc.)
suggested total levels from the WCPO purse seine fishery on the order of roughly 20,700 mt per year
(Lewis, 2014). These by-catches were linked largely to the use of fish aggregating devices (FADs), and as
a percentage of the targeted catch were lower in the WCPO than any other major tuna fishery (Lewis, 2014).

3.6 Characterization of Current Status of the WCPO Tuna Asset
As mentioned previously, natural resources are special economic goods because they are not produced. As
a consequence, natural resources will yield economic profits – rents – if properly managed. Living
resources such as fish stocks are unique because unlike minerals for example, they are a potentially
sustainable source of rents if well managed. Such stocks can be considered as natural capital assets of a
country, contributing to its development. The optimal stock size is a complex question, but would in theory
be such that it maximizes the present value of the future stream of benefits. If this optimal stock size and
that present value can be estimated, then the difference between the present value of the future stream of
benefits generated by the optimal size and the present value associated with the current size, is essentially
depletion or ‘borrowing from the future’ – i.e. the asset’s potential compared to its current value (World
Bank, 2006). Figure 28 below provides a snapshot of the rate that WCPO’s current portfolio of tuna stocks
is being drawn down at the moment, in terms of the latest assessment of spawning stock biomass compared
to the potential biomass that would be expected in the absence of fishing.




17
       ISSF:    http://iss-foundation.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2015/03/ISSF-2015-03-Status-of-the-Stocks-Feb-2015.pdf;            ICCAT:
https://www.iccat.int/Documents/SCRS/ExecSum/YFT_EN.pdf; IOTC: http://www.iotc.org/documents;


                                                                                                                                             50
 Figure 28. WCPO ‘Tuna Bank’: Fish Stocks in the Water
Latest estimate of fish stock as a % of unexploited potential stock
(latest spawning biomass(SB)/unfished spawning biomass (SBo)
                                                                      60


                                                                      50


                                                                      40


                                                                      30
                                                                                                                                                                                      Threshold
                                                                                                                                                                                      below which
                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                      stock is
                                                                                                                                                                                      considered
                                                                      10                                                                                                              overfished

                                                                       0
                                                                                Albacore (South                Bigeye                  Skipjack                 Yellowfin
                                                                                    Pacific)

                                                                           Sources: Albacore working group (2014); Harley et al. (2014); Harley et al. (2014b); Rice et al. (2014b)


 The above figure depicts assessments of the current status of the natural resource stocks, but does not
 indicate if this status is sustainable under current rates of fishing pressure, or if they will increase or decrease
 in the future if current rates of fishing pressure are maintained. Nonetheless, it provides a useful snapshot
 of the current status, and the resource management challenge for tuna fisheries governance in the region –
 to regulate fishing pressure to levels that will grow or maintain the stocks such that they can provide optimal
 returns for Pacific Island countries’ economic growth aspirations.

 3.7 Summary of Key Trends in WCPO Tuna Fisheries Policy
 Building upon the key trends identified in WCPO tuna fisheries by Gillett and Cartwright (2010), the
 following have been noted in terms of trends in policy at a number of different levels within the WCPO
 (see Annex 1 for more detail):

 WCPO level. In the early to mid-1990s there was a growing awareness of the need for a tuna management
 agency that would cover an area larger than that encompassed by Pacific Island countries and which would
 include foreign nations with vessels fishing in the WCPO (Gillett, 2014). After six years of complex
 negotiations between the PICs and distant-water fishing nations, a treaty for the creation of a Western and
 Central Pacific Fisheries Commission (WCPFC) was opened for signature in September 2000 and the
 Secretariat established in Pohnpei in 2004 (WCPFC, 2015). The WCPFC currently includes 26 member
 countries, 7 participating territories and 7 cooperating non-members, meeting annually with decisions
 generally taken on the basis of consensus towards the objective of ensuring the long-term conservation and
 sustainable use of the highly migratory fish stocks in the WCPO (WCPFC, 2015). The decisions of the
 Commission, known as ‘conservation and management measures’, are binding upon members, and have
 included the requirement for example that all members’ vessels are authorized to fish in the WCPO and
 registered with the Secretariat, as well as transfer information on vessels’ fishing activities in order to
 support management (see Annex 1). The Oceanic Fisheries Program of the Secretariat of the Pacific
 Community (SPC) is the agreed science service provider to the WCPFC, collecting and analyzing tuna
 catch and effort data, observer reports and other relevant information, and providing stock assessments to
 the Commission (Gillett, 2014).

 Pacific Islands region. Leaders from Pacific Island nations have articulated a number of policy statements
 of principle and objective for the region’s use of WCPO tuna resources, consistently focused on increasing
                                                                                                         51
conservation of the resources and domestic benefits from their sustainable use, and enhanced regional
cooperation towards that end. These policy statements include (among others):

      •    Pacific Islands Regional Ocean Policy (2002): Endorsed by leaders of the Pacific Islands Forum18
           leaders recommended the development of a regional policy statement in 1999, and endorsed the
           Pacific Islands Regional Ocean Policy (PIROP) in 2002 (Gillett, 2014). The PIROP articulates a
           vision for a healthy Pacific Ocean that sustains the livelihoods and aspirations of the region’s
           communities, under guiding principles of improved understanding of the ocean, sustainable
           development and management of ocean resource use, maintained ocean health, promotion of
           peaceful ocean uses and the creation of partnerships and promotion of cooperation (Gillett, 2014).

      •    Pacific Islands Regional Ocean Framework for Integrated Strategic Action (2005): Developed as
           a guide for implementation of the PIROP, the Framework provides a regional consensus on priority
           actions for improved ocean governance and sustainable resource use, a framework for regional
           coordination of action and guidance to development partners on priorities (Gillett, 2014).

      •    Vava’u Declaration on Pacific Fisheries Resources (2007): Annual meetings of Forum leaders
           have generated a number of statements of policy objectives for tuna resources, but the 2007
           meeting is perhaps the most comprehensive in articulating a number of specific objectives,
           including: promotion of domestic fisheries and particularly the development of national tuna
           industries, maintaining Pacific Island solidarity in managing WCPO tuna stocks, full
           implementation of conservation and management measures agreed at the WCPFC and promotion
           of additional conservation measures for bigeye and yellowfin, enhancing effectiveness and
           transparency in national licensing and cooperation with FFA on monitoring and surveillance of
           fishing activity (Gillett, 2014).

      •    Framework for a Pacific Oceanscape (2009): The Framework for a Pacific Oceanscape (FPO) was
           proposed at a meeting of Forum leaders by the Republic of Kiribati, as a vision for a secure future
           for PICs based on ocean conservation and management. A document was subsequently developed
           based on regional consultation entitled “Our Sea of Islands, Our Livelihoods, Our Oceania -
           Framework for a Pacific Oceanscape: a catalyst for implementation of ocean policy” (Pratt and
           Govan 2010) and was endorsed by the Pacific Island leaders in that same year (Gillett, 2014).
           Since that time, a number of PICs and territories have established large marine protected areas
           under the FPO, including Kiribati’s Phoenix Islands Protected Area (PIPA), large marine protected
           areas in the Cook Islands and French Polynesia, and a proposed tuna fishing reserve in Palau.




18
   Pacific Islands Forum member countries are: Australia, Cook Islands, FSM, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru, New Zealand, Niue, Palau, PNG, RMI,
Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu. Tokelau, French Polynesia and New Caledonia are associate members.
                                                                                                                                          52
    •   Framework for Pacific Regionalism (2014): The Framework replaced the 2005 Pacific Plan as the
        overarching strategy for regional integration and coordination between PICs, by establishing a
        process through which regional priorities for collaboration and pooling of resources would be
        identified and implemented (Pacific Islands Forum, 2014). Based on the process established by
        the Framework for Pacific Regionalism, in 2015 Forum leaders identified the region’s fisheries as
        one of five issues that
        met      the    test     for       Box 3. 2015 Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries
        regionalism in the new
        framework and endorsed Four Targets:
        the Regional Roadmap          • Enhance sustainability of the resource as a prerequisite for greater benefits,
        for Sustainable Pacific          including agree on objectives (i.e. ‘target reference points’) for minimum
        Fisheries (Pacific Islands       stock sizes (biomass) for all four tuna species as a basis for access limits, that
                                         would result in clear progress towards growth/maintenance of stocks sizes
        Forum          Secretariat,
                                         towards these objectives within 10 years – particularly for rebuilding the
        2015). The Roadmap               bigeye stock.
        sets 4 targets for benefits   • Enhance the economic value of the tuna fisheries without increasing
        to PICs from WCPO                production, by reducing harvests and oversupply to the markets, increasing
        tuna fisheries over the          productivity and profitability in the fisheries (and therefore the value access)
        next 10 years, with              and targeting higher value products and markets, resulting in a doubling of
        indicators of success and        the value of the region’s tuna catch in 10 years.
        implementation                • Increase Pacific Island employment in WCPO tuna fisheries, through
        strategies,      and       a     additional processing in Melanesia, as well as increased Pacific Island crew
        commitment               for     for fishing vessels, resulting in 18,000 new jobs over the next 10 years.
        Fisheries Ministers to        •  Enhance Pacific Islands food security, through increased small-scale catch of
        provide      an      annual      tuna,  local processing and supply, and utilization of incidental catch (i.e. ‘by-
                                         catch’) of non-targeted species, resulting in 40,000 tons of additional tuna
        ‘fishery report card’ of
                                         supplied for Pacific Island consumption by 10 years.
        progress to the Forum
        leaders meeting (see Box Six Strategies to Achieve Targets:
        4) (FFA, 2015). In their      1. Effective management of tuna fishing in PICs’ waters (zones), based on
        endorsement of the               assertion of national rights to access the stocks within a framework for
        Roadmap, Forum leaders           cooperation and binding limits towards resource objectives (i.e. target
        called for the economic          reference points), which within 10 years would be based on quotas of catch
        targets to be achieved           rather than effort (fishing days);
        within 5 years, and           2. Continued     efforts to reduce illegal fishing, through investments in
        directed a joint taskforce       cooperative   monitoring and surveillance programs through the Niue Treaty,
                                         utilizing technology advances such as enhanced investment in satellite and
        of FFA, PNA and the
                                         electronic surveillance, at-sea boardings and inspections, cooperation in
        Forum Secretariat to             aerial surveillance and strengthened port controls;
        develop      a     program    3. Progressive restriction of fishing on the high seas by non-PIC vessels,
        towards       that     end,      through continued conditions of access to PIC waters as well as efforts
        including examination of         through the WCPFC and promotion of consumer preferences for tuna caught
        a quota management               in national waters;
        system for purse seine        4. Prioritize supply of raw material to Pacific Island processors, through
        tuna fishery and an              requirements to offload a portion of catch locally and coordinated increases
        evaluation by 2016 of the        in transshipment fees;
        region’s           fisheries  5. Establish high standards for employment in harvesting and processing,
                                         through uniform minimum standards and a renewed emphasis on training;
        monitoring              and
                                         and
        surveillance         system   6. Establish regional processing hubs in two or three PICs, where fish caught
        (Pacific Islands Forum           in other PIC waters can be received and processed.
        Secretariat, 2015).

Specific policy instruments for shared management of tuna resources in Forum members’ waters begin with
the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency Convention of 1979. This treaty arose from the perception of
PICs in the late 1970s that many distant water fishing nations negotiated access agreements bi-laterally in
                                                                                                                  53
a strategy of ‘divide and conquer’ (Gillett, 2014). This treaty aimed to drive regional cooperation for the
sustainable use and management of Forum members’ shared tuna resources, and created the Forum
Fisheries Agency (FFA) in support of this objective (FFA, 2015b). Governed by a Forum Fisheries
Committee of member countries that meet annually and take decisions based on consensus, the FFA
Secretariat serves as an advisory body that provides expertise, technical assistance other support to inform
members’ decisions about the use of tuna resources in their waters and participation in the WCPFC (FFA,
2015b). Focused almost entirely on tuna, FFA supports development of regional and national policies,
provides national and regional tuna fisheries management services (such as maintaining a tuna fishing
vessel registry and a satellite-based tuna fishing vessel monitoring system) and providing information,
analysis and training for industry development along the value chain (FFA, 2015b). Under the 1979
Convention, the Niue Treaty on Cooperation in Fisheries Surveillance and Law Enforcement in the South
Pacific Region was agreed in 1992 and amended with a subsidiary agreement in 2012. This treaty promotes
cooperation among FFA members on: (i) enforcement of national tuna fishing laws and regulations, (ii)
regional surveillance procedures and patrols, and (iii) establishment of harmonized minimum terms and
conditions of foreign fishing vessel access to PIC waters, among others (FFA, 2015b). FFA has also helped
facilitate agreement between members and the United States on a Multilateral Fishing Treaty since 1987,
for common conditions and fees for access to PIC waters by the U.S. tuna fleet, together with targeted bi-
lateral aid from the U.S. (U.S. State Department, 2015).

Pacific Islands Sub-Region: Equatorial Belt. Building from the context of the 1979 FFA Convention, PICs
in the equatorial belt where the heaviest concentration of purse seine fishing takes place began to discuss
more specific cooperation around the tuna fisheries in their waters. In 1982 seven countries (and
subsequently an eighth, Tuvalu) signed the Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management
of Fisheries of Common Interest, with aim of coordinating and harmonizing management of the common
fish stocks shared across the zones of the Parties to the Agreement (PNA, 2010). The Parties to the Nauru
Agreement (PNA) agreed to work together to set uniform terms and conditions of access to tuna in their
waters, including licensing, reporting, identification, etc. Following a period in the 1980s of policy focus
in the sub-region (and beyond) on public investment in local fleets and canneries, which by the mid-1990s
were generally judged to have been unsuccessful, some countries began to focus on increasing benefits
from access fees (Gillett, 2014). In 2000 a study by FFA suggested shifting the strategy of PNA efforts to
manage the purse seine fishery in their waters, from a cap on vessel numbers (and licenses), to a strategy
based on limits on purse seine fishing days (Gillett, 2014).

The transition was actually made seven years later (Gillett, 2014), and the Parties subsequently amended
the Palau Arrangement for the Management of the Western Pacific Purse Seine Fishery (most recently in
2015) to create a vessel day scheme (VDS) to manage access to Parties’ waters for purse seine tuna fishing
vessels, by setting a total collective limit on fishing days in those waters by licensed purse seine vessels
each year (total allowable effort or TAE), and allocating that TAE among the Parties (Party allowable effort
or PAE). All Parties agree to limit fishing effort in their water to the respective PAEs, using standard
criteria for reporting fishing days. Parties may transfer unused days within their PAEs, or agree on
arrangements to pool them for sale. Effort expended under the FSMA and US Treaty is included in the
calculations for TAE and PAEs, and Parties must allocate a portion of their PAEs to account for any days
fished by their national fleets in other Parties’ waters. To combat ‘effort creep’ (increasing fish catch per
the same measure of fishing effort, i.e. increasing catch per fishing day), the following conversion factors
are used: (i) every fishing day by a purse seine vessel with a length overall of less than 50 meters shall
equate to a deduction of one half of a fishing day; (ii) every fishing day by a purse seine vessel with a length
overall of between 50 meters and 80 meters shall equate to a deduction of one fishing day; and (iii) every
fishing day by a purse seine vessel with a length overall in excess of 80 meters shall equate to a deduction
of one and one half fishing days. The VDS is implemented as part of a Conservation and Management
Measure agreed at the WCPFC, together with the Third Implementing Arrangement in 2009 that closes a
number of high seas areas to foreign vessels wishing to obtain/maintain a license to fish in Party waters
(PNAO, 2015). Originally FFA provided secretariat services to the PNA, but in 2010 the Parties amended
                                                                                                             54
the Agreement to establish an office (PNAO) in Majuro. A number of instruments have been introduced
by the PNA, notably the Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement (FSMA) of 1995 to provide a
mechanism for Parties’ domestic vessels to access other non-home Parties’ waters at reduced fee rates, in
order to support domestic industry (though countries are reviewing and in some cases revising these rates).

Additionally, the Palau Arrangement has been amended in 2014 to include a VDS for the longline fishing
effort in PNA waters, under similar terms as the purse seine VDS, except that the conversion factors are as
follows: (i) every fishing day by a longline vessel with a length overall of less than or equal to 40 meters
shall equate to a deduction of 0.8 of a fishing day; (ii) every fishing day by a longline vessel with a length
overall greater than 40 meters shall equate to a deduction of 1.6 fishing days; and (iii) artisanal vessels are
exempt. For both the purse seine and longline VDS, the PNAO conducts administration and maintains a
registry of purse seine vessels (with registration on the FFA register as a pre-requisite).

Pacific Islands Sub-Region: Southern region. In November 2014, ten countries signed the Tokelau
Arrangement to introduce fishing catch limits by zone (i.e. EEZ), following loosely on the model of the
VDS whereby limits on access for the southern albacore longline fishery will be introduced via national
measures in each of the participating countries (Havice et al, 2014). The agreement was signed by Australia,
the Cook Islands, Fiji, New Zealand, Niue, Samoa, the Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu and
Vanuatu, with provision for the states to meet once annually to take decisions by consensus, with FFA
acting as secretariat.

Pacific Island Countries. Access and regulation of tuna fishing within the waters of PICs is regulated at the
national level, according to the various regional agreements made. Towards this end, almost all PICs have
prepared national Tuna Fishery Development and Management Plans or the equivalent (World Bank, 2012),
with varying degrees of implementation to date.

A key caveat on the above policies is the difference between articulation/endorsement of policy statements
and instruments, and their implementation at various levels. Assessments of fisheries governance in the
region have noted in the past a disconnect in some cases between regional policy statements (e.g.
declarations) and the day-to-day activities of the agencies required to give them effect (Gillett and
Cartwright, 2010).

3.8 Summary of Key Trends in WCPO Tuna Fisheries Outcomes
This section carries forward the previous discussion on key trends in policy at various levels within the
WCPO, to highlight trends in outcomes from the tuna fishery for Pacific Island countries, again building
upon the work of Gillett and Cartwright (2010).

Trends in the status of the resource base. One of the defining trends in the WCPO tuna fisheries since the
late 1970s and early 1980s, has been the growth of purse seine fishing. As mentioned previously, the
skipjack stock contributing around 79% of the purse seine catch remains healthy, and PNA and the WCPFC
have recently adopted a target reference point to maintain the skipjack stock at around current levels, largely
for economic reasons. The WCPFC Scientific Committee has recommended that the yellowfin catch level
is not further increased.




                                                                                                            55
Figure 29. Trends in WCPO Purse Seine Capacity
                                              Purse Seine Fishing Vessels                      # Vessels

                                                                                                 400

                                                                                                 350

                                                                                                 300

                                                                                                 250

                                                                                                 200

                                                                                                 150

                                                                                                 100

                                                                                                 50

                                                                                                 0
  1980
  1981
  1982
  1983
  1984
  1985
  1986
  1987
  1988
  1989
  1990
  1991
  1992
  1993
  1994
  1995
  1996
  1997
  1998
  1999
  2000
  2001
  2002
  2003
  2004
  2005
  2006
  2007
  2008
  2009
  2010
  2011
  2012
  2013
  2014
   Source: WCPFC Tuna Fishery Yearbook 2014


As shown above, the number of large scale purse seine vessels fishing in the WCPO (i.e., excluding smaller
purse seine vessels) has increased by a multiple of 10 over the last 35 years, from 34 in 1980 to 344 vessels
in 2014 (WCPFC, 2015). Over the same period, the aggregate purse seine catch, including by the smaller
coastal vessels, increased to an estimated 2,036,968 tons in 2014. Within the aggregate purse seine fleet, a
number of specific trends stand out, as shown in Figure 30 below (FFA, 2015 unless otherwise noted):
    • Declining: catches by the Japanese fleet have been declining since 2007;
    • Relatively constant: catches by fleets from China, Taiwan as well as Korea have been relatively
        constant since 1997 (though both China, Taiwan and Korea’s catches increased somewhat in 2014),
        and similarly although the U.S. fleet (including all territories except American Samoa) increased
        its catch from 144,082 metric tons in 1997 to 283,230 metric tons in 2014, catches have been on a
        relatively flat trend since 2009;
    • Increasing from the edges: catches by the fleets from Indonesia and the Philippines have increased
        from a combined 180,160 metric tons in 1997 to 268,672 metric tons in 2014;
    • A new fleet: catches by the purse seine fleet from China are a relatively new factor in the WCPO,
        increasing from 0 in 1997 to 59,407 metric tons in 2014 (WCPFC, 2015b); and
    • Exponential growth: catches by the PIC fleets have increased from 85,657 metric tons in 1997 to
        526,067 metric tons in 2014, while the number of vessels has increased from 40 in 2002 to 95 in
        2014, over half of which are flagged to PNG (Williams and Terawasi, 2015), in many cases foreign-
        owned but securing access partly in exchange for landing catch locally.




                                                                                                           56
                             Figure 30. Trends in WCPO Purse Seine Catch by Selected Fleets
     Mt Catch
     600,000

     500,000

     400,000

     300,000

     200,000

     100,000

                     -
                         1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                                 China                                          China, Taiwan
                                 Indonesia                                      Japan
                                 Korea                                          Philippines
                                 PICs                                           US+territories (excl. Am. Samoa)


Source: FFA (2015)


The aggregate purse seine fleet and catch have grown significantly over the years, but the distribution of
fishing effort has not been uniform. The question arises, since the introduction of the VDS in the waters of
the PNA countries plus Tokelau, where most purse seining takes place, as well as the associated closure of
the high seas pockets, has fishing capacity and catch increased? Has the VDS truly capped fishing pressure?

Figure 31. Trends in WCPO Purse Seine Catch by Location

               2,500,000


               2,000,000


               1,500,000
  Total WCPO




               1,000,000


                500,000


                         0
                                2010           2011          2012           2013            2014
               High Seas        76,935        66,851         89,075        89,631          134,547
               Other EEZs       45,101        45,398         71,501        67,954          63,981
               IND + PH        193,795        140,689       179,813        317,362         268,672
               PNA            1,421,904      1,328,240     1,530,164      1,462,289       1,599,207

Source: Williams and Terawasi (2015)


                                                                                                                     57
Purse seine catches in PNA waters have been relatively stable from 2010 to 2013. Catches increased in
2014, which according to SPC, “could be due to a strong year-class in conjunction with environmental
conditions resulting in a prolonged period where skipjack tuna were more available to the gear”. Over the
same period, catches outside PNA waters have increased by around 48%, with increases in the high seas
(75%), Indonesia and Philippines (39%) and other EEZs (42%) (Williams and Terawasi, 2015). Increased
reporting may also have played a role in some instances.

The relative stability of catches in PNA waters reflects the implementation of the VDS. Before 2012, the
VDS was only partially applied, excluding the US fleet and domestic vessels operating under the FSMA.
An overall hard limit at the 2010 level was applied to the fishing days available under the VDS from 2012.
As shown below, the application of this limit reduced effort from the high level reached in 2011 and has,
since then, maintained effort in PNA EEZs at below the 2010 level.

Figure 32. Purse Seine Effort in PNA Waters


                  60,000



                  40,000
   Fishing days




                  20,000



                      0
                       2010    2011             2012               2013               2014
                              PNA EEZs     PNA Archipelagic Waters


As illustrated in the graph below, implementation of the VDS has also held the total number of purse seine
vessels registered to fish in PNA waters at roughly the same as in 2010 (Clark, 2015).

Figure 33. Purse Seine Vessels Registered to Fish in PNA Waters




Source: Clark (2015)


                                                                                                       58
However, at the same time, fishing effort (as measured in days fished) has increased substantially in waters
outside of the PNA since the introduction of the VDS. In response to the question, based on the data
available, it appears that purse seine fishing catch and effort have been relatively stable under the VDS in
PNA waters until 2013, with an increase in the catch in 2014, which could be largely due to favorable
fishing conditions. By comparison, purse seine effort and catch, outside PNA waters, though relatively
smaller than the PNA catch and effort, have grown rapidly from 2010 to 2014. (Clark, 2015).

Throughout the entire WCPO, a total of 57,138 vessel days were fished in 2014 (excluding national waters
in Indonesia and the Philippines), which could be translated into the number of vessels that would be
estimated to operate full time at that level. A preliminary analysis estimated this as equivalent to a total of
229 vessels – below the current levels registered, suggesting that many of these vessels may be operating
less than full time (Pilling and Hardy, 2015). Additionally, Pilling and Hardy (2015) estimated that 281 to
289 vessels could operate full time within the total limit of 65,867 fishing days per year currently agreed at
the WCPFC, including: 51,879 for PNA countries and Tokelau (including archipelagic waters), 7,047 days
for other countries’ waters in the WCPO, and 6,941 for the high seas, but excluding the waters of Indonesia
and the Philippines (Pilling and Hardy, 2015). However, Pilling and Hardy (2015) note that the number of
vessels operating full-time would be significantly less if the WCPO wants to maintain the skipjack tuna
stock at a target biomass of 50 – 60% of unfished levels: in the range of 142 to 220 vessels – i.e. below
current levels. Additionally, Tidd et al. (2015) recently found that the ‘catching capability’ of purse seine
vessels in the WCPO steadily increased between 2005 and 2011 at a rate of 3 – 5% per year, as younger
and bigger vessels in the fleet tended to be more efficient (i.e. catching more fish per day than previous
vessels). At this rate, a day of fishing was 19 – 34% more effective in 2011 than 2005, again reflecting not
just the growing fleet size and catch, but the growing efficiency of the WCPO purse seine fleet (Tidd et al.,
2015). However, this trend had reversed in the early years of the introduction of the VDS, with vessel
efficiency estimated as declining overall from 2009-2011, especially in the FAD fisheries. This is contrary
to expectations that effort limits would create incentives to increase vessel efficiency, though may reflect
‘closures’ of FAD fishing for several months annually that were in effect during this period.

It remains to be seen whether the decline in vessel efficiency in the early years of the VDS is a short term
effect and accelerated increases in vessel efficiency develop, or continues as a result of features in the VDS
including the effects of the price of vessel days in removing economic rents and of PNA members using
the VDS to replace larger roaming vessels with smaller, more locally-based vessels.

In summary, a few conclusions may be drawn based on current information available:
    1. Purse seine fishing capacity and catch have continued to grow throughout the WCPO. The fleet
       registered to PICs has grown exponentially in the last decade, as has its catch, while most other
       fleets have remained stable.
    2. Fishing effort and catch appear to have grown much more in the waters outside of the PNA since
       2010, by around 50% from 2010 to 2014, though catch did increase in PNA waters as well (some
       9% from 2013 to 2014). This growth outside PNA waters has been highlighted as a concern by
       Parties, as it may to be due to efforts to operate outside the VDS and evade its controls as well as
       illustrating the challenges of regulating fishing on the high seas. Fishing effort and catch increased
       significantly in some high seas pockets in 2014 for the first time since 2010, and have steadily
       increased in the waters of Indonesia and the Philippines.
    3. It is not clear what the effect of the VDS has been on vessel efficiency and whether the VDS has
       overall created incentives to increase fishing power and catch/day. This will be a critical factor to
       monitor in the future development of the VDS.
    4. The VDS appears to have effectively controlled fishing pressure in the purse seine fishery in PNA
       waters in terms of the number of vessels and fishing effort involved. It remains to be seen whether
       the catch increase in 2014 is a one-off increase due to oceanographic conditions, or indicates the
       emergence of systematic increases in fishing power in the fleet (or potentially fishing effort
       reported as ‘non-fishing days’ within the VDS in some instances).
                                                                                                            59
In terms of capacity in the WCPO longline fisheries, Figure 34 below shows that the fleet has declined from
previous peaks, even as catch levels have remained relatively constant.
             Fig. 34 Trends in WCPO Long-Line Capacity & Catch
 # Vessels                                                                     MT Catch
 300000                                                                        5000
                                                                               4500
 250000                                                                        4000
 200000                                                                        3500
                                                                               3000
 150000                                                                        2500
                                                                               2000
 100000                                                                        1500
  50000                                                                        1000
                                                                               500
         0                                                                     0



                                        Catch   Vessels

 Source: WCPFC Tuna Fishery Yearbook 2014

As mentioned previously, the longline fishery in the southern part of the WCPO (i.e. south of the 10 degree
south parallel) has shown decreased productivity since 2009, with catch-per-unit of effort (i.e. kilograms of
tuna per one hundred hooks on a longline) hitting a low in 2011 for the period since 2002, with only
marginal improvements since that time (Gillett, 2014; FFA, 2014). This drop coincides with a sharp
increase in fishing effort in this part of the WCPO longline fishery in 2008 (Gillett, 2014), reflecting the
rise of the PIC albacore fleet in recent years (consisting of smaller, offshore vessels, many of which are
chartered), which caught as much as 50 to 60% of albacore in 2014 (Williams and Terawasi, 2015). Even
more recently, a fleet of smaller vessels from China has been operating in the fishery, which are reported
to be subsidized (Ilakini, 2013; Havice et al., 2014). The sustained reduction in vessel productivity since
2011 led FFA to express some concern with regard to the economic health of the fishery in late 2014 –
notably as low catch rates have reduced profits (Gillett, 2014; FFA, 2014). Distant-water vessels in
particular have seen a decline in productivity and overall numbers, though the trend has been common
throughout all fleets (Gillett, 2014). Gillett (2014) writes that “[Pacific Island] fleets participating in the
South Pacific longline albacore fishery are struggling, blaming fierce competition from the burgeoning
subsidized Chinese longline fleet and depressed prices due to the over-supply of albacore. Many longline
vessels are not operating, awaiting conditions to improve.” Similarly, Campling et al. (2014) wrote that
many of the Fiji-based vessels are struggling for profitability. In 2015 the Deputy Director of FFA stated
that some 400 new longline vessels from China were operating in the southern Albacore fishery, and that
catch rates were declining to unprofitable levels for all other fleets (Matangi Tonga Online, 2015). Much
of the increase in catch of albacore in WCPO is attributed to vessels from China and also China, Taiwan
(Harley et al., 2015). In its 2015 assessment of the southern Pacific albacore stock, SPC also noted the
strong declining trend in the economic conditions experienced by many PIC fleets, and cited a decline in
the size of the stock as a key driver (Harley et al., 2015).

The longline fishery targeting fresh fish for the sashimi markets operates largely in tropical waters near the
equator, targeting bigeye and yellowfin. Over the period from 2003 – 2013, the catch rates for bigeye
peaked in 2008 and have generally declined since (i.e. kilograms caught per hundred hooks on a longline),
while yellowfin catch rates consistently declined from 2010 to 2013 (FFA, 2014). The flat trend in the
growth in catches in the longline fisheries bears some resemblance to the global analysis that Garcia (2009)
conducted of long-term trends in fish landing statistics. On the basis of trends in the growth of landings,
                                                                                                            60
Garcia (2009) classified five stages in the development of ocean fishery systems: (i) undeveloped, (ii)
developing, (iii) mature, (iv) senescent and (v) recovering, and classified a majority of the world’s ocean
fishery systems as ‘senescent’ based on declining rates of growth in landings (see Figure 35 below).
Essentially, a drop in the growth rate of landings presages a drop in the actual fish landed, in a trend towards
what Garcia (2009) classifies as ‘senescence’.

Figure 35. Classification of stages of development of ocean fishery systems based on analysis of landings




Source: Garcia (2009)


In both the tropical longline fishery and the purse seine fishery, the declining stock of bigeye has become
a key trend in the resources. The longline gear explicitly targets the large and valuable bigeye for the sashimi
market, but smaller, juvenile bigeye are caught incidentally in purse seine nets that are set on fish
aggregating devices (FADs), as they associate with skipjack schooling under floating objects (Gillett,
2014). In 2014, 41 percent of bigeye catch in the WCPO was taken as incidental ‘by-catch’ by purse seine
vessels, while the remainder taken by longline vessels was the lowest in the last 10 years (WCPFC, 2014).
Bigeye mortality has been the highest in the tropical areas, also where purse seining is the highest (WCPFC,
2014).

Figure 36. Trends in WCPO Bigeye Catch by Fishing Gear




Source: ISSF (2015)




                                                                                                             61
               Figure 37. Distribution of 2013 WCPO Bigeye Purse Seine Catch by Fleet
                                                       Other China
                                                        6%    5%       Ecuador
                                                                         5%


                                                                     Spain
                                               U.S. 18%               11%    FSM
                                                                              1%
                                             Taiwan,             Indonesia 6%
                                              China
                                                                                Japan 4%
                                               12%                   Kiribati
                                                       PNG RMI   Korea 6%
                                  Philippines-DW        8% 6%     8%
                                        4%

                                               Source: WCPFC Data Catalogue




Figure 38. Distribution of WCPO Bigeye Catch by Location and Fishing Method (2003 – 2012)




Source:https://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/SC10-SA-WP-01%20%5BBET%20Assessment%5D_rev1_25July.pdf


In summary, some key trends in WCPO tuna resources are as follows:
    • The exponential growth of purse seine fishing: The purse seine fleet has grown in number of vessels
      steadily and exponentially since 1980, even as the composition has changed, with some individual
      fleets staying constant while others have grown drastically in recent years (e.g. PIC fleets). During
      this time the efficiency and catching capacity of the average vessel has grown steadily – notably
      the increased technology of FADs. The introduction of the VDS and subsequent fixed caps on
      fishing days have slowed this growth somewhat in PNA waters, together with enclosure of the high


                                                                                                        62
          seas activity. Purse seine effort outside of the PNA waters appears to have grown unabated, all
          resulting in a record high purse seine catch in 2014.
     •    Stagnation in the longline fisheries: After an increase in fishing effort in 2008, the southern
          albacore longline fishery saw a low point in catch rates in 2011 and has only marginally improved
          since. In the tropical longline fishery, catch rates for bigeye peaked in 2008 and have generally
          declined since, while yellowfin catch rates consistently declined from 2010 to 2013, even as new
          vessels reportedly enter the fishery. Even with declining catch rates, the 2014 catch of yellowfin
          was a record high, while bigeye catches have been stagnant or declining.
     •    Bigeye stock overfished and declining: the biomass of the bigeye stock has shown a steady decline
          since the 1970s, reaching overfished status in the last five years. At the same time, the growth of
          purse seining has taken a larger share of the bigeye catch, representing 41% of the WCPO bigeye
          catch in 2014.
     •    Albacore, skipjack and yellowfin stocks relatively healthy but at the limit: these stocks are not
          currently considered overfished, but they are approaching limits and cannot continue to support the
          growth in fishing effort and catch seen in the past, according to current scientific assessments.

In summary, although more recent assessments have been conducted, Figure 39 provides a useful
illustration of trends in the status of the resource base, indicating clearly that future directions are unlikely
to continue past trends:

Figure 39. 2012 WCPO Tuna Stock Assessments Showing Trends in Status




Source: Hurry (2014), at: http://devpolicy.org/presentations/2014-Pacific-Update/Day-2/Glenn-Hurry.pdf accessed on December 4, 2015.


Similarly, the International Seafood Sustainability Foundation’s global tuna scorecard provides another
means to visualize the status of the stocks (with the exception of albacore given less recent assessments),
as shown in Figure 40:




                                                                                                                                       63
Figure 40. WCPO Tuna Stock Status Scorecard from ISSF
                        Bigeye                   Skipjack                                                     Yellowfin
 Stock Abundance*
 Fishing Mortality**
* Green: Spawing biomass (SB) is greater than levels needed to support the maximum sustainable yield (MSY); yellow: SB is less than levels
needed to support MSY, but stable or increasing; orange: SB is less than levels needed to support MSY, and has not been stable or increasing.
** Green: Fishing mortality (F) is lower than levels that would support the MSY; yellow: F is greater than levels needed to support MSY, but
adequate measures are in place and expected to end overfishing; orange: F is greater than levels needed to support MSY, and no adequate
measure are in place, or those in place are insufficient.
Source: ISSF (2015)


Trends in the economic benefits to PICs from the WCPO tuna resources. The harvesting component of the
WCPO tuna fisheries value chains has provided benefits to Pacific Island countries over the years largely
in the form of: (i) access fees from foreign vessels, (ii) ownership of harvesting enterprises and (iii)
employment on vessels. In terms of access fees, the return to PICs had been relatively stable over the years,
until the recent introduction of the VDS for the purse seine fishery. Total access fees to PICs from the tuna
fisheries was US$66 million in 1996 (IFC, 2000), and according to Figure 12 somewhat lower in 2000, and
staying at these levels essentially until 2009 when the VDS was introduced. Since that time the access fees
to PICs have increased exponentially, to an all-time high of an estimated US$400 million in 2015 (see
Figure 12). In terms of ownership of harvesting enterprises, Gillett (2014) notes that previous Government
investments in fishing companies throughout the region showed little success, and their decline has been
one of the constant trends in the region. At the same time, the growth in Pacific Island fishing fleets has
been one of the central trends in recent years, many of which are joint ventures. In terms of employment
on vessels, the number of Pacific Islanders working as crew on regional or foreign fleets has grown in recent
years, to some 6,000 persons in 2013 (see Figure 22), up from just under 3,000 in 2002 (Bell et al., 2011).

The processing component of the WCPO tuna fisheries value chains has provided mixed results for the
region. Most of the Government-led processing enterprises created in the 1980s or 1990s are no longer
operating, but a number of private-led companies are currently working in PNG, the Solomon Islands, Fiji
and to a lesser extent RMI. Much of this industry has developed as a result of the countries using access to
the tuna resources to leverage companies to base locally (Gillett, 2014). Given the canneries and loining
factories operating in these countries, processing employment has fluctuated over the years in the region
but stayed relatively flat, at an estimated 10,000 jobs in 2000 (IFC, 2000), 5,555 in 2002 and up to 11,000
in 2006 due to increase in PNG (Bell et al., 2011), and roughly 11,000 in 2013 (FFA, 2014). Although data
is difficult to obtain on full processing volumes, it is likely that less than 10 percent of the tuna caught in
the WCPO is processed in PICs. As mentioned previously, in total the WCPO tuna fisheries value chains
likely employ less than 0.5 percent of the region’s current labor force (World Bank 19), though in some cases
it constitutes a much higher percentage of formal employment for women.




19
     http://data.worldbank.org/indicator
                                                                                                                                                64
                    Summary of Key Trends in WCPO Tuna Fisheries over Recent Decades

In describing the baseline situation of the WCPO tuna fisheries, collectively one of the world’s largest and most
valuable fisheries, the following key trends can be extracted:

The purse seine fishing ‘revolution’
   • Explosion in purse seine vessels and catch. Purse seine fishing to produce canned tuna has grown
       exponentially in the WCPO since 1980, with 34 vessels catching roughly 100,000 metric tons of tuna that
       year, increasing to a steady state of some 180 to 220 vessels operating from 1990 to 2006, to 344 vessels
       catching over 2 million tons in 2014. Fifty-two new purse seine vessels have been built since 2010 and
       registered to fish in the WCPO. Purse seine harvesting technology has increased as well, notably for FADs.
   • Changing composition of the fleet. The purse seine fleet has always been a largely foreign fleet, but the
       composition is changing, and the number of vessels based in PICs is growing – notably in PNG:
          o Relatively constant: Since 1997 catches by fleets from China, Taiwan as well as Japan and Korea
                have been relatively constant, and catches by the U.S. fleet have been on a relatively flat trend
                since 2009;
          o Increasing on the edges: combined catches by the fleets from Indonesia and the Philippines more
                than doubled between 1997 and 2014;
          o A new fleet: catches by the Chinese fleet increased from 0 in 1997 to 59,407 metric tons in 2014;
                and
          o Pacific Island fleet growth: catches by the PIC fleets increased by a multiple of over 6 between
                1997 and 2014, with the fleet flagged in PNG accounting for over half of all vessels - in many
                cases foreign-owned but securing access in exchange for landing catch locally.
   • A more efficient fleet. The purse seine fleet in the WCPO has grown more efficient over time, increasing
       catches per day of fishing at a rate of 3 percent per year between 2005 and 2011.

Stagnation and possibly senescence in the long-line fisheries
   • Declining productivity and profitability in the southern albacore long-line fishery, even as fishing has
       increased. Fishing increased sharply in 2008 with the rise of the PIC albacore fleet, which caught as much
       as 50 to 60 percent of albacore in 2014, and more recently the rise of the Chinese fleet. Catch rates have
       decreased steadily since 2009, hitting a low in 2011 for the period since 2002, with only marginal
       improvements since, even as new (and reportedly subsidized) vessels enter the fishery. While the stock is
       not considered overfished, a decline in the size of the stock is cited by SPC as a key driver in the declining
       economic conditions.
   • Flat trend in catches from the tropical long-line fishery supplying sashimi markets. Over the period from
       2003 – 2013, the catch rates for bigeye peaked in 2008 and have generally declined since (i.e. kg caught
       per hundred hooks on a long-line), while yellowfin catch rates consistently declined from 2010 to 2013.
   • Overall, little benefits for PICs. PICs capture an estimated 3 percent of the delivered value of the long-line
       fisheries.

Establishment of a regional management body for the tuna fisheries
   • Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission met for the first time in 2004. Established as the body
        recognized under international law to promote the conservation and management of WCPO tuna stocks,
        and includes both PICs and foreign fishing nations, generally taking decisions based on consensus.
   • PICs have expressed frustrations with the pace of decision-making. Given the diversity of actors in the
        Commission, consensus has been elusive in many cases, and some PIC representatives have expressed
        frustration when decisions have not been taken (Gillett, 2014). PIC representatives have cited the pace of
        decision-making at the Commission as a rationale for pursuing sub-regional agreements and governance
        arrangements, such as the Palau Arrangement and the Tokelau Arrangement (Campling et al, 2015).


                                                                                                              65
A new model of cooperation by a sub-regional grouping of Pacific Island countries to manage purse seine
fishing access
    • The Parties to the Nauru Agreement and the purse seine vessel day scheme. The establishment of a
        cooperative scheme by 9 PICs to limit purse seine fishing access to their waters and allow transferability
        and greater flexibility in access terms, has significantly enhanced their ability to charge and capture resource
        rents in the form of access fees.
    • Access fees have increased by at least a multiple of four since 2009. An estimated 13 percent of the delivered
        value of the purse seine catch was captured in rent via access fees in 2014.
    • The countries have held the limit on purse seine access, but throughout the WCPO catch and effort continue
        to grow. Fishing effort and catch appear to have grown much more in the waters outside of the PNA
        countries, notably in the waters of Indonesia and the Philippines as well as some high seas pockets in 2014,
        though catch did increase in PNA waters as well between 2013 and 2014.
    • Following the model of the purse seine vessel day scheme, similar arrangements have been introduced for
        the long-line fisheries. In 2015 the PNA countries have begun a vessel day scheme for the tropical long-line
        fishery, and in late 2014 ten countries signed the Tokelau Arrangement to implement a similar scheme for
        access to the southern albacore long-line fishery in their waters. Given the order-of-magnitude higher
        number of long-line vessels than purse seine vessels, monitoring such arrangements and including observers
        on vessels will be an operational challenge.

Failures of state-led efforts to capture more of the value chains in the Pacific Islands
    • State fishing and processing companies have generally not succeeded. Most of the Government-led
       processing enterprises created in the 1980s or 1990s are no longer operating, but a number of private-led
       companies are currently working in PNG, the Solomon Islands, Fiji and to a lesser extent RMI. In total the
       WCPO tuna fisheries value chains likely employ less than 0.5 percent of the region’s current labor force.
    • Pre-eminence of trading companies in the canned tuna supply chain. As of 2010, three main trading
       companies purchased over half of the WCPO purse seine catch for processors (as well as additional catch
       from other areas) and provided some 90 percent of the supply to Bangkok: Trimarine, Itochu and FCF
       Fishery Co. Ltd. Given this level of control over the supply to Bangkok, these three traders are in a position
       to exert significant influence over the purse seine value chain.
    • Continued dominance of Bangkok canning cluster, despite a lack of trade preferences. Less than 10 percent
       of the WCPO purse seine catch is processed locally, and Bangkok remains the world’s largest tuna canner
       (despite higher labor costs and PNG and Solomon Island trade preference for the EU market).

Relatively steady global market for tuna products
   • Canned tuna relatively flat. The three main markets for canned tuna, the EU, US and Japan, are considered
       as ‘mature’ with relatively flat growth trends. The price of skipjack in Bangkok has declined significantly
       in recent years, attributed to the growth (or ‘glut’) in supply – largely from increasing catch volumes in the
       WCPO, especially outside PIC waters.
   • Japan pioneered the sashimi market, which has become global. In 2010 Japan consumed some 80 percent
       of sashimi in the world, but the global market has grown, with the remainder destined for the U.S., Korea,
       China, the European Union and Taiwan, China.

Decline of the bigeye stock, while fishing on other stocks approaches limits recommended by scientists
   • Bigeye stock overfished and declining. The biomass of the bigeye stock has shown a steady decline since
       the 1970s, reaching overfished status in the last five years. At the same time, the growth of purse seining
       and particularly FAD technology has taken a larger share of the bigeye catch, representing 41 percent of the
       WCPO bigeye catch in 2014.
   • Albacore, Skipjack and Yellowfin stocks relatively healthy but at the limit. These stocks are not currently
       considered overfished, but they are approaching limits and cannot continue to support the growth in fishing
       effort and catch seen in the past, according to current scientific assessments. Scientists have recommended
       a reduction in the long-line catches of southern albacore.
   • Overall, the WCPO tuna fisheries is ‘tilting towards the need to reduce catch and rebuild stocks’ according
       to scientists (Campling et al, 2015).                                                                 66
IV. Key Drivers of Future Change in the Western & Central Pacific Tuna
Fisheries

4.1 Evolution of Key Non-Policy or External Drivers of WCPO Tuna Fisheries’ Economic
Contribution to Pacific Island Countries

Direct Driver #1: Climate Change
This section is based on the work of Bell et al. (2011), who used global climate models to simulate projected
changes to the atmospheric climate in the region and the main features of the tropical Pacific Ocean, under
two scenarios of future greenhouse gas
emissions: (i) low emissions (B1) leading to Box 4. The impact of oceanographic conditions on
atmospheric concentrations of 500 – 600 ppm of abundance and distribution of WCPO tuna stocks
carbon dioxide in 2100; and (ii) high emissions
(A2) leading to atmospheric concentrations of The features of the tropical Pacific Ocean that influence
750 - 800 ppm of carbon dioxide in 2100. On distribution and abundance of tuna stocks are the currents, water
                                                       temperature, dissolved oxygen and nutrient supply. The El
this basis, the authors modelled the impacts on Nino-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) refers to an oscillation
the abundance and distribution of the WCPO between a warm (El Nino) and a cold (La Nina) state every 2 –
skipjack and bigeye stocks (noting that the 7 years in the tropical Pacific Ocean. The ENSO has a very
biology and ecology of yellowfin can be strong influence on distribution and abundance of tuna in the
considered to lie somewhere between the two) equatorial waters, resulting in large-scale, east-west
(Bell et al., 2011). The models gave very similar displacements of skipjack correlated with ENSO events, as the
results for 2035 under both scenarios, but fish prefer warmer waters that extend farther to the east during
diverged significantly for the results by 2100 El Nino episodes (resulting in higher purse seine catches in the
(Bell et al., 2011). The oceanographic features central Pacific, e.g. Kiribati near the Line Islands). Several
that influence the distribution and abundance of months after the completion of an El Nino episode, the
                                                       productivity shifts and the habitat contracts, and higher skipjack
tuna stocks in the WCPO (see Box 5) are catch rates may occur in PNG and the Solomon Islands,
expected to change in the future, notably with an particularly if a La Nina episode follows an El Nino.
increase in ‘El-Nino-like’ conditions, which will Additionally, long-line catch rates of yellowfin and bigeye seem
likely affect where tuna spawn, the survival and to increase in regions of increased sea surface temperatures.
growth of juveniles, and where adults feed (Bell Source: Bell et al. (2011)
et al., 2011).

Changes to the distribution and abundance of tuna. The preliminary modeling conducted by Bell et al.
(2011) suggests an overall eastward re-distribution of the WCPO skipjack and bigeye stocks over time,
however much uncertainty remains (notably the possible impacts of ocean acidification on juvenile and
adult tuna are not well understood). Skipjack in the WCPO is projected to have almost no change in
abundance by 2035, but by 2100 the stock’s biomass is expected to have decreased 32 percent compared to
2000 under the high emissions scenario (A2) if average fishing effort from 1980 to 2000 were to continue,
and increase by 50 percent in the Eastern Pacific Ocean outside of WCPO (Bell et al., 2011). At the same
time, projected changes in skipjack catch relative to the 20-year average for 1980 to 2000, suggest a likely
increase across the WCPO by 2035, with greater increases expected in the eastern than in western Pacific,
notably in Kiribati, Tokelau, Nauru and Tuvalu (see Table 9 below). By 2100 under the low emissions
(B1) scenario, catches for the western Pacific are projected to decrease and return to average levels for 1980
to 2000, although catches in Solomon Islands and PNG are projected to decrease by 5 and 10 percent
respectively. In contrast, catches in the eastern Pacific are projected to increase on average by over 40
percent. Under the high emissions (A2) scenario, in 2100 catches of skipjack for the western Pacific are
estimated to decline further, by an average of over 20 percent and by as much as 30 percent for PNG. Under
this scenario catches in the eastern Pacific are expected to remain greater than the baseline, but decrease
relative to B1 scenario. Across the WCPO, catch is projected to decrease by 7.5% by 2100 under the A2
scenario. A subsequent study projects a slight increase in WCPO skipjack catch and biomass under simple

                                                                                                                  67
fishing effort scenarios until 2050, and then biomass stabilizes and starts to decrease after 2060, with
feeding and spawning habitat becoming progressively more favorable in the eastern Pacific Ocean and
extending to higher latitudes (Lehodey et al., 2012).

For adult bigeye, there is no obvious difference in abundance and distribution projected by 2035, however
small decreases in catch (less than 5%) are projected to occur in 17 of 22 PICs and territories by 2035. The
magnitude of the reduced catches is projected to increase to 5 – 10 percent in most PICs and territories
under the low emissions (B1) scenario by 2100, and 10 – 30 percent for many PICs and territories under
the high emissions (A2) scenario. Impacts on yellowfin should be similar to those described for skipjack
and bigeye. Initial modeling suggests a potential positive impact for abundance of albacore, although some
poleward displacement of distribution of stocks is possible.

Additionally, a recent study has modelled the impacts of the high emissions (A2) scenario on the south
Pacific albacore stock, and projected that under a scenario of average fishing effort based on recent years,
by 2035 the population would decrease by roughly a third from 2006 levels, with the trend reversing after
2080 when a new spawning ground emerged in the north Tasman Sea (Lehodey et al., 2015). Of note, a test
simulation highlighted the sensitivity of the model results to projected dissolved oxygen concentration for
which there is large uncertainty in the tropical region, and a second test simulation showed factors where
the spawning ground does not emerge and hence the trend does not reverse after 2080 (Lehodey et al.,
2015).

In summary, there is the eventual possibility of reduced overall abundance of skipjack, yellowfin and bigeye
in the WCPO by 2100, but less likely by 2035 – while south Pacific albacore abundance may be reduced
by this time period. Distribution of skipjack and bigeye (and by extension yellowfin) are likely to shift
progressively towards the central and eastern Pacific during the 21st century. Within this larger trend, sub-
regional concentrations may be maintained or increased, for example increased rainfall and nutrient flow
into the Bismarck Sea may retain concentrations of tuna in the Indonesia-PNG archipelagos. On balance,
projected changes in skipjack catch from preliminary modeling indicate that there could be more advantages
than disadvantages for the region, notably with potential increased access fees captured by Kiribati, Nauru,
Tokelau and Tuvalu.

Table 10. Projected % changes in catches of skipjack and bigeye tuna, relative to the 20-year average for
1980 to 2000, under low (B1) and high (A2) greenhouse gas emissions scenarios in 2035 and 2100*
 Pacific Island Country or Territory      % Change in Skipjack Catches       % Change in Bigeye Catches
                                       2035       2100 (B1) 2100 (A2)      2035    2100 (B1) 2100 (A2)
 Melanesia
 Fiji                                  +26        +24          +33         +1        +1          -1
 New Caledonia                         +22        +19          +40         +1        +1          +6
 PNG                                   +3         -11          -30         -4        -13         -28
 Solomon Islands                       +3         -5           -15          0        -3          -7
 Vanuatu                               +18        +15          +26         -3        -6          -10
 Micronesia
 FSM                                   +14        +5           -16         -11       -11         -32
 Guam                                  +16        +10          -8          -13       -13         -33
 Kiribati                              +37        +43          +24         -5        -5          -17
 RMI                                   +24        +24          +10         -10       -10         -27
 Nauru                                 +25        +20          -1          -7        -7          -19
 CNMI                                  +23        +22          +13         -5        -5          -23
 Palau                                 +10        +2           -27         -11       -11         -45
 Polynesia
 American Samoa                        +41        +48          +58         -5        -8          -18
 Cook Islands                          +40        +50          +47         -3        -8          -15
 French Polynesia                      +41        +49          +77         -2        -8          -12
                                                                                                          68
 Niue                                            N/A              N/A             N/A              -5          -8               -15
 Pitcairn Islands                                N/A              N/A             N/A              -2          -4               -4
 Samoa                                           +44              +49             +55              +1          +1               -4
 Tokelau                                         +61              +69             +63              -3          -6               -16
 Tonga                                           +47              +50             +58              -4          -5               -10
 Tuvalu                                          +37              +41             +25              +3          +2               -6
 Wallis and Futuna                               +44              +49             +46              0           0                -7
 Regional
 Total                                           +19              +12             -7               +0.3        -9               -27
 Western fishery                                 +11              -0.2            -21              -2          -12              -34
 Eastern fishery                                 +37              +43             +27              +3          -4               -18
*Model results are the same in 2035 for both emissions scenarios, so only one change given for 2035; Model simulations for A2 in 2050 were used
to approximate B1 in 2100 – though while CO2 emissions for these scenarios/times are similar, the multi-modal mean of sea surface temperature
is 0.18 degrees C (plus/minus 0.23) higher under B1 2100 than A2 2050.; Source: Bell et al. (2011)


Based solely on the projected changes in catch, and holding fishing effort, tuna prices, GDP, levels of
taxation and the value-added component of the fisheries constant relative to 1999 – 2008 levels, changes in
contribution to GDP and to public revenues were estimated, as shown in Table 10 below.

Table 11. Estimated Changes by 2035 in Percentage Contributions of Tuna Fisheries to GDP and Public
Revenues relative to 1999 – 2008, based on projected changes in skipjack catch due to climate change
 Pacific Island Countries     Change to GDP by 2035 (%)       Change in Public Revenues by 2035 (%)
                                        Lower Limit of        Upper Limit of         Lower     Limit          of     Upper Limit          of
                                        Projections           Projections            Projections                     Projections
 FSM                                    0                     +1                     +1                              +2
 Kiribati                               N/A                   N/A                    +11                             +18
 PNG                                    0                     +0.1                   0                               0
 RMI                                    +2                    +6                     0                               +
 Solomon Islands                        +0.1                  +0.2                   0                               +0.2
 Tokelau                                N/A                   N/A                    +1                              +9
 Tuvalu                                 N/A                   N/A                    +4                              +9
Source: Bell et al (2011)


The above estimates are preliminary and indicative only, to provide an indication of the direction and
magnitude of possible economic impacts from changes in the distribution of skipjack by 2035.

Increased operating costs for WCPO tuna fishing. Bell et al (2011) note that cyclones and storms are
projected to possibly become progressively more intense, increasing the risk of damage to shore-based
facilities, processing operations and domestic fleets. Fleets operating in cyclone-prone areas, and
particularly longline vessels, may need to be upgraded to provide for improved safety at sea. Additionally,
rising sea levels may eventually make many existing wharfs and shore-based facilities unstable, with the
most significant economic damages relative to the size of the economy expected to occur in FSM, Palau,
RMI and Nauru (IPCC, 2014). Taken together, increased costs associated with repairing and relocating
shore-based facilities, and addressing increased risks to occupational health and safety for fishers, may
affect the profitability of domestic tuna operations.




                                                                                                                                           69
                                       Key considerations for the future
The initial modelling led by SPC suggests the following key considerations for future impact of climate
change on the economic benefits PICs derive from the WCPO tuna fisheries:
   • For skipjack, abundance is not expected to change, but an overall shift in the distribution to the
        central and eastern Pacific is expected to change the catch rates in the waters of many PICs,
        providing positive benefits for all PICs, with the largest increase in benefits expected in Kiribati,
        Nauru, Tokelau and Tuvalu.
   • For bigeye, a projected eastward re-distribution of the stock is expected to have significant
        consequences for the status, given that purse seine by-catch rates of the species are much higher in
        the central and eastern Pacific than in the western Pacific, potentially due to shallower depths of the
        mixed layer of surface waters rendering the fish more vulnerable to purse seining.
   • The potential re-distribution of tuna stocks throughout the WCPO (and beyond) due to climate
        change reinforces the importance of flexible management systems that can cope with spatial shifts
        in fishing activity, e.g. to avoid the need for eastern countries to continually purchase purse seine
        vessel days from countries in the west.
   • Additionally, given the potential significant impacts of climate change on WCPO tuna stocks but
        the high levels of uncertainty in predicting these impacts, the importance of maintaining healthy
        and resilient tuna stock sizes becomes magnified.
                                                                                            Source: Bell et al (2011)




                                                                                                                70
Direct Driver #2: Markets and the Economy
This section focuses on: (i) the role of global markets, and specifically the potential changes in global prices
for tuna products and raw materials, reflecting changes in both supply and demand (including possible shifts
in consumer preferences); and (ii) the role of the global economy, and specifically the potential changes in
fixed and operating costs along WCPO tuna fishery value chains, notably changes in the cost of fuel and
hence of harvesting operations, as well as processing and distribution costs.

Markets. As mentioned previously, the markets and value chains for the canned tuna and fresh tuna (e.g.
sashimi) produced from purse seining and long-lining in the WCPO are global, with the largest proportion
consumed in Europe, Japan and the United States. As such, the price of tuna along the value chains is
considered a (partially) exogenous driver in the WCPO fisheries and the benefits that PICs capture from
them. Price is a key variable in determining the overall economic value of the WCPO tuna fisheries, and
the revenues captured at each segment of the supply chains (see Figure 4). This section considers past
trends, and information available on the possible future directions, of global prices for tuna, as a function
of supply and demand, drawing heavily from the work of Hamilton et al. (2011).

Firstly, before focusing specifically on the markets and prices for specific tuna products, the projected
global demand for animal protein and more specifically fish products is a useful reference point. Broadly
speaking, with the global population projected to reach 9.6 billion by 2050, seafood consumption is
expected to rise, notably as an ‘animal protein gap’ opens up between demand and available supply (Waite
et al., 2014). More specifically, in 2013 the World Bank, FAO and IFPRI modeled global fish supply and
demand to 2030, and projected an increase in supply from 154 million tons in 2011 to 186 million tons in
2030, with almost all of the growth coming from aquaculture (see Figure 41 below) (World Bank, 2013).
Per capita fish consumption was projected to decline in Japan, Latin America, Europe, Central Asia and
Sub-Saharan Africa, even as total consumption increases in some regions with population growth (World
Bank, 2013). The study notes that China is expected to increasingly influence global fish markets,
accounting for 38 percent of food fish consumption by 2030 (World Bank 2013). Even a relatively small
percentage shift in consumption of tuna in China or similarly India, could have a significant impact on the
volume demanded and price.

Figure 41. Global Fish Production: Data and              Figure 42. Projected Global Fish Supply by Species to
Projections 1984 – 2030                                  2030




Source: World Bank (2013)

                                                         Source: World Bank (2013)




                                                                                                             71
MT Catch
                 Figure 43. Trend in Global Catch of Principal Tuna Species
 5000000                                                                                                                                                     2003 “Peak tuna”
 4500000                                                                                                                                                     except for skipjack
 4000000
 3500000
 3000000
 2500000
 2000000
 1500000
 1000000
  500000
       0
                 1952
                        1955
                               1958
                                      1961
                                             1964
                                                    1967
                                                           1970
                                                                  1973
                                                                         1976
                                                                                1979
                                                                                       1982
                                                                                              1985
                                                                                                     1988
                                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                          1997
                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                                        2003
                                                                                                                                               2006
                                                                                                                                                      2009
                          albacore              bluefin             bigeye              skipjack             yellowfin

Source: FAO Fishery Statistical Collection http://www.fao.org/figis/servlet/TabSelector#lastnodeclicked


With global population growth and general (albeit modest) increase in per capital consumption, overall
volume demanded will continue to increase, even while supply remains flat. The projected global supply
of tuna in 2030 (see Figure 42) reflects the recent trends in catch shown in Figure 43 above, where catches
of all principal tuna species peaked in 2003 or before, except for skipjack (FAO, 2015). At the same time,
aquaculture production of tuna as a potential shift in supply is projected to be negligible in 2030 (World
Bank, 2013). Hence, even though global tuna prices have been fairly stable in nominal terms and decreasing
in real terms since the early 1990s (Miyake et al., 2010), the World Bank (2013) projected a modest increase
in the real price of tuna – 10 percent above 2010 levels – by 2030.

Food safety and price are expected to remain the priority of consumers, but growing consumer preferences
for sustainability (based on eco-labels) and traceability are expected to potentially reward first movers by
establishment of brand recognition, while over time constituting barriers to entry rather than price premiums
(Conservation International, 2015). Eco-labels are likely to be a requirement of many markets for tuna
products in the future, with little difference on price in the long run (Conservation International, 2015).

The Canned Tuna Market. The supply of skipjack as raw material for production of canned tuna as a global
commodity is increasingly dependent upon the WCPO, as catch levels in other regions have remained
relatively flat over the last decade (see Figure 44 below).
            Figure 44. Trends in Global Skipjack Tuna Catch, by
   MT Catch
                                 Location
  2,500,000

  2,000,000

  1,500,000

  1,000,000

    500,000

           -
                 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                                               WCPO                       Other Regions

Sources: FFA, 2015; IATTC, 2015; IOTC, 2015; ICCAT, 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                   72
This reflects to some extent the size and status of the resource base in other regions, which in some cases
is reaching maximum sustainable limits, as shown by Figure 45 below.

                              Figure 45. Biological Status of Global Skipjack Tuna Stocks

                                                       SKIPJACK TUNA




                                                                                                                       Overfishing
                                                  Overfishing
                                     1.2
                                                                                 ICCAT E
                                      1
                                                                    IATTC
                                     0.8
                            F/FMSY




                                     0.6                                      IOTC
                                                                                        ICCAT W
                                                                                                        WCPO
                                     0.4

                                     0.2

                                      0
                                           0            0.5                  1                 1.5                 2
                                                                        SB/SBMSY

                                 Note:      ICCAT = International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (East Atlantic &
                                            West Atlantic stocks)
                                            IATTC = Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
                                            IOTC = Indian Ocean Tuna Commission
                                 Sources: ISSF (2015), ICCAT (2015), IOTC (2015), Rice et al (2014b) 20


Given the size and status of skipjack resources around the world, the total supply would not be expected to
increase significantly by 2040, with the possible exception of modest increases from the WCPO in the short
term resulting from continued growth in fishing effort – though in order to maintain the region’s stock at a
level that can sustain maximum yields, scientists have recommended catch levels should grow no further.
Similarly, the WCPO’s position as the biggest supplier of skipjack for canned tuna would not be expected
to decline, if current trends continue.

Global demand for canned tuna has increased in the last few decades, as a relatively cheap but price-
sensitive source of protein. The largest markets for canned tuna in the first half of 2015 were the United
States, Western Europe (particularly Spain, Italy, France, the United Kingdom) and Egypt (FAO Globefish,
2015). The traditional or ‘mature’ markets in the U.S. and Western Europe have been relatively flat in
recent years, while emerging markets in the Middle East and North Africa grew in the first half of 2015
(FAO Globefish, 2015).

More specifically in terms of the U.S. market, the trend in consumption (one of the largest and longest-
running canned tuna markets) can be seen in Figure 46 below:




20
       ISSF:    http://iss-foundation.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2015/03/ISSF-2015-03-Status-of-the-Stocks-Feb-2015.pdf;         ICCAT:
https://www.iccat.int/Documents/SCRS/ExecSum/SKJ_EN.pdf; IOTC: http://www.iotc.org/documents;
                                                                                                                                          73
 Lbs/per capita      Figure 46. Trend in US Canned Tuna Consumption*
 4.5
 4.0
 3.5
 3.0
 2.5
 2.0
 1.5
 1.0
 0.5
 0.0
        1962
        1964
        1966
        1968
        1970
        1972
        1974
        1976
        1978
        1980
        1982
        1984
        1986
        1988
        1990
        1992
        1994
        1996
        1998
        2000
        2002
        2004
        2006
        2008
        2010
        2012
* Per capital pounds of canned tuna available – as a proxy for national consumption
Source: USDA (2015)


As shown above, per capita consumption of canned tuna in the U.S. has fallen by over 40 percent since the
peak in 1989 of 1.77 kg/capita, to 1.05 kg/capita in 2013 – the lowest level since 1966 (USDA, 2015).
Given population growth, total volume of consumption has lagged behind per capita consumption, but
followed the same trend, peaking in 2000 at 450,000 metric tons and declining since to 330,000 metric tons
consumed in 2013 – the lowest level since 1982 (USDA, 2015). As such, U.S. industry representatives
describe the canned tuna purchasing behavior of the consumers as being in ‘precipitous decline’: household
penetration has declined from 68.1 percent in 2009 to 62.1 percent at the close of 2013 (Havice et al., 2014).
This declining appetite for canned tuna in the U.S. is reported to reflect changing diets and perceptions of
food, as the country has shifted away from canned foods such as packaged, pre-cooked tuna (Washington
Post, 2014). Reasons cited for this shift include the health concern that surfaced in the 1970s, spread in the
1980s and has persisted since, that tuna contains unsafe levels of methylmercury, as well as concerns in the
1980s about dolphin by-catch that led to shifts in harvesting practices and the promotion of government-
defined ‘dolphin-safe’ labels (Washington Post, 2014).

Over this time period imports have played a growing role in meeting demand: between 1979 and 1982 the
U.S. imported an average of 27,700 mt of canned tuna annually, but by 2009 this figure had grown to
138,000 mt of canned tuna in brine and 31,000 mt of tuna in pouches (Havice et al., 2014). In the period
2008-2013, annual US imports of all tuna products averaged 283,963 mt and US$1.397 billion in value
(NMFS 2014). Thailand is the clear leader in supplying the U.S. market in volume of canned and pouched
product, supplying 52 percent of all imports (NMFS 2014). The U.S. also offers an important market for
pre-cooked loins. Since a second plant that processes loins into cans opened, the volume of loin imports
has grown. In 2007, the U.S. imported 43,800mt of pre-cooked loins (Globefish 2010). That number jumped
to 69,792 mt in 2013 (NMFS 2013). Pacific Island Countries export on average less than 15,000 mt/year of
loins to the US market between 2008 and 2013 (NMFS 2014).

While the dollar retail sales of tuna products increased between 2006 (US$1.4 billion) and 2013 (US$1.685
billion), tuna volume retail sales have remained relatively flat or in decline, indicating that the US market
can be considered ‘mature’ (Havice et al, 2014). In 2009, 29.2 million cases of canned tuna were sold in
the U.S. retail market, 21 while only 27.2 million cases were sold in 2013 (Melbourne 2014). The discrepancy
between dollar and volume sales reflects the increasing price of canned tuna, and in turn of raw material

21
     Data excludes food service industry.
                                                                                                           74
prices. Between 2001 and 2007, average canned retail prices in grocery outlets increased 21% to US$ 1.15
per can (Havice et al., 2014). 22

Canned tuna remains a key retail category in the broader U.S. market. It is the second most popular seafood
product. Shelf stable tuna sales represent 74 percent in value and 72 percent in volume of all shelf-stable
seafood products (Havice et al., 2014). Tuna is heavily promoted to drive volume sales in supermarkets. In
2007, 46 percent of all tuna was sold on promotion (Hamilton et al., 2011). 23 Several market outlets compete
for tuna purchases, driving steep competition in which traditional retailers have lost sale shares to
superstores such as WalMart and various warehouse clubs. From 2001 to 2005, shelf stable tuna sales were
down 4.6 percent in traditional grocery stores while super-center tuna sales were up 68.8 percent and
warehouse clubs up 15.6 percent (Hamilton et al., 2011). Meanwhile, consumer interest in lower cost
private label product is gradually deepening. In 2009, private label accounted for 20 percent of tuna dollar
sales, compared with 14.5 percent in 2005 (Hamilton et al., 2011). Despite gains made by private label, the
‘big three’ brands still command upwards of 77 percent of volume sales in US retail markets (Bumble Bee,
Chicken of the Sea and Starkist), which is largely differentiated into light meat and white meat (albacore)
segments (Hamilton et al., 2011). In addition to tuna in cans, there is a small, but profitable market segment
of tuna in pouches, most commonly a premium product. This market segment has remained stagnant in
recent years.

The increasing market share of the largest retailers and growing private label sales illustrates the highly
competitive and low price dynamic that dominates the U.S. market. Price pressure from supermarket
buyers, along with competition between processors in Southeast Asia, Latin America and elsewhere
explains a reported 68 percent decline in real prices for light meat product between 1980 and 2004 (Havice
et al, 2014). This trend is significant to Pacific Island producers seeking to access the US market because it
translates into lower profit margins for suppliers lower down the supply chain, such as firms canning or
loining for brands and private labels (Havice et al., 2014). In addition to the low price dynamic, the US
market volume is flat, leading industry observers to refer to the ‘low margin’ or ‘lousy’ U.S. market (Havice
et al, 2014). Over the last five years, branded tuna labels have continued to launch category-wide and brand
specific campaigns that emphasize the health and convenience of tuna products, though growth has not
emerged (Havice et al., 2014). In some cases, price premiums may be available for niche products, though
U.S. consumers’ familiarity with low cost tuna products – particularly in cans – might limit this possibility.

The U.S. market is expressing some interest in ‘sustainable’ products, with several major retailers making
commitments to purchase sustainably sourced seafood. However, given that the U.S. market for such
products is only beginning to evolve, there is no estimate of its size and value available. Sustainability
commitments can come in two forms, either commitments to sustainabilty labels (e.g. MSC eco-label), or
internal procurement specifications (e.g. FAD-free or pole and line caught). The sustainability market
segment is one that is likely to grow, though there are constraints for this market segment. First, it is not
clear that such products will be sold at a price premium. Second, in shelf-stable sector, realizing such
commitments is limited by lack of supply of product that meets sustainability specifications. Third, this
market segment is relatively small and new, which, as noted, limits the publically available data on the
overall size and value of the ‘sustainability’ market. Anecdotally, there is some evidence of the development
of a growing sustainability segment of the shelf-stable tuna market. For example:
    • Tri Marine has introduced it’s ‘Ocean Naturals’ label, which labels product according to specific
         species, gear type (e.g. FAD-free) and markets it as ‘responsibly caught’. 24
    • Bumble Bee, in association with WWF has launched its ‘Wild Selections’ range of MSC certified
         tuna.


22
   Note that this data reflects grocery outlets. Warehouse clubs and Walmart prices are likely lower.
23
   Excluding WalMart sales.
24
   See: http://www.oceannaturals.com
                                                                                                           75
    •    Club store, Costco, is in the process of introducing a chunk light meat producer under its private
         label (Kirkland) which is free-school caught and species specific (i.e. 100% skipjack, rather than
         yellowfin, bigeye or albacore).

Though there is growth in this segment, it is critical that PICs keep the opportunities associated with niche
products in perspective. As noted, in the short- to medium-term, it is unlikely that there will be a major shift
in which major brands and retailers make broad commitments to sustainable products, not least because of
the very limited volumes of eligible raw materials and the unwillingness to date of U.S. consumers to pay
premiums for shelf stable products (Havice et al., 2014).

While the U.S. market is significant in terms of its massive volume, it is stagnant and characterized by deep
price pressure and discounting. In all cases, while the size of the market makes is attractive to producers,
those producers must anticipate the very small margins necessary for product to be competitive in this
highly price sensitive market (Havice et al., 2014). It is not clear if and how the U.S. market will evolve to
offer producers higher margins for niche products or otherwise (Havice et al., 2014).

Over the last decade the Western European market has not exhibited the downward trend in consumption
seen in the U.S., but has remained relatively flat in both per capita consumption and volume imported
(EUMOFA, 2015; Conservation International, 2015), though with modest growth in prices and value as
shown in Figure 47 below. In 2014, the European Union imported some 560,000 tons of canned tuna, with
the average price of canned tuna from Thailand at 3.53 EU per kilogram (EUMOFA, 2015).

Figure 47. Values of processed tuna imports to the EU by main countries of origin and % variation 2014/2013




Source: EUMOFA (2015)


In 2002, the majority source of supply for the EU volume market for canned tuna shifted from domestic
production in favor of imports from non-EU countries. Behind this broad trend is significant losses in
market volume for canned tuna production based in France and Italy, but not for the major Spanish
processors which have successfully expanded their export markets in Italy and France (Hamilton et al.,
2011). Major trends for imported canned tuna over the ten year period 2000-2009 include the following:
    • Declining market volume between 2008 and 2009, contrary to predictions that it would continue to
        grow;
    • Continued growth in Spain’s exports to the EU import market, indicating that the current EU tariff
        regime on canned tuna successfully protects this country’s processing industry, a trend that could
        in the future present new market opportunities as tariff protections continue to decline;
    • Continued growth of share of EU imports by Thailand and the Philippines (the latter of whom
        recently gained market access under the GSP+ categorization); and
    • Canneries in small island states in the Indian Ocean have had variable success in profiting from the
        EU market (Hamilton et al., 2011).
                                                                                                              76
Per capita consumption of canned tuna is stabilizing in the principal EU15 markets and the EU is now
broadly considered to be a mature market for canned tuna (Hamilton et al., 2011). Eastern Europe has the
most probable growth potential, albeit from a very low baseline. Aside from emerging markets in Eastern
Europe, another area of growth is in product innovation where so-called ‘value added’ products offer
potential in terms of enhanced profitability, though the markets are likely to stay relatively small in the
future.

In terms of the Japanese market, for over two decades (mid-1980s to mid-2000s), canned tuna consumption
in Japan remained stable at around 100,000 mt/year (finished weight) (Hamilton et al., 2011). From 1995
to 2007, consumption had declined by almost 20% to 145,000 mt (around 1.6% per annum) (Hamilton et
al., 2011). The share of domestically produced canned tuna has also declined due to high production costs,
with increasing volumes of imports (mostly from Thailand and the Philippines) (Hamilton et al., 2011). At
best, Japanese canned tuna consumption can be expected to remain stagnant, but is more likely to continue
to decline over time. Domestic production of canned tuna will also continue to decrease, given increasing
competition faced from cheaper imports, particularly from Thailand (rather than products processed in
PICs).

While demand has been flat in the major markets in recent years, emerging markets are consuming more
of this relatively cheap source of animal protein, not just in the Middle East and North Africa, but also in
Brazil, Chile, Eastern Europe and Russia among others (FAO Globefish, 2015; Conservation International,
2015). Essentially, canned tuna is filling the same niche in emerging markets that it used to fill in developed
countries years ago, as an easy product to work with that can be stored for years (Conservation International,
2015). With demand for canned tuna unlikely to increase significantly in the U.S. and Europe in the future,
the focus of processors and exporters is expected to turn to these emerging markets (FAO Globefish, 2015).

In terms of the Chinese market, the volume of consumption to date has not been perceived to be significant.
Culturally, it is an unknown product and where it is known, it is not associated with either expensive tastes
or mass consumerism. The latter point is reinforced by a high cost per unit of protein relative to other
products. Industry sources believe that the main consumers of canned tuna in China at present are
foreigners, including foreign students who are used to eating it in their own country. In spite of these
attitudes, there are continuing and persistent efforts being made by both Thai and European canners to enter
and expand the market for canned tuna in China. These are efforts aimed at the long-term, with the goal of
tapping into changing tastes of a growing middle class. Early attempts to develop a market in China for
canned tuna were made by Century Canning of the Philippines, who began exporting to China in 1994 with
just one container load according to one source in the industry (Hamilton et al., 2011). In 2005, Thai Union
Frozen Products (TUF) invested $US4 million for a 50 percent stake in Century Union (Shanghai) Foods
Co. (Hamilton et al, 2011). The major impediment to increased consumption of canned tuna in China
appears to be consumer acceptance. Unlike tuna sashimi, which is perceived as a prestigious food well-
suited to situations where a degree of ostentation is desired, canned tuna is recognized as a utilitarian item.
That said, as Asian economies continue to grow, demand for tuna in general, and canned tuna products, is
expected to grow in China and also in India – where even marginal shifts in demand could have significant
impacts on the volume consumed (Conservation International, 2015).

In conclusion, demand for canned tuna is declining the U.S., flat in Western Europe, growing in a number
of emerging markets in the Middle East (e.g. Egypt, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates,
all of which do not have domestic canneries), North Africa and Latin America, and expected to grow in
Asia in the coming decades, as well as potentially Eastern Europe and South Africa. Of note, many of these
markets do not have domestic purse seine fleets, and may be expected to import products (Conservation
International, 2015). Similarly, in Middle Eastern markets there are not significant tariff barriers, nor
product traceability requirements.



                                                                                                            77
With the potential direction of supply likely to remain flat, and demand expected to slowly/steadily grow
albeit from shifting markets, the global price of skipjack for canning (taken as the Bangkok price where the
majority of the world’s canned tuna is produced) could also be expected to increase steadily to 2040.
However, canned tuna has extremely elastic pricing, where small increases drive disproportionately fewer
sales (Conservation International, 2015). Such price elasticity can make producers sensitive to increases in
supply and exert downward pressure on prices offered to harvesters/fleets operating in the WCPO and
providing access fees and value added to PICs. Canneries do maintain inventory and hence can build up
supply and reduce price accordingly. This certainly appears to have been the case in the last two years,
where the price has dropped significantly since 2013 in response to continued growth in catches in the
WCPO and hit a 6-year low in 2014 (FAO Globefish, 2015). In response, the World Tuna Purse Seine
Organization 25 decided to reduce fishing effort by 35 percent from May 15 to December 31 in 2015, which
did trigger a response from producers and a rebound in price (FAO Globefish, 2015).

Figure 48 below indicates the trend in nominal and real prices for skipjack in Bangkok over the last 15
years, and particularly the recent drop beginning in 2013:

Figure 48. 15-Year Trend in Nominal and Real Prices of Skipjack and Yellowfin in Thailand
               Trend in Nominal Processors' Price of Tuna Caught by Purse Seine
                                                 Skipjack        Yellowfin

     3,000

     2,500

     2,000

     1,500

     1,000

      500

         -
             1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
Source: FFA (2015)




25 In response to a drop in prices at the time, purse-seine owners organized in a World Tuna Purse Seine Organization (WTPO) in
March 2001, essentially functioning as a cartel of producers and adopting on a voluntary basis, self-limits on catches (Miyake et
al, 2010).

                                                                                                                             78
                 Tr en d in Real Pr o c esso r s' Pr ic e o f Tu n a Cau gh t b y Pu r se Sein e
  1,800

  1,600

  1,400

  1,200

  1,000

    800

    600

    400

    200

      -
           1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014

                      US 1997$/MT Skipjack in Thailand                   US 1997$/MT Yellowfin in Thailand

Source: adapted from FFA (2015), prices adjusted using U.S. Consumer Price Index


As nominal and real prices of skipjack in Thailand hit a six-year low in 2014 (the key marketplace where
global prices are formed (Miyake et al., 2010), catches and raw material produced from the WCPO hit a
new record, as shown in Figure 49 below. Typically the price of skipjack in Thailand reflects demand
rather than supply, and the specific relationship, or flexibility, between skipjack prices in Thailand and
WCPO catch has been estimated in the past at 0.52 – i.e. a 1 percent increase in the quantity of skipjack
supplied from the WCPO would result in a 0.52 percent fall in the Bangkok landing price (Miyake et al.,
2010).
        Figure 49. Trend in WCPO Skipjack Catch &
  MT Catch
                       Thailand Price
                                                              US$/MT
  2,500,000                                                      2,500
  2,000,000                                                      2,000
  1,500,000                                                      1,500
  1,000,000                                                      1,000
    500,000                                                      500
           -                                                     -
               1995     2000        2005       2010       2015

                  MT WCPO Purse Seine Catch of Skipjack
                  US$/MT Skipjack in Thailand
Source: FFA (2015)


Given that both consumers and Thai processors are price sensitive, increased supply of skipjack from
WCPO purse seine operators has not generated higher returns for this segment of the supply chain in recent
years, as the total value of harvests (Thailand price multiplied by the catch volume) has decreased even as
volume has increased (see Figure 50).




                                                                                                             79
    US$
              Figure 50. Trends in Delivered Value of WCPO Purse Seine Catch
   4,500,000,000
   4,000,000,000
   3,500,000,000
   3,000,000,000
   2,500,000,000
   2,000,000,000
   1,500,000,000
   1,000,000,000
     500,000,000
                  -



                      Other      PNA + Tokelau        Philippines      Indonesia         High Seas

 Source: FFA, 2015; Delivered value = WCPO catch x Thailand price for unprocessed fish


 Given the price elasticity of canned tuna and the expected slow (but perhaps steady) growth in demand as
 traditional markets stagnate and new markets emerge in Asia, the Middle East and Latin America among
 others, increased returns to purse seining in PIC waters for canned tuna are unlikely to come from increasing
 catch volumes, but rather catch values. The direction of real canned tuna prices may be expected to slowly
 increase to 2040, but remain sensitive to supply volumes (which may generate greater returns at lower
 levels). At the same time, retailers are expected to continue to diversify skipjack products in the traditional
 markets, for example by offering flavored pouches or vacuum-sealed tuna – particularly if demand begins
 to grow faster than supply and canned tuna prices increase (but sales decrease given elasticity) (FAO
 Globefish, 2015; Conservation International, 2015).

 In addition to skipjack, prices for albacore in canned tuna have declined in recent years, again owing to
 combination of stagnant demand in the U.S. and expanded supply from increased longline catch (notably
 from the entrance of the ‘mini-longline’ vessels from China and increased effort by other existing fleets).
 For example, the Chinese longline fleet has increased from 23 vessels in 1990 to 286 by 2012 (SPC, 2013,
 in Gillett, 2014).

1997 US$
              Figure 51. Trend in Real Thailand Import Price of Albacore
  3000

  2500

  2000

  1500

  1000

    500

      0



 Source: FFA (2015), prices adjusted by U.S. Consumer Price Index
                                                                                                             80
The Fresh Tuna Market (including Sashimi). Although Japan has always been the world’s largest market
for fresh tuna, most of which is consumed as sashimi, imports have declined in the past six years (FAO
Globefish, 2015). With demand stagnant in Japan in recent years as the younger population seeks other
protein alternatives (Conservation International, 2015), the U.S. has emerged as the second largest market
for fresh tuna (FAO Globefish, 2015). Nonetheless, for the time being, Japan is the market for at least a
quarter of the world’s non-canned tuna, and a major driver in the price of yellowfin (see Figure 53).

  1997 US$       Figure 52. Trend in Real Japan Import Price of Yellowfin
  9,000
  8,000
  7,000
  6,000
  5,000
  4,000
  3,000
  2,000
  1,000
       -



                             Longline (frozen)             Longline (fresh) export

Source: FFA (2015), prices adjusted by U.S. Consumer Price Index


Again, similar to canned tuna, while the traditional market is expected to decline in the future, fresh tuna
imports to the U.S. are growing, while such higher-value products can be expected to see growth in new
markets as the global population grows, notably China and other Asian markets.

Role of the global economy. A number of global economic drivers can impact the fixed and operating costs
along WCPO tuna fishery value chains, notably in terms of harvesting production costs for fishing fleets.
For both purse seine and longline fleets, the single largest cost component is fuel – estimated to constitute
44 percent of longline vessel operating costs and 25 percent of purse seine costs, though considerably higher
in some cases (Conservation International, 2015; Miyake et al, 2010) – which is determined globally as the
aggregated of a number of different forces. This is essentially the major variable influencing the operating
costs of the harvesting segment of the value chain (Miyake et al, 2010), notably for a longliner which may
on average use over three times the amount of fuel to harvest a metric ton of albacore than a purse seiner
would to harvest a ton of skipjack (Gillett, 2014). As a key driver of operating costs, the cost of crude oil
has decreased in recent year, but is current projected by the U.S. Energy Information Administration to
slowly and steadily increase to 2040 in the ‘reference case’ scenario, from an annual price of US$55.62 in
2015 to US$141.28 per barrel for Brent Spot, and from US$52.72 to US$135.67 per barrel for West Texas
Intermediate Spot, in 2013 US$ (US Energy Information Administration, 2015). This trend is consistent
with the World Bank’s most recent forecast to 2025 (World Bank, 2015).




                                                                                                          81
 Figure 53. Projected Percentage Increase in the Price of Crude Oil, from 2016




As shown in Figure 53, crude oil prices are projected to increase roughly 100 percent in real terms by 2040
in a relatively steady but significant rise (U.S. Energy Information Administration, 2015). Fuel costs can
be expected to put continued pressure on longline fleets, particularly the distant water longline fleets, even
as catch rates are declining.




                                                                                                           82
                                     Key considerations for the future
A brief summary of recent trends and available projections of the direction of change in global tuna markets
and key economic drivers of tuna fishing fleets suggest some key considerations for PICs:

Trends in supply:
   • Global catches of all principal tuna species peaked in 2003 or before, except for skipjack from the
        WCPO. With scientists recommending that catches of skipjack in the WCPO not be further increased,
        the world is likely approaching the limits of the supply that can be sustained, and significant
        sustainable increases would not be expected.
   • Supply is expected to continue to depend heavily on the WCPO, whose share of global supply would
        be expected to at least be comparable to current levels if not higher, given the status of the stocks in
        other regions.

Trends in demand:
   • Population growth is one of the key factors that can drive a shift in demand curves, and the global
        population is projected to grow to 9.6 billion by 2050. With population growth, seafood consumption
        is expected to rise, notably as an ‘animal protein gap’ opens up between demand and available supply.
        China is expected to increasingly influence global fish markets, accounting for 38 percent of food
        fish consumption by 2030. Even a relatively small percentage shift in consumption of tuna in China
        or similarly India, could have a significant impact on the volume demanded and price.
   • Consumer demand for sustainably sourced seafood products, including tuna, will continue to increase,
        particularly in European markets – notably for ‘FAD-free’ and ‘pole and line’ tuna, though volumes
        are likely to remain relatively small.
   • Canned tuna is price sensitive in consumer markets, with slow (but perhaps steady) growth in demand
        expected as traditional markets stagnate and new markets emerge in Asia, the Middle East and Latin
        America among others. At the same time, retailers are expected to continue to diversify skipjack
        products in the traditional markets, for example by offering flavored pouches or vacuum-sealed tuna
        – particularly if demand begins to grow faster than supply and canned tuna prices increase (but sales
        decrease given elasticity). Processors’ price for tuna in Thailand has typically been responsive to
        consumer demand more than supply changes from fishing fleets (with the exception of increased fuel
        costs), but current supply levels may be playing a greater role in the price and changing flexibility.
   • Demand for sashimi and other fresh tuna products is expected to continue to decline in Japan, while
        the U.S. and other markets show growth.

Trends in Global Price:
   • While price is affected by a range of variables over time, the direction of real canned tuna prices may
        be expected to slowly increase to 2040, but remain sensitive to supply volumes (which may generate
        greater returns at lower levels).
   • Similarly, the direction of fresh tuna prices can be expected to increase slowly over time, given the
        combination of population growth and supply constraints.
   • Recently, tuna prices in aggregate were projected to increase modestly by 10 percent in real terms
        from 2010 levels to 2030, and that trend could be expected to continue to 2040.
   • Eco-labels and product traceability are likely the future for tuna products, but rather as a requirement
        of the marketplace than having any impact on price.
   • The market power of large retailers in the mature markets will likely continue to increase in the future,
        potentially exerting downward pressures on prices down the supply chain.

Trends in Harvesting Costs:
   • The single largest cost item for harvesting operations is fuel, with crude oil prices projected to double
        in real-terms from 2016 to 2040.

                                                                                                          83
Direct Driver #3: Science and Technology

This section focuses on: (i) changes in harvesting technology, and specifically the potential changes in the
efficiency of fishing vessels, gear and methods; and (ii) changes in fisheries monitoring, enforcement and
traceability technology, and specifically the potential benefits that PICs may derive from technology
advancements to simultaneously enhance enforcement capacity and reduce costs.

Harvesting technology. From the 1950s to the early 2000s, tuna fishing technology has changed in a number
of ways to increase efficiency, including:
    • Continuous improvement in fishing gear and procedures (net or line materials and gear
        construction, line/net casting and hauling);
    • Improvements in fishing vessels (motorization and increasing engine power, construction materials
        and increasing length and carrying capacity);
    • Improvements in navigational instruments (wide use of satellite positioning since the mid-1970s);
    • Improvement in freezer systems on longliners (blast freezing replaced ice wells in 1953) and the
        start of distant water fishing;
    • Introduction of ‘super freezers’ in the 1960s which allowed for the production of sashimi-quality
        tuna by distant water longliners;
    • Deployment of deep longlines in the 1970s to target bigeye;
    • Invention of the power block resulting in a rapid increase in the number of modern purse seiners;
    • Rapid increases in fish holding capacity beginning in the 1960s and continuing to the present;
    • Various improvements in gear and procedures such as net pursing, catch brailing and storage,
        conservation of large catches through handling and freezing techniques, and rapid unloading
        beginning in the 1960s and continuing to the present;
    • Improvements in searching and catch rates through the use of helicopters, bird radar, sonar, global
        positioning system (GPS) and GPS radio buoys; and
    • Establishment of FAD fishing in the 1990s (Miyake et al, 2010).

During this time period, longline fishing efficiency was essentially maximized in the 1990s, although there
have been some technological improvements since that time – including greater freezer power and capacity
(Miyake et al, 2010), and more recently lighter vessels such as used by the fleet from China. For purse
seine vessels, catch rates have been growing, and combined with high capital costs and deprecation have
contributed to less efficient vessels exiting the fleet over time. New vessel construction has continued in
recent years, in some fleets including helicopter spotters. In general, the purse seine fleets can be expected
to continue to advance harvesting technology (e.g. nets, storage, FADs, etc.) (McCoy et al., 2015)

One area that has received particular attention in recent years and can be expected to increasingly be the
subject of research, is the development of new technologies for purse seining that can reduce by-catch on
drifting FADs. From 2000 to 2009, 52 percent of the skipjack catch in the WCPO was taken with FADs
(Daghorn and Restrepo, 2011), becoming an increasing cause of juvenile bigeye mortality (who are
associated with skipjack schools under FADs) and contributor to overfishing of the stock. As mentioned
previously, some 41 percent of the bigeye catch in the WCPO was via purse seining in 2014, where nets
are set around FADs. For this reason, a number of companies and organizations have initiated research on
alternative purse seine gears and methods to reduce the by-catch of bigeye, including re-designing FADs,
the use of sonar buoys to detect juvenile bigeye around FADs, and various acoustic and visual means to
assess species composition of fish aggregations (ISSF, 2015b).

To some extent, while technology advancements and innovation more broadly can be almost impossible to
predict, given past trends above, there is certainly reason for optimism in expecting continued efficiency
gains in harvesting technology in the region, including for enhanced product quality (e.g. alternatives to
brine-freezing tuna, even canning on board in larger vessels). For example, a company in Seattle has

                                                                                                           84
developed molecular ice technology (nano-ice) to produce microscopic ice particles in a flow format
(essentially to freeze water like liquid ice), in order to freeze fish faster and preserve the flesh at a higher
grade with more nutrients retained (World Fishing and Aquaculture, 2015), with costs likely to become
competitive in the near future.

However, the development and uptake of such technology and improved efficiency is not completely
exogenous to the WCPO, but will to some extent depend upon the policy incentives in place. For example,
McClurg (2014) writes that a fishery access framework which provides security to companies that long-
term access to sustainable fishing opportunities will be available, can help reduce the risk of not just of their
harvesting operations, but also the risk they transmit into other investments along the value chain, e.g. can
today’s transaction to purchase raw material for processing be repeated for the same quantity, quality or
price, or even with the same counterpart. Essentially, the more that future operations and transactions can
be anticipated as a result of secure access to sustainable supply, the lower the risk to companies and the
greater the incentive to innovate and enhance efficiency (McClurg, 2014). The benefits of a secure access
regime that ensures a sustainable supply of fish can be felt throughout the entire value chain – anywhere
fish or components of fish are a valuable factor of production – and hence encourages investment in
technology development to enhance efficiency (McClurg, 2014).

In conclusion, given past trends, purse seine fleets can be expected to continue to develop technology to
improve efficiency including to reduce by-catch, assuming that economic incentives from secure access
remain in place in the WCPO. For longline fleets, similar advances can be expected as shown by the recent
fleet from China, but these may depend upon the return of incentives and profitability to the WCPO longline
fisheries.

Lastly, although not related to harvesting technology, developments in the global aquaculture sector could
have an impact upon WCPO tuna fisheries in the future if farmed replacements for wild-caught tuna were
introduced. To date, global production of farmed Bluefin tuna has reached an estimated 35,000 metric tons
in 2014, with some potential to exert downward pressure on prices of bigeye and yellowfin tuna for the
sashimi market (FAO Globefish, 2015). At the same time, the first attempt to farm bigeye and yellowfin
tuna in Mexico has been unsuccessful due to a high mortality of juveniles, linked to feeding issues, and has
resulted in commercial farming of these species halting for the time being (FAO Globefish, 2015).

Fisheries monitoring and surveillance technology. Enforcement is costly (North, 1990), particularly in the
case of the rules governing fisheries throughout the WCPO – though relatively little data and analysis is
currently available on the estimated current levels of illegal tuna fishing taking place, or its economic
impacts for PICs.

With the introduction of satellite-based vessel monitoring systems, PICs can now track the movements of
fishing vessels licensed to fish in their waters, via a system maintained by FFA. This monitoring is
supplemented by human observation (i.e. ‘observers’) on all purse seine vessels operating in the region.
PIC waters are vast, with monitoring of all fishing activity costly and difficult, hence the 2015 Regional
Roadmap for Sustainable Fisheries prioritizes continued efforts to reduce illegal fishing through
investments in cooperative monitoring and surveillance programs as one of its six strategies (Pacific Islands
Forum Secretariat, 2015). Fortunately, assuming that such investments are made, a number of monitoring
and surveillance technologies are developing that could supplement observer efforts and likely reduce
enforcements costs over the next 25 years, including:

    •   Continued expansion of satellite tracking: the vessel monitoring system maintained by FFA shows
        the signals of fishing vessels that transmit their location as required by regulation, however vessels
        that do not comply cannot be viewed. Fortunately, systems are developing that can extract signals
        sent by vessels to other satellite-based systems for safety and navigation purposes, as well as
        combine other information systems to track movements of almost all vessels operating in a
                                                                                                              85
            country’s waters. For example, Pew Charitable Trusts and Satellite Applications Catapult have
            developed a system for officials to integrate satellite tracking with other sources of information
            such as fishing vessel databases and oceanographic data (Pew, 2015). Google, Oceana, and
            SkyTruth have developed a tool that will capture and publicly display satellite feeds from
            Automatic Identification System (AIS) data – a system used by many ocean-going vessels— and
            classify the vessels’ movements as “fishing” or “non-fishing” (Global Fishing Watch, 2015). Given
            these developments, in the future PIC officials might view signals of all fishing vessels in their
            waters via FFA’s platform, with data extracted from a range of systems to ensure near-universal
            coverage.

        •   Use of unmanned aircraft systems (i.e. ‘drones’) for patrols: The technology for unmanned aircraft
            systems (UAS) has advanced quickly in recent years, with small crafts capable of traveling long
            distances to collect large volumes of data from even the most remote locations. For example, UAS
            have been used recently in South Africa to monitor for poaching of rhinos, capable of sending real-
            time information up to 30 kilometers (Moe, 2014), and some universities have begun to open
            research and training facilities for use of UAS in marine science and conservation – including
            analyzing marine debris in remote locations, monitoring endangered species and their habitats,
            monitoring effects of climate change and sea level rise, and following fishing fleets and stocks
            (Johnston, 2015). Such systems could in theory be used from various regional bases and reduce the
            need for costly sea patrols, perhaps in conjunction with smaller fleets of PIC patrol vessels
            responding when data collected requires boarding or interception, operating under the Niue
            Subsidiary Agreement. As such, in conjunction with expanded satellite tracking through FFA’s
            system, small hubs for UAS and PIC sea surface patrol vessels to respond on demand in order to
            intercept vessels committing infractions, could reduce the need for and costs of fisheries
            surveillance in the region.

        •   Electronic monitoring systems: Electronic logbooks are already phasing out paper logbooks as the
            record of fishing catch and effort in the WCPO, and before 2040 the entire fleets would be expected
            to use electronic, real-time reporting. Similarly, video camera technology has been increasingly
            tested for installation on vessels and recording of catch amounts and composition, en lieu of
            observers (Lowman et al, 2013). Although still in its infancy, electronic monitoring has been trialed
            to record catch and by-catch on vessels fishing for Atlantic Bluefin tuna (NOAA, 2015) and such
            trials are beginning now in the WCPO (McCoy et al, 2015), and could even make human observers
            obsolete by 2040. This could have significant implications for the longline fisheries, where fleets
            with thousands of boats whose conditions and duration of trips make observer coverage practically
            impossible.
                                         Key considerations for the future
Harvesting technology is expected to continue to enhance efficiency.
   • From the 1950s to the early 2000s, tuna fishing technology has changed in a number of ways to increase
       efficiency.
   • Purse seine fleets can be expected to continue to enhance efficiency, including to reduce by-catch on FADs,
       provided that economic incentives remain in place.
   • For longline fleets, efficiency was essentially maximized in the 1990s, and the direction of future efficiency gains
       may depend upon the return of incentives and profitability to the WCPO longline fisheries.
   • In addition to improved efficiency, in both the purse seine and longline fleets, technology developments offer
       promise to enhance quality, for example through new freezing technology.

Fisheries monitoring and surveillance technology significantly reduces enforcement costs
With sufficient investment by PICs, a number of monitoring and surveillance technologies are expected to reduce
enforcements costs over the next 25 years, including continued expansion of satellite tracking of fishing vessels
drawing data from a wider range of systems; use of unmanned aircraft systems for patrols; and electronic monitoring
systems of fishing catch and effort.
                                                                                                           86
Indirect Driver #1: Demographic Change

The population in Pacific Island countries and territories is estimated to increase from an estimated 10.8
million people in 2015 (UN Desa, 2015), to roughly 15 million in 2035 (Bell et al, 2011), as shown in Table
11. Growth rates are of course not uniform throughout the region, and are highest in Melanesia, while some
of the smaller islands and territories are actually declining due to emigration (Bell et al, 2011). Throughout
the region, rapid urbanization is expected - in 25 years one third of the population in Melanesia, one half in
Polynesia and three quarters in Micronesia will live in urban areas (Gillett, 2014).

Table 12. Project Population Growth in Pacific Island Countries and Territories to 2035

 Pacific Island Country or Territory                                 2015 Est. Population   2035 Projection
 Melanesia
 Fiji                                                                892,000                977,600
 New Caledonia                                                       263,000                322,538
 PNG                                                                 7,619,000              10,822,300
 Solomon Islands                                                     584,000                969,900
 Vanuatu                                                             265,000                400,033
 Micronesia
 FSM                                                                 104,000                105,300
 Guam                                                                170,000                250,400
 Kiribati                                                            112,000                144,600
 Marshall Islands                                                    53,000                 62,700
 Nauru                                                               10,000                 14,400
 CNMI                                                                55,000                 76,200
 Palau                                                               21,000                 22,700
 Polynesia
 American Samoa                                                      56,000                 87,300
 Cook Islands                                                        21,000                 16,900
 French Polynesia                                                    283,000                330,800
 Niue                                                                2,000                  1,200
 Samoa                                                               193,000                202,000
 Tokelau                                                             1,000                  1,200
 Tonga                                                               106,000                115,000
 Tuvalu                                                              10,000                 12,800
 Wallis and Futuna                                                   13,000                 13,600
 Total                                                               10,800,000             14,949,471
Sources: 2015 estimates: UN Desa; 2035 estimates: Bell et al, 2011


Fish is a cornerstone of food security for many Pacific communities, providing 51-94 percent of animal
protein in the diet in rural areas, and 27 – 83 percent in urban areas, across the region (PNG is the exception,
where the large inland population generally has much less access to fish) (Bell et al, 2011). Most of this
fish is supplied by the coastal fisheries (Bell et al, 2011). Currently many of the stocks supporting coastal
fisheries are overfished, and overall the opportunities to increase production from these fisheries are limited
(Bell et al, 2011). With projected population growth in the region, as well as urbanization, fishing effort
and pressure on the coastal fisheries is expected to grow, while a gap between the fish they supply and
demand will grow – raising the cost of fish and decreasing household consumption (Bell et al, 2011). For a
number of countries and territories, this food fish gap is expected grow by 2035, including American
Samoa, Fiji, Guam, Nauru, CNMI, PNG, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Vanuatu, due to population growth
alone, and will only be further exacerbated by the projected impacts of climate change. Many of these
countries will need to supply an additional 20 to 30 kg of tuna per person per year by 2035 to supply the

                                                                                                             87
fish recommended for good nutrition, though it should be noted that some – such as PNG – are currently
below consumption levels recommended (Bell et al, 2011). Hence, the food fish gap illustrated here is not
actual, but rather the gap between recommended consumption levels and projected supply at the expected
future population level.

Nonetheless, Table 13 below from Bell et al. (2011) indicates a concern for food security and nutrition in
the region, as the population grows while supply from coastal fisheries likely remains constrained.
Additionally, climate change impacts are expected to place additional stresses on coral reef systems and
their capacity to support fisheries (Gillett, 2014).

Table 13. Projected Gap between Supply and Recommended Fish Consumption Levels in 2035
 Country             Gap in fish needed for good nutrition per person per year (kg/person/year)
 PNG                 27
 Solomon Islands     7
 Vanuatu             25
 Guam                32
 Nauru               34
 American Samoa      22
Source: Bell et al, 2011


Again, as mentioned previously, many if not all of these PICs are currently consuming fish at levels
significantly below those needed for good nutrition, such that the gap in Table 13 should be seen as
theoretical rather than actual. That said, studies such as Bell et al (2011) have noted that if current levels of
fish consumption are to be maintained in Pacific Island countries and territories given projections of
population growth, urbanization and impacts from climate change, than tuna will need to help fill the gap
– and hence local demand for use of the region’s tuna resources would grow.

Currently, small-scale fishers take only a tiny fraction of tuna in the WCPO, and of the numerous attempts
to encourage increased small-scale harvests, one of the few that have been successful has been the use of
inshore FADs (Gillett, 2014). Few countries currently have publicly-funded networks of inshore FADs
(Gillett, 2014), but active and well-managed programs may likely be needed in order to for tuna to help fill
the projected food fish gap in 2040. Additionally, greater retention of the roughly 20,700 mt of purse seine
by-catch (not including bigeye) could be part of the solution in key transshipment hubs where the population
(and hence demand) is relatively large, e.g. Solomon Islands (Noro) and PNG (Rabaul) – given that
currently the WCPO has the lowest retention rate of tuna by-catch of the major tuna fisheries (Lewis, 2014).

                                        Key considerations for the future
     •     The population throughout the region is expected to grow by almost 50 percent by 2035, though not
           uniformly across countries and territories.
     •     Throughout the region, rapid urbanization is expected - in 25 years one third of the population in
           Melanesia, one half in Polynesia and three quarters in Micronesia will live in urban areas
     •     Most of the food fish in the region is supplied by fully or overfished coastal fisheries, with
           population growth, urbanization and impacts from climate change expected to put more pressure on
           these resources.
     •     For a number of countries and territories, including PNG, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, Guam,
           Nauru and American Samoa, a gap is expected by 2035 between recommended levels of
           consumption, and what the coastal fisheries are expected to supply.
     •     In these countries, a viable option may be to ensure that some portion of the production from the
           tuna fisheries are utilized for local food fish. To date, the use of inshore FADs has shown
           considerable success in supporting small-scale tuna fisheries. Greater retention of purse seine by-
           catch (not including bigeye) may also contribute towards a solution, for ports or transshipment hubs
           with relatively large nearby populations (e.g. PNG, Solomon Islands).
                                                                                                              88
Indirect Driver #2: External Governance

This section recognizes that external governance measures will drive outcomes from the WCPO tuna
fishery in the coming decades as well, notably preferential trade regimes, foreign fishing subsidies and the
decisions of the WCPFC.

Preferential trade regimes. Currently key processing centers in Pacific Island countries enjoy preferential
access to the European market, notably tuna products from PNG and the Solomon Islands can be exported
duty free – in comparison to a 24 percent tariff on canned tuna from Thailand. Additionally, Palau, FSM
and RMI also have limited preferential access to the U.S. market. The trade preferences have in essence
been a requirement to allow processors in PNG and the Solomon Islands to compete with canned tuna
produced in Thailand at lower cost. Globally trade preferences have been eroding and the efforts under the
World Trade Organization while moribund are expected to remain relevant (Bagwell et al, 2015), and
though certainly slower for fragile states like PICs, it seems more likely than not that such preferences will
not exist in their current form in 2040, if at all.

Foreign fishing subsidies. Despite significant international attention since the 1990s (e.g. Milazzo, 1998;
Virdin, 2001), subsidies in the fishing sector have persisted, now the subject of one of the targets of the 14th
Sustainable Development Goal to conserve the oceans, which aims “by 2020, prohibit certain forms of
fisheries subsidies which contribute to overcapacity and overfishing, eliminate subsidies that contribute to
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing and refrain from introducing new such subsidies, recognizing
that appropriate and effective special and differential treatment for developing and least developed countries
should be an integral part of the World Trade Organization fisheries subsidies negotiation” (United Nations,
2015).

In the WCPO, subsidies in the harvesting segment of the tuna fisheries value chain, notably for construction
and operation of vessels, has had an impact. For example in the southern albacore longline fishery, Chinese
vessels are reportedly heavily subsidized (e.g. for shipbuilding, fuel costs, etc.) and able to operate even
when it is unprofitable for others to do so given declining catch rates (Gillett, 2014). While information
and data are often difficult to obtain, recent studies (e.g. Sumaila et al, 2010; 2012) suggest that global
levels of fishing subsidies have continued at current levels. Given the trends to date, even with the target in
SDG 14, it seems likely to consider that foreign subsidies to the harvesting segment of the value chains
(including vessel construction) may still be a feature of WCPO tuna fisheries in 2040.

WCPFC Policies and Measures. A brief discussion on the WCPFC is included here in the context of
external governance drivers, considering that while PICs are members of the organization and certainly
have influence, the decisions taken currently involve 26 member countries, 7 participating territories and 7
cooperating non-members, and are at least partially outside of their control. PIC representatives have
expressed frustration with the lack of consensus at the Commission (see Gillett, 2014), and most recently
the 12th meeting left PICs voicing frustration (FFA, 2015c). Although the pace of decision-making is slower
than PICs have wished, the number of measures adopted to date (see Annex 1) indicates that consensus is
possible (and in many cases has followed or endorsed sub-regional decisions and efforts taken by PICs
themselves). The United Nations Fish Stocks Agreement under which the Commission was established,
obliges states to adopt measures ‘to ensure long-term sustainability of straddling fish stocks and highly
migratory fish stocks and promote the objective of their optimum utilization” (United Nations, 1995). As
such, questions over harvest limits for WCPO tuna stocks, notably rebuilding the bigeye stock, will continue
to be in front of the WCPFC in the years ahead, though history to date suggests that PICs will lead resource
management efforts through sub-regional cooperation, with the Commission to follow. The Fish Stocks
Agreement and the WCPFC’s Convention also require the Commission to ensure that sustainability
measures do not place a disproportionate burden on developing states, though to date negotiations have not
led to an agreed process to evaluate the distribution of costs and benefits from potential measures (Hanich
and Ota, 2013).
                                                                                                             89
                                  Key considerations for the future
  •   Current trade preferences with the European Union may be expected to erode by 2040, in
      comparison to Thailand and other canned tuna producers.
  •   However, globally foreign fishing subsidies have shown no signs of diminishing, and should be
      considered a continuing factor in the operations of some foreign fleets.
  •   The members of the WCPFC are obligated by the UN Fish Stocks Agreement to take measures
      necessary to ensure long-term sustainability of the region’s tuna stocks, however history to date
      suggests that consensus will be reached after leadership by sub-regional groupings of PICs.


Table 14 below summarizes both the recent trends in WCPO tuna fisheries, as well as the expected future
direction of change in selected variables of key external drivers of performance:




                                                                                                     90
      Table 14. Summary of Key Trends in Recent decades in WCPO tuna fisheries and Expected Direction of
      Future Changes in Selected Variables for Key External Drivers in the Fisheries

Key Trends in WCPO Tuna Fisheries over Recent Expected Direction of Future Changes in Selected
Decades                                       Variables for Key External Drivers to 2040

The purse seine fishing ‘revolution’                                   Direct Driver #1: Climate Change
 • Explosion in purse seine vessels and catch                          • Skipjack and bigeye abundance (no change)
 • Changing composition of the fleet                                   • Skipjack and bigeye distribution (overall shift to central and
 • A more efficient fleet, notably increased FAD technology               eastern Pacific)

Stagnation and possibly senescence in the longline fisheries           Direct Driver #2: Markets and the Economy
 • Declining profitability in the southern albacore longline fishery   • Supply (approaching global limits, little further increases
 • Flat trend in catches from the tropical longline fishery               expected, highly dependent on WCPO
   supplying sashimi markets                                           • Demand (in aggregate, modest increase given flat supply
 • Overall, little benefit for PICs (though by-catch from locally-        and population growth)
   based vessels has contributed significantly to local food fish         o Canned tuna (no change expected with mature markets
   supply in some cases)                                                       declining but new markets emerging, greater
                                                                               diversification of products from purse seining)
Establishment of a regional management body for the tuna                  o Sashimi and other fresh tuna products (Japan market
fisheries                                                                      expected to continue decline, U.S. and others to grow)
 • WCPFC met for the first time in 2004                                • Global price
 • PICs have expressed frustrations with pace of decision-making          o Canned tuna (slow increase expected, but remaining
                                                                               sensitive to supply volumes)
A new model of cooperation by a sub-regional grouping of PICs             o Fresh tuna (slow increase expected)
to manage purse seine access                                              o In aggregate (projected 10% increase in real price from
 • The PNA and introduction/implementation of the VDS                          2010 to 2030, potentially further to 2040)
 • Access fees have increased by at least a multiple of four since     • Harvesting costs (fuel: crude oil prices projected to double
   2009                                                                   in real terms)
 • PNA members have held the limit on purse seine access, but
   throughout WCPO catch and effort continue to grow                   Direct Driver #3: Science and Technology
 • Following the VDS model, similar arrangements have been             • Harvesting technology is expected to continue to change in
   introduced for the longline fisheries.                                 order to enhance efficiency (ongoing in purse seine fleet,
                                                                          eventually in longline fleet with return of incentives) as well
Failures of state-led efforts to capture more of the value chains in      as to enhance product quality
PICs                                                                   • Fisheries monitoring and surveillance technology expected
 • State fishing and processing companies have generally not              to advance to significantly reduce enforcement costs,
   succeeded                                                              including expanded satellite tracking of vessels, use of
 • Pre-eminence of trading companies in the canned tuna supply            unmanned aircraft systems for patrols and electronic fishing
   chain                                                                  catch and effort monitoring – while global markets and
 • Continued dominance of the Bangkok canning cluster, despite            regulatory regimes continue to strengthen to increase the
   a lack of trade preferences                                            costs of illegal fishing

Relatively steady global market for tuna products                      Indirect Driver #1: Demographic Change
 • Canned tuna relatively flat                                          • Pacific Island pop. expected to grow by some 50% by 2035
 • Sashimi market pioneered in Japan, now becoming global               • Rapid urbanization expected throughout Pacific Islands
                                                                        • Coastal fisheries largely stagnant, food fish gap opens in
Decline of bigeye stock, while fishing on other stocks approaches         PNG, Sol. Islands, Vanuatu, Guam, Nauru & Am. Samoa
recommended limits
 • Bigeye stock overfished and declining                               Indirect Driver #2: External Governance
 • Albacore, skipjack and yellowfin stocks relatively healthy but       • Current trade preferences expected to erode, in comparison
   at the limit                                                           to other producers
 • Overall, WCPO tuna fisheries are moving towards the need to          • Foreign fishing subsidies expected to continue
   reduce catch and rebuild the bigeye stock according to               • WCPFC expected to take measures to conserve bigeye
   scientists                                                             stocks, slowly

                                                                                                                             91
4.2 Proposed Key Policy Decisions to Drive the Opportunity in 2040

Given the past trends described in the baseline, and the expected directions of key external drivers of change
in the WCPO tuna fisheries, this section proposes a collection of policy decisions or strategies that Pacific
Island countries might take in the coming decades, towards a best-case or opportunity scenario in 2040, as
defined by increased economic benefits to the countries. There are of course infinite pathways that the
region might take in the governance and use of the tuna resources, and this section does not aim to offer
definitive routes, nor predict or project specific outcomes. Rather the intention is to highlight possible
opportunities and key policy decisions that may arise in the coming 25 years, and give an indication of the
magnitude of potential economic benefits that might be realized as a result.

Following the methodology in Chapter Two, the description of potential policy decisions and strategies,
and the pathways to opportunity that they might provide given expected external change, is bounded by
first principles, as articulated in the Framework for Pacific Regionalism (see Chapter Two). Within the
context of these shared values in the region, key policy decisions or strategies highlighted over the coming
decades begin with the Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries (i.e. the Roadmap) approved
by Forum Leaders in September 2015, and build upon opportunities created by measures PICS have taken
in recent years (e.g. PNA efforts, the Tokelau arrangement, etc.). Taking the Roadmap as the starting point,
key policy decisions or strategies are organized around the four key goals for WCPO tuna fisheries in the
Roadmap: (i) sustainability, (ii) value, (iii) employment and (iv) food security. For each of these four policy
goals, step-wise strategies or decisions are highlighted. At the end of the section, indicative estimates of
potential additional net economic benefits to PICs from these strategies are suggested, with underlying
assumptions described.

Based on the above, this section is organized as follows:
   • Policy goals from the Roadmap,
           o Proposed key policy strategies or decisions for each goal, and
   • Indicative estimates of net economic benefits of policy strategies.

Overarching Policy Strategy: Regional Cooperation between PICs. Quite simply, regional cooperation
between PICs is required for almost all of the following policy strategies and their potential benefits. This
point has been made many times before of course, notably in the 2010 Future of Fisheries report, but is
essentially dictated by the biophysical characteristics of the resource itself: the stocks migrate across
national borders and span multiple jurisdictions across a vast area – no one country can solely influence the
size of the stocks and hence the value that can be generated from their use. Essentially, the pathway to
opportunity in 2040 depends upon cooperation. Within the wider context of the area defined in the
convention of the WCPFC, two sub-regional ‘coalitions’ of PICs have emerged in recent years around the
specific tuna fisheries, though they are different in nature and stages of evolution: (i) the Parties to the
Nauru Agreement and subsequently the associated Palau Arrangement, cooperating around the two
equatorial fisheries: the purse seine fishery and the tropical longline fishery; and (ii) the parties to the recent
Tokelau Arrangement, cooperating around the southern longline fishery. The PNA coalition is supported
by a secretariat (the PNA Office), as well as FFA (e.g. fisheries monitoring and surveillance) and SPC (e.g.
provision of scientific information and analysis). FFA is currently providing secretarial services to the
parties of the nascent Tokelau Arrangement.

The continued cooperation of PICs through mechanisms such as these coalitions towards the shared goals
of the Roadmap will to a large degree determine the opportunities available from all subsequent policy
strategies or decisions suggested here. This is not of course guaranteed in the future, and Arnason (2015)
notes that in game theory an equilibrium between players implies that each party receives at least what they
might be able to obtain individually or in another coalition. Given the current shifting distribution of stocks
and fishing opportunities between PICs’ waters, which are likely to be exacerbated by climate change,
flexible and transparent distribution arrangements between coalition members that allow for bargaining,
                                                                                                             92
will likely be essential to maintaining coalitions. Arnason (2015) suggests the development of models that
allow parties to clearly see the benefits of different allocation formulas may be helpful.

                              Key Overarching Policy Strategies or Decisions
   •    Maintain/strengthen sub-regional coalitions around defined fisheries, matching institutions to the
        spatial distribution of fishing effort as much as possible.
   •    Continue to enhance cooperation among the members of these coalitions, for example through
        increased information-sharing within the group, as well as the use of models and similar tools to
        illustrate and communicate the benefits of cooperation.

Roadmap Goal #1: Enhance sustainability of the resource as a prerequisite for greater benefits –
essentially building up the value of the region’s tuna assets in the bank, or water. There is broad scientific
consensus that fishing activity is generally the single biggest determinant of the size or abundance of ocean
fish stocks such as WCPO tuna assets (MEA, 2005; CEA, 2012). While there is no single determinant of
human behavior such as fishing activity, Ostrom’s (2005) Institutional Approach to Development (IAD)
framework is a useful guide, considering behavior such as fishing that interacts with the natural
environment to be determined largely by the: (i) biophysical characteristics of that environment in a given
context, (ii) social characteristics, and (iii) governance institutions (the rules, norms and shared strategies
in use). Of these three types of characteristics in any given fishery, the governance institutions may be the
most feasible to change (Ostrom, 2005), and a wide body of literature has identified failures in governance 26
as the primary reason for current levels of overfishing worldwide (Garcia, 2005; Cochrane, 2009), and the
key determinant of changes to fishing effort (Grafton et al, 2008).

Given the above, governance of fishing activity by tuna fleets, shaped by the policy goals and strategies
adopted by states and their organizations or agencies, is considered as the key mechanism by which PICs
can influence the size and value of the tuna stocks or assets in the WCPO. While there are no blueprints for
fisheries governance in any given context, two key characteristics of fisheries governance arrangements are
particularly relevant for PICs’ goal in the Roadmap to enhance sustainability and build up the value of the
region’s tuna assets in the water: (i) determining fish catch and effort limits for each of the tuna fisheries
based on sound science; and (ii) matching the spatial scale of the institutions applying these limits to the
ecological scale of the resources as much as possible.

In terms of setting limits on fishing effort based on sound science, PICs have been working directly with
companies and through the WCPFC to collect operational data on fishing catch and effort, and drawing
upon the SPC for assessments of stock sizes. This information has been translated by PICs into proposed
objectives (i.e. ‘target reference points’) for the minimum size to be maintained of the four tuna stocks,
with only the skipjack target agreed at the WCPO-level by the WCPFC in December 2015 (FFA, 2015), as
the basis for the fishing effort limits fixed by the PNA for the tropical purse seine and longline fisheries.
Given the uncertainties in stock distribution and abundance introduced by climate change in the coming
decades, as well as the experience to date with adoption of limits at the WCPO, continued and perhaps
expanded investment by PICs in collection and analysis of scientific information on the state of the tuna
stocks, for setting multi-year objectives and translating these into firm limits on fishing in the waters under
their jurisdiction, would be the basis for ensuring sustainability of the resource per the Roadmap.
Essentially, PICs would be cooperating and collaborating with partners in order to determine fish catch and
effort limits for their waters based on sound science, to maintain skipjack and yellowfin stock sizes,
potentially rebuild albacore stock size, and rebuild bigeye stock size – as shared natural capital assets that
can provide a sustainable economic return. Some trade-offs between these objectives or target reference

26 Drawing from the work of North (1990), Ostrom (20015) and Kooiman et al (2005) among others, governance is defined

broadly here, as the rules, norms and strategies that govern fishing, and the organizations emerging from these rules and
articulating policies to implement or change them, or articulate new rules.
                                                                                                                            93
points may be required in the short-term, e.g. effort reductions to rebuild the bigeye stock may lead to
biomass and stock sizes above the target for skipjack (and hence lower sustainable economic returns from
that species during this period).

For rules limiting fish catch and effort to maintain minimum stock sizes to targeted levels so that they can
sustainably generate the intended benefits for PICs, it is well established that a close match with the spatial
extent of the fisheries is needed – otherwise limits introduced may only affect fishing on the stock for one
time period or area, while greater or unregulated fishing takes place on the stock in other waters (e.g.
Ostrom, 1990; Folke et al, 1998; Kooiman et al, 2005; Wilson, 2006). Spatial mismatches between scales
of governance and ecosystems are common (Crowder et al., 2006), and the Code of Conduct for
Responsible Fisheries states that management efforts “should be concerned with the whole stock unit over
its entire area of distribution” (FAO, 1995). For PICs, the coverage of the fisheries under their jurisdiction
is as follows:
     • Purse seine fishery: with the ‘closure’ of fishing in the high seas for vessels seeking license to fish
          in national waters, in 2014 an estimated 77 percent of the purse seine catch took place in the waters
          of PNA members (plus Tokelau), an additional 13 percent in the waters of Indonesia and the
          Philippines, 3 percent in the water under the jurisdiction of other countries and territories, and the
          remaining 7 percent on the high seas;
     • Tropical longline fishery: in 2014 some 27 percent of the bigeye and yellowfin was caught in the
          waters of PNA members (specifically FSM, Kiribati, RMI, Palau and the Solomon Islands), another
          20 percent in the waters of Indonesia, 6 percent in the waters of Japan, and 27 percent on the high
          seas, among others; and
     • Southern longline fishery: in 2014 some two-thirds of the albacore was caught in the waters of the
          parties to the Tokelau Arrangement (largely in the Cook Islands, Fiji, the Solomon Islands and
          Vanuatu), while some 30 percent was taken on the high seas (FFA, 2015).

In the case of the purse seine fishery, under present distribution of the stocks, cooperation between PNA
members (and Tokelau) and Indonesia and the Philippines could place some 90 percent of the fishery and
much of the skipjack stock under the same limits and rules. Similarly, cooperation between PNA members
and Indonesia on the tropical longline fishery would almost double the fishery under the same rules and
limits (e.g. longline VDS), to a total of 47 percent. Of course expanding the club to new members such as
Indonesia will take time to build cooperation, recognizing that the characteristics of tuna fishing may be
different in these contexts. In the case of the Tokelau arrangement, if parties can set limits over some two-
thirds of the fishery, with much of the remainder in the high seas, the example of the PNA’s purse seine
VDS may be useful, where access to the high seas was ‘closed’ to vessels purchasing licenses to fish in
parties’ national waters.

With rules governing fishing activity continuing to be based on sound and robust scientific analysis and
setting hard limits to ensure target stock sizes are maintained (e.g. the effort by the PNA to set a target
reference point for skipjack), and expanded where opportunities allow in order to enlarge coverage of the
stocks, PICs could be expected to be well-positioned to grow their natural capital assets in the water.
However, the types of rules used to set limits will become increasingly important over the years. The
coalitions mentioned above have or will likely develop EEZ-based limits on fishing effort, e.g. days fished,
combined access fees (i.e. taxes) that increase harvesting costs. As Arnason (2015) noted, there is a wide
body of theoretical and empirical literature describing or documenting the incentives of commercial fishing
fleets to expand investments in fish catching capacity in response to rules that limit certain dimensions of
fishing effort (e.g. days fished, number of hooks used on a line, etc.) – i.e. to catch more fish via unregulated
methods (e.g. catching more fish per day fished, etc.) in order to expand profits of individual firms, while
overall returns from use of the common pool resource decrease. Arnason (2015) suggests that this issue
could be expected eventually with the VDS, such that current efforts to adjust fishing days and access fees
to match the catching capacity of vessels may lag behind actual catch, and hence limits will not be met and
stocks may decrease. Similarly, the ability of the governance regimes for longline fisheries to deliver policy
                                                                                                              94
objectives could eventually expect to face this same issue of fishing effort ‘creep’ as/if effort limits are
introduced by the PNA and parties to the Tokelau Arrangement, and pending sufficient impact on overall
fishing effort for the stocks and subsequent stock growth (or maintenance at current levels, depending on
the limits), companies begin to see profit incentives for investing in additional and unregulated catching
capacity.

While a wide spectrum of rules and adjustments have been employed to account for ‘effort creep’ in
fisheries, transitions to ‘output-based’ limits are frequently cited as effective options in certain contexts,
given that they regulate output (i.e. quantity of fish harvested) rather than inputs (e.g. days fished) (Arnason,
2015). Transitions to such rules can involve higher enforcement costs, as for example inputs may be easier
to monitor for compliance than outputs (FAO, 2000). Some PICs are currently anticipating this future
challenge, and PNAO has commissioned a study on the costs and benefits of transitioning from the VDS to
output-based rules (PNAO, 2015). The operational complexity involved in output-based systems can be
significant, for example in a mixed fishery such as the purse seine, questions of the units of output to be
used can be complicated (e.g. convert yellowfin to ‘skipjack-equivalent’ or define units in terms of both
yellowfin and skipjack). While it will remain to be seen if more investment in precision in adjusting input
or effort limits per zone of PIC coalitions will be more cost-effective in the short term than conversion to
output-based rules, over the longer term technology advances in monitoring and surveillance (e.g. ubiquity
of electronic logbooks and vessel video cameras) may change this calculus. By 2040, the complexity and
transaction costs of output-based rules that could obviate concerns for ‘effort creep’ may be significantly
lower in real terms, making the transition much more feasible – though still likely to be a gradual one.

Lastly, while no further increases in catch are recommended for yellowfin, the bigeye stock is considered
overfished and in need of rebuilding now – assuming a target stock size that could sustain maximum yields
(based on the internationally-agreed objective of the Sustainable Development Goal). Bigeye is targeted
by the tropical longline fishery, but an almost equal amount was caught in 2014 as by-catch in purse seine
nets set on FADs. Given the projected shift of bigeye stock distribution towards the central and eastern
Pacific due to climate change, the volume of purse seine by-catch might be expected to increase, as FAD
fishing is more prevalent in the east (Bell et al, 2011). Were PNA countries to assume the entire costs of
reduced fishing effort to rebuild the stock of long-lived species by 2040, depending on the distribution of
catch reductions between the tropical longline and purse seine fishery within their waters, the burden could
be significant (and fail the provisions in the UN Fish Stocks Agreement and WCPFC Convention on
equitable distribution of conservation costs, per Hanich and Ota, 2013) – as skipjack stocks could grow
beyond the target reference point and harvests fall below sustainable economic optimum. Arnason (2015)
suggests that rebuilding the bigeye stock solely via reductions in purse seining under current fishing
methods, could reduce the potential access fees to PICs from the VDS by up to 40 percent.

While the tropical longline fishery under the VDS may bear some of the costs of rebuilding the bigeye, as
mentioned previously, almost 75 percent of the fishery occurs outside of PNA waters, reducing the efficacy
of rule changes via the VDS. At the same time, given the high unit values of bigeye for the sashimi markets,
rebuilding the stock could generate significant additional value for the tropical longline fishery (though not
the purse seine fishery). Compliance with the UN Fish Stocks Agreement would suggest an obligation by
the WCPFC to take measures to restore the long-term sustainability of the stock, but these might be less
favorable to PICs and somewhat beyond their control. Alternatively, rather than a reduction in fishing effort
or catch through the purse seine VDS, PNA members may begin to put in place incentives to speed the
technology change expected to happen by 2040. Initial research has already begun on the design of FADs
or gears that might reduce purse seine by-catch, and additional investment could accelerate results. PNA
members might regulate or license FADs in order to introduce the economic incentives for investment into
reduced purse seine by-catch (e.g. creating a FAD registry and requiring monitoring of use via satellites).
Purchase of FAD licenses together with vessel days and alteration of fishing methods would increase costs
for purse seine operators and reduce profits, and likely demand for access, but a well-designed and
monitored system of FAD licensing may provide incentives for both greater investment into research for
                                                                                                              95
alternatives as well as shifts in fishing patterns. This would come at a cost, though potentially less than
externally-imposed measures by the WCPFC, or increasingly in the future by foreign markets demanding
‘FAD-free’ or by-catch free tuna (already the object of eco-labelling).

In conclusion, a key determinant of the size of WCPO tuna stocks and hence PICs’ natural capital assets,
is fishing mortality. Regulating this effort is essentially a question of fisheries governance – broadly defined
– and notably the scientifically-based limits set on fishing and the match between these limits and the
distribution of the stocks. PIC coalitions such as the PNA, working through secretariats and with regional
agencies including FFA and SPC, have invested significantly in determining targets for the stocks and in
the case of the purse seine fishery hard limits. A key policy strategy or decision to enable future
opportunities, particularly given climate change and external governance factors, is expected to be
continued PIC commitment and investment in setting and maintaining scientifically-determined fishing
limits that will ensure healthy stocks and valuable assets for the region. Towards this efforts, PIC coalitions
may be able to enhance coverage and impacts significantly by expanding cooperation to include other
WCPO countries where the stocks may be fished, for example Indonesia and the Philippines in the case of
the purse seine fishery, and Indonesia in the case of the tropical longline fishery. Linking avoidance of
high seas fishing to access to waters under the jurisdiction of parties to the Tokelau Arrangement may hold
potential to expand coverage of rules for south Pacific albacore fishing. Over time, given advances in
monitoring technology PICs can potentially transition to output-based rules in order to obviate concerns
over fishing effort creep, after having continuously adjusted rules to keep up with any shifts in fishing
capacity and effort within the fleets. Finally, the status of the bigeye stock will likely become a limiting
factor on the tropical purse seine and longline fisheries as the stock shifts towards the east, but particularly
the former given that so much more of it is under PICs’ jurisdiction. Effort reductions necessary to rebuild
the stock could incur significant costs to PICs, but creation of incentives for investment in alternative
technology – including additional controls on FADs – could be expected to support a gradual reduction in
by-catch.

                           Key Policy Strategies or Decisions for Roadmap Goal #1
    •    Sub-regional coalitions introduce, maintain and adjust target reference points for tuna stocks, and
         total fish catch and/or effort limits for each – mindful of the tradeoff between targets (e.g. bigeye
         vs. skipjack stocks).
    •    Expand sub-regional coalitions to better match the spatial scale of regulations and fishing effort on
         the targeted stocks, notably working with Indonesia and the Philippines on the purse seine fishery,
         and Indonesia in the tropical longline fishery.
    •    Continue or expand restrictions on fishing effort in the high seas, linked to national access, while
         promoting robust management and monitoring of high seas fishing through the WCPFC.
    •    Adjust the rules and/or access fee levels adopted by sub-regional coalitions in order to account for
         effort creep in the regulation of fishing mortality to maintain the stock at levels consistent with the
         target reference points, while eventually transitioning to output-based rules as technology advances.
    •    Rebuild the bigeye stock sequentially, through rules for management of FADs that provide
         economic incentives for alternatives, as well as gradual catch reductions equitably shared between
         the purse seine and tropical longline fisheries.

Roadmap Goal #2: Enhance the economic value of the tuna fisheries without increasing production -
managing these assets for increased economic benefits to PICs. As mentioned previously, the economic
value of renewable natural assets such as tuna stocks is linked to their environmental status, where increases
in stock size lead to higher values and conversely a reduction in asset value may reflect resource
degradation. More specifically, the asset value is measured as the present value of the future consumption
(i.e. value of consuming current and future benefits from all economic items, in this case given as the
economic super-profits or resource rents generated along the fishery value chains). Thus efforts to increase
net economic benefits from the region’s tuna fisheries are linked to sustainably increasing the present value
                                                                                                             96
of these assets, i.e. the sustainable benefits they can produce, rather than just their annual contribution to
GDP. Essentially, the economic returns from the fisheries and the contribution they can make to poverty
reduction are tied to the abundance of fish in the ocean. As such, there is significant overlap between goals
one and two in the Roadmap.

The resource rents or profits above a normal rate of return that are created in the harvesting segment of the
tuna fishery value chains, can be transmitted along the different segments of the chains, as can both risk
and innovation, in both directions (McClurg, 2014). PICs are currently resource owners, and hence have
the comparative advantage of controlling access for harvesters to supply, which they can regulate to increase
productivity and resource rents while maintaining harvesting viability and healthy working conditions (e.g.
consistent with the International Labor Organization Work in Fishing Convention).

Arnason (2015) writes that for commercial fisheries where profit maximization is the primary objective of
fishing fleets such as in the WCPO tuna fisheries, it is well established that efficiency and the size of
resource rents generated from fishing depend on the extent to which inputs and outputs include
characteristics of property rights 27 (see also Anderson and Seijo, 2010). Similarly, North (1990) wrote that
such characteristics determine the opportunities for efficiency in productive activities, and therefore
generation of net economic benefits. Such property rights are complicated multi-dimensional social
arrangements produced by rules, and are also the corollary of duties, because one participant has an interest
protected by a right only when all others have a duty to respect it (Bromley and Cernea, 1989; Ostrom and
Schlager, 1996; Ostrom, 2005). The extent to which the rules for access to the WCPO tuna fisheries create
or mimic some form of ‘property rights’ and ‘duties’ for fishing companies (Charles, 2009), is said to
depend on the extent to which of the following independent characteristics are aggregated or bundled in the
access or use right: exclusivity (ability to keep others from using the property); security (how likely is it
that the owner can hold on to his property right); duration (how long lasting is the property right);
transferability (to what extent can the property right be divided and traded to others); and flexibility (in
what way can the property right be used) (Scott, 2008; Arnason, 2015). The quality of a property right is
therefore measured by the extent to which it comprises some or all of these key attributes (Arnason, 2015).

Thus in summary, the rules that PIC coalitions put in place to govern access to the portions of WCPO tuna
fisheries under their jurisdiction – within the limits set as described under the first goal of the Roadmap –
can create or mimic various attributes of property rights that help increase the value of access, without
increasing catch volume or production. 28 Within the framework of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) Treaty, PICs have created relatively strong ‘property rights’ to access the tuna
fisheries in the waters under their jurisdiction or zones, but Arnason (2015) notes that the quality of the
access rights that they have created for users (i.e. fishing fleets) could be strengthened to create more value.

Interviews conducted recently by Conservation International (2015) with a number of companies indicated
that more efficient, transparent and flexible access rights to the purse seine fishery would reduce their
harvesting costs and risks and thus create value or resource rent, for which they would be willing to pay.
Such rights may become even more important in the future given the projected steady increase in fuel prices
(and thus harvesting costs) shown in section 4.1, from relatively low levels of the present. Taking this
example of the PNA’s purse seine VDS – though applicable to the opportunities that can be created to some
extent (albeit lesser given the portion of the fishery under jurisdiction and opportunity for greater
substitutability on the high seas) under the PNA’s longline VDS and by parties to the Tokelau Arrangement
– Arnason (2015) discusses a number of strategies and decisions that PICs could take to potentially increase
the value of access to the fishery:
27 Property rights are defined here as a claim to a benefit stream that some higher body – usually the state – will agree to protect
through the assignment of duties to others who may covet, or somehow interfere with, the benefit stream (Bromley, 1992).
28 It is important to note that as Bromley and Cernea (1989) state that “property is not an object [such as a fish in the water], but it

is rather a right to a benefit stream that is only as secure as the duty of all others to respect the conditions that protect that stream.”

                                                                                                                                       97
•   Durability: Currently vessel days are allocated to countries for a duration of one year, and then are
    re-calculated (and may change significantly). A longer duration of allocation to countries would
    allow for greater planning and visibility, for example Arnason (2015) suggests allocating a
    percentage of the TAE that is reviewed after every 5 to 10 years. At the same time, the access rights
    that the countries then issue to companies are short-term, providing limited incentives for resource
    conservation and longer-term investment (e.g. in alternative gears and methods to reduce by-catch
    on FADs) (Arnason, 2015). Increasing the duration of access would likely reduce risk and increase
    efficiency and value for companies, though could actually lower the share of the benefits captured
    by PICs if the price paid for longer-term access over two or more years is less than the aggregate
    fees countries would have received during each year of the period. Alternatively, PICs may wish
    to link more durable access rights to local investment in other aspects of the value chain, such as
    processing, with a preference for creation of local employment over any reduction in fees (see Goal
    #3 below).

•   Transferability (including secondary markets): Arnason (2015) writes that currently, the formula
    for allocation of PAE in the VDS creates an incentive or cost to parties to trading vessel days (as
    trades might affect future PAEs), which reduces efficiency in the system. Similarly, over time
    developing rules that allow for trading of access rights between companies can be expected to
    enhance efficiency, building upon the registry of vessel days currently operated at PNAO, as
    secondary markets emerge and even private exchanges or clearing houses (see for example
    experiences with the European Carbon Market – EC, 2014). Such rules must be designed carefully,
    for example to provide oversight to protect against fraud, market manipulation by those with large
    holdings, or abuse of asymmetric information, among others.

•   Reducing substitutability (‘the competitive fringes’): In addition to the benefits from the standpoint
    of sustainability discussed under Goal#1, expanding cooperation with Indonesia and the Philippines
    (in the case of the purse seine fishery, and perhaps Indonesia alone in the case of the tropical
    longline fishery) could reduce potential substitutions for purchasing vessel days – via access to the
    stock in these waters, as well as increase overall value. A key question here is how the distribution
    of PAE might change, and Arnason (2015) suggests that the PAE for new parties not exceed the
    contributions that they make to the TAE. Perhaps more importantly to PICs, access to the stock on
    the high seas has a zero cost, and although harvesting costs such as fuel may be higher in some
    instances, such substitutes become more attractive the higher the cost of vessel days. For this
    reason, the Roadmap envisages progressive restriction of fishing on the high seas by non-PIC
    vessels as a condition of access to countries’ national waters, extending the initiative taken to date
    by PNA members.

•   Pooling of access rights to increase homogeneity: Because the stocks migrate across different
    parties’ waters and fishing activity and productivity can differ from year to year – more so in the
    future given climate change – vessel days or access rights are extremely heterogeneous (Arnason,
    2015). Companies may face transaction costs in purchasing access from different parties to follow
    differences in fishing opportunities. Increasing the homogeneity of access rights would reduce
    transaction costs and increase value, i.e. ‘pooling’ between countries. Trials conducted to date by
    sub-groups of PNA members have indicated significant value and increased willingness to pay by
    companies for pooled days. Essentially, if the allocation formula to distribute benefits between
    parties is agreed, by 2040 there may be little benefit to maintaining national access rights en lieu
    of pooled rights that are more efficient and thus valuable. Starting now, countries may wish to
    progressively pool a greater percentage of days (e.g. 5 to 10 percent of the total), while maintaining
    a level of national sales for some countries to discount in order to support local fleets and
    processing.

                                                                                                       98
    •   Auctioning access rights: Arnason (2015) points out that the equilibrium price of access in the purse
        seine fishery is not known, and as such auctions may be a promising mechanism to establish an
        equilibrium (and can also enhance transparency). However, the authors caution that there are
        infinite types of auction designs and many have failed due to collusion among bidders, so this
        process should start slowly and gradually. They indicate that some characteristics of well-designed
        auctions include: attraction of as many bidders as possible to reduce chances of collusion, and
        ensuring that rights auctioned are as homogenous as possible (Arnason, 2015). As with pooling,
        the potential increased efficiency of access could yield significant benefits for PICs, but should be
        approached with care and introduced progressively in order to test what works, as many have
        already begun to do.

A key decision for PICs will be any potential impacts from increased efficiency of operations on domestic
fleets. FFA (2014) estimates roughly US$551 in value added per metric ton caught by domestic vessels,
so if changes to access rules enhance efficiency of the fleet and overall resource rent or value generated in
the fishery, but at the expense of domestic fleets for foreign fleets, than local value added and contribution
to GDP may be reduced in favor of increased access fees (though FFA notes that these value added estimates
are based on multipliers that should be treated with caution). While hypothetical, and changes may be
phased to encourage innovation by the domestic fleets, there will likely be a trade-off for PICs to consider.
Again, countries may wish to proceed progressively, pooling and auctioning a portion, e.g. 10 percent, of
vessel days, while allowing for a cushion of days that can be sold or exchanged nationally for local fleets
and processing. To help better measure this trade-off, countries with processing clusters could conduct a
controlled experiment: auction a portion of vessel days without any requirements for local processing, but
require bidders to also quote a price for days together with guaranteed local processing. Adding increased
durability to the days, e.g. for 5 years, would only increase their value to companies, and potentially allow
for both local processing and access payments. Lastly, increased efficiency could come at the expense of
working conditions on vessels throughout the harvesting sector, depending upon the incentives created.
PICs will need to ensure as a condition of access that minimum standards are maintained on vessels, such
as agreed in the International Labor Organization’s Work in Fishing Convention in 2007.

The question of fishing ‘effort creep’. A conundrum of changes to rules for access that enhance efficiency
such as described above, may provide profit incentives for fleets to invest in increased fishing capacity and
effort, or ‘effort creep’ as mentioned previously, which would increase harvests beyond the effort limits
regulated and eventually undermine sustainability and profitability (Arnason, 2015). This reinforces the
importance of investment by PICs to be flexible and adjust rules to keep up with effort shifts in individual
vessels, and eventually a transition to an output-based system. In the short term the current conversion ratios
that are used to adjust fishing days issued to reflect the catching capacity of vessels, could be further refined
to be more precise (Arnason, 2015).

Investing in capacity for administration, monitoring and enforcement at regional and national levels. In
addition to a sound scientific basis for decisions on the regulation of fish catch and effort, and rules that
enhance efficiency in commercial fisheries as discussed above, additional common features of effective
fisheries governance from experiences around the globe include effective administration, monitoring and
enforcement of rules (OECD, 2011). The administration and monitoring of the purse seine and tropical
longline VDS, as well as rules introduced by parties to the Tokelau Arrangement, will only become more
complex over time given changes in harvesting technology and distribution of stocks resulting from climate
change. Uniform measurement of days or access rights and application of rules is critical – as Arnason
(2015) estimates that small overruns do not translate into large losses (e.g. 5 percent overrun in sales of
days could lead to a loss of $1.5 million for parties), but losses increase significantly as the percentage rises.
This will require skilled technical expertise at both regional and national levels, and PICs would likely need
to invest heavily in training the next generation of technicians and administrators to support these complex
access regimes as they evolve – particularly given the current and potential level of benefits they can
generate. To support this effort, in the case of the PNAO Arnason (2015) proposes establishing a permanent
                                                                                                               99
board of directors named by each of the parties, in order to ensure longer-term service by
technicians/experts and investment of time, as well as expanding the staff of the office to support
administration and for parties to charge the Administrator to ensure consistent application of days across
parties.

In terms of enforcement, in the short term costs can be expected to increase with access fees, as incentives
for companies to seek cheaper access on the high seas or non-compliance with rules grows. However,
expanded investments in cooperative monitoring and surveillance programs through the Niue Treaty, can
build upon the platform at FFA to take advantage of technology change over time and eventually reduce
costs, for example expanding satellite tracking of vessels towards near-universal coverage; use of
unmanned aircraft systems for patrols via regional bases or hubs; and expanded electronic monitoring of
catch and effort on vessels via electronic logbooks and video camera technology – together with greater
controls and monitoring at ports. Additionally, infractions are based on perceptions of cost (Arnason, 2015),
so increasing sanctions may deter additional non-compliance at relatively low cost to PICs. Crucially,
expanded investments in communication of the rules and procedures for access set by PIC coalitions in the
different fisheries could increase awareness (including of sanctions and the cost of non-compliance) and
potentially reduce infractions (given that prevention is cost-effective in terms of enforcing compliance).

Branding Pacific Island tuna products. Given current
catch rates in the tropical long-line fishery and the large Box 5. Examples of Seafood Branded by
portion of fishing occurring on the high seas, efforts Location: Maine Lobster
from the PNA longline VDS are likely to take time to
reduce overall fishing effort and increase catch rates Successful seafood brands have been able to
and profitability. However, PICs could aim to partner generate a price premium on the order of 10 to 20
                                                             percent, based on a story about the location where
with large retailers to co-create a PNA island brand to
                                                             they were caught, together with sustainability. For
differentiate the product and lift market value, in example, Maine lobster generates a premium over
exchange for medium term security of supply the same species of lobster harvested in the waters
(Conservation International, 2015). Essentially, PICs of neighboring states.
would offer secure access to outsource harvesting, as
well as outsource processing for frozen tuna, supplied
to a retailer in exchange for a portion of profits in sales
(Conservation International, 2015). Given trends in
tuna steaks discussed in section 4.1 as well as the
interest in product differentiation, this could capture
opportunities for greater value at the opposite end of the
value chain, in the form of public revenues to PICs
                                                             Sources: Conservation International (2015);
largely, but also modest increased employment in the www.getmainelobster.com
brand and potentially through in-sourcing processing.
Additionally, PICs could aim to enter into a specific and long-term supply relationship with a retailer to
guarantee supply of tuna – e.g. from tropical long-lining – in exchange for equity in the brand, whereby the
retailer’s brand differentiates based on sourcing from a specific location and commands higher prices in the
market, some of which are returned to PICs as revenues (Conservation International, 2015).




                                                                                                           100
                         Key Policy Strategies or Decisions for Roadmap Goal #2
    •   Increase the efficiency and property rights characteristics of access, including:
            o Enhanced durability among parties and potentially for companies,
            o Enhanced transferability of access rights,
            o Reduced substitutability of access via high seas closures, and
            o Increased homogeneity of access through pooling.
    •   Progressively auction access rights to better identify the equilibrium price.
    •   Invest in regional and national capacity for administration, monitoring and enforcement of access
        rights and limits.
    •   Establish partnerships with interested retailers for Pacific Island branding of fresh/frozen products
        from the tropical longline fishery.

Roadmap Goals #3: Increase Pacific Island employment in WCPO tuna fisheries - translating the benefits
from a healthy portfolio of tuna assets into jobs. The previous two goals have related to growing the size of
the economic benefits generated from WCPO tuna fisheries, while this goal focuses on one aspect of how
these gains are distributed within PICs – e.g. captured as access fees and/or local investment to create
employment. Figure 55 below has been shown previously in Chapter Two, but is repeated here to illustrate
the various opportunities for increased employment in PICs along the value chains, but also trade-offs that
may be present in some cases. Some trade-offs may be minimal, such as PIC requirements for vessels
accessing the waters under their jurisdiction to use a certain proportion of Pacific Island crew members in
order to generate jobs on fishing vessels. Others may be more substantial, such as where PICs are not cost-
competitive for foreign investment in local fleets or processing facilities, yet as resources owners the
countries can leverage their comparative advantage to give reduced access fees in exchange for local
investment and employment. Particularly for processing, there is generally a clear trade-off between access
fees and local processing jobs, though to date little analysis of such trade-offs has taken place (or
methodologies agreed).




                                                                                                         101
Figure 54. Current Economic Benefits to Pacific Island Countries from WCPO Tuna Fisheries
                                            Revenue from the                          Benefits Captured by Pacific
                                         Fisheries allocated along                         Island Countries
                                         the Global Value Chain
                                                  Distr/
        Wholesale & Retail                       Marketing
       Distributors, groups,                      Costs
   companies who sell to other                 • Labor
   retailers or final consumers                • Capital
                                               • Other inputs

           Processing
                                                 Processing
       Individuals, groups,                                      •   Domestic ownership of enterprises
                                                   Costs                                                    Pacific
          companies, etc.                                        •   Employment in local plants
    transforming raw fish into                 • Labor           •   Taxes                                  Island
            the product                        • Capital         •   Locally sourced inputs                Countries
                                               • Other inputs

             Harvest                                Labor
        Fishing Fleet(s)
    •   Fishers                                  Other Inputs    • Local labor on vessels
    •   Technology (incl.                                        • Purchase of domestic goods &
        suppliers and servicers)                   Capital         services
    •   Methods                                                  • Domestic ownership of fleets
    •   Effort                                                   • Vessel joint ventures
                                                                 • Taxes on capital
                                                  Resource       • Access fees
        Ocean Ecosystem                             Rent


         Ecological unit

                                                                                     Source: Adapted from IFC (2000)
                                                 Note: Pacific Island labor is shown as a benefit, rather than a cost of
         Tuna stock(s)                                                  production, given high regional unemployment




A recent survey of a number of industry professionals identified several opportunities for PICs to capture
more of the value chain shown in Figure 54, in ways that would increase the overall net economic benefits
received (Conservation International, 2015). Although certainly others may exist, among these
opportunities included the following:

    •    Regional processing clusters for canning. As mentioned previously, several PICs have leveraged
         concessional access for fishing in exchange for investment in canning facilities (though in many
         cases these are operating below capacity), notably PNG and the Solomon Islands, together with
         preferential access to the European market for products. Otherwise, PICs would struggle to be cost-
         competitive with processors in Thailand and other countries, who do not have trade preferences
         with Europe but have lower operating costs – notably utilities and shipping costs. Assuming such
         trade preferences erode towards 2040 (see section 4.1), demand for canned tuna shows modest
         growth and processing retains low margins, PICs are likely to continue to be at a cost disadvantage
         compared to other countries, likely requiring a reduction in access fees in exchange for investment,
                                                                                                                     102
            together with regulatory reforms to reduce the cost of doing business (e.g. in the 2016 Doing
            Business rankings, Solomon Islands, RMI and PNG are ranked 112, 140 and 145 respectively out
            of 189 countries). 29 Given projected population growth and urbanization in many PICs, this may
            be an exchange that countries choose to make.

       •    Vessel support service hubs. Interviews with industry by Conservation International (2015) suggest
            that a number of vessels are incurring significant additional costs to travel for basic services, or
            using services at sea. With investment in the ease of doing business to reduce transaction costs,
            Conservation International (2015) found that companies would be willing to come to additional
            Pacific Island ports for reliable support services to fishing operations, such as vessel repair, food
            supplies, bait, fuel and net repair. While such services would depend on specific contexts for PICs,
            the development of vessel support hubs could be an opportunity to increase employment and
            respond to a need in the value chain. For example, fishing vessel maintenance and consumables
            can be provided without significant additional infrastructure or extensive expertise (Conservation
            International, 2015), likely in PNA waters where there are already facilities for landing or
            transshipping fish, e.g. in PNG, Solomon Islands, RMI and FSM.

       •    Consolidated trading. As mentioned previously, several large companies provide services to the
            fleets in the WCPO and buy their catch (rather than taking a commission on a trade), with
            guaranteed delivery to processors and often with exclusive relationships with vessel owners and
            fleets (and in some cases vertical integration). These three trading companies provide logistics and
            coordination for much of the supply chain. Given this level of control over the supply to Bangkok,
            these three traders are in a position to exert significant influence over the purse seine value chain.
            As Conservation International (2015) proposed, PICs could form a trading company and retain
            ownership of harvested fish, essentially contracting harvesting operations at lowest prices and
            controlling the trade of raw material (potentially influencing volume of supply to processors and
            the price per section 4.1). Essentially, PICs could control significant portions of the global tuna
            supply (e.g. over one third from PNA waters) via occupying the trading segment of the value chain
            (following the model of OPEC for example), including purchasing and storing catch for shipment
            to processors, and managing logistics systems (Conservation International, 2015). The opportunity
            carries significant risk, given the massive logistic systems and efficiency required, the large volume
            of freezing capacity needed, and strong governance, among others, but also carries high opportunity
            that merits further analysis (Conservation International, 2015).

                             Key Policy Strategies or Decisions for Roadmap Goal #3
       •   Establish/expand regional processing clusters where a critical mass already exists and where
           feasible – e.g. PNG, Solomon Islands, potentially Majuro – in exchange for concession of access
           and together with regulatory reforms to reduce the costs of doing business.
       •   Build reliable fishing vessel support service hubs where feasible, e.g. potentially expanding services
           in PNG, Solomon Islands, RMI and FSM.
       •   Research the potential to establish a Pacific Island tuna trading company to control supply of
           skipjack, and capture profits from this segment of the supply chain.




29   See: http://www.doingbusiness.org/rankings
                                                                                                              103
Roadmap Goal #4: Enhance Pacific Islands food security - using the region’s tuna assets to enhance PIC
food security in the face of population growth, urbanization and climate change. As mentioned previously
(see section 4.1), given current levels of fish consumption and projected population growth, urbanization
and impacts of climate change, a food fish gap has been projected in a number of PICs. Continued definition
of access rights as discussed in Goal#2 could help provide a mechanism by which countries could secure
access for small-scale fishers, together with public investment in an inshore FAD network to provide fishing
opportunities. As such, a dedicated portion of the total limit on fish catch and effort (see Goal#1) could be
allocated to coastal fishing communities to prevent a food fish gap, with PICs adjusting in the event that
demand and risks to food security grow beyond current projections. Additionally, PICs can increasingly
trial dedicated revenue streams from access fees to invest in public goods in coastal communities, as Tuvalu
has proposed – establishing a social fund with a portion of access fees that would fund priority infrastructure
and public goods from communities (World Bank, 2014). Finally, in some cases where relatively large
populations are close to ports or transshipment hubs (e.g. PNG and Solomon Islands), measures to ensure
greater retention of purse seine by-catch (not including bigeye) for local sale may provide part of the
solution (Lewis, 2014).
                         Key Policy Strategies or Decisions for Roadmap Goal #4
   •    Consider utilizing a fixed percentage of strengthened access rights together with public investment
        in inshore FAD networks (as public goods) to secure a portion of the allowable catch of tuna for
        coastal communities, where food fish gaps appear.
   •    Trial establishment of dedicated streams of revenue received from access fees, as social funds
        targeted to priority infrastructure and public goods in coastal communities.
   •    Trial measures to require greater retention of purse seine by-catch (not including bigeye by-catch),
        and support increased distribution near ports/transshipment hubs with relatively large nearby
        populations.

Policy Delivery Capacity. A key point of emphasis in the strategies and decisions under each of the
Roadmap Goals is continued and expanded investment in policy delivery capacity, notably in terms of
regional agencies that support the information base for setting fishing limits and the monitoring of
compliance, the secretariats of sub-regional coalitions setting fishing limits, and the national agencies
developing and implementing policy within countries’ waters. Expanded staffing, training and partnerships
with regional and international organizations could help ensure the delivery capacity is in place, together
with dedicated regional programs and activities towards this end.

Indicative Estimates of Net Economic Benefits. Based on the data and literature available, indicative
estimates of potential net economic benefits from various policy strategies and key decisions are described
here and summarized in Table 15 below, based on the expected direction of change for key external drivers
of performance in the WCPO fisheries. These estimates should be interpreted with caution and considered
as indicative of the magnitude of potential benefits from various strategies and decisions over time, towards
2040. They are synthesized from existing data and literature, rather than generated via extensive bio-
economic modeling of scenarios. However, the estimates and the subsequent 2040 scenario serve to
highlight the magnitude of opportunities and choices before PIC decision-makers in the coming years, and
should be seen as an initial step, with the Roadmap as the starting point.

It should be noted that these estimates err on the side of caution, assuming that in the absence of the policy
decisions described here in the context of the Roadmap, the status quo of net economic benefits generated
from the WCPO tuna fisheries for PICs could be sustained. This is somewhat unlikely, given the limits that
could be imposed externally by the WCPFC and/or markets on bigeye by-catch, the potential for continued
expansion of purse seine effort on the ‘competitive fringes’, and the shifting distribution of catches resulting
from climate change, to name a few. Essentially, the status quo may result in overfishing and economic
costs over time, which would further reduce the baseline from which these estimates are generated.
Nonetheless, the estimates are provided in order to indicate the magnitude of the opportunity that could
                                                                                                            104
emerge for WCPO tuna fisheries to contribute even further to economic growth in PICs over the coming
decades.

Assumptions:
Pre-requisite policy decisions are taken for enhanced regional cooperation and sustainability of the
resources – but are not expected to have significant economic or financial costs:
    • Overall: maintain/enhance regional cooperation between PICs
            o Individual Pacific Island countries see greater or equal benefits over the long-term to
                maintaining sub-regional coalitions around defined fisheries, where institutions are
                matched to the spatial distribution of fishing effort as much as possible (e.g. the PNA for
                purse seine and tropical longline fisheries, the Tokelau Arrangement for the southern
                albacore longline fishery), reinforced by enhanced flexibility, communication and
                transparency between coalition members.
    o Roadmap Goal#1: Enhance sustainability of the resource as a prerequisite for greater
       benefits
            o PIC sub-regional coalitions introduce, maintain and adjust target reference points for tuna
                stocks in order to ensure levels commensurate with local objectives and international
                principles and obligations for sustainability, accompanied by total fish catch and/or effort
                limits to achieve each of the targets.
            o PIC sub-regional coalitions cooperate with additional countries or even expand as needed
                to match the scale of institutions to the spatial distribution of fishing effort, for example
                cooperating with Indonesia and the Philippines (part of the competitive fringes) in the purse
                seine fishery; cooperating with at least Indonesia in the tropical longline fishery; and
                working to restrict fishing on the high seas for all three tuna fisheries (purse seine, tropical
                longline and southern albacore longline).
            o Catch limits that are translated into rules regulating effort, such as the VDS, are
                continuously adapted to changing fleet capabilities, and eventually transition to output-
                based rules as monitoring technology further develops.
            o The bigeye stock is gradually rebuilt (precluding costly regulations introduced at the
                WCPFC or barriers to traditional markets for FAD-caught tuna), through a combination of
                FAD management rules in the purse seine fishery that help encourage technology
                innovations to reduce by-catch, as well as reduced longlining on the high seas as a result
                of national restrictions taken cooperatively by the PNA and Indonesia.

Decisions are taken to increase the value of access to tuna fishing in PIC waters:
   • Roadmap Goal#2: Enhance the economic value of the tuna fisheries without increasing
       production
            o The durability, flexibility and transferability of access rights in each of the three fisheries
                is strengthened for both coalition members and fishing companies, in order to enhance the
                efficiency of fishing operations and hence the value of access to the resources.
            o Access rights to each of the three fisheries become more homogenous via pooling, reducing
                transaction costs to operators.
            o Rights are auctioned in order to better establish the equilibrium price.
            o PICs make additional investments to administer, monitor and enforce compliance with the
                rules governing fishing in each of the three fisheries, equivalent to an additional US$50
                million per year in real terms by 2040 (with a baseline of US$50 million per year) –
                assuming a standard of 5 percent of the delivered value of the catch is reinvested in fisheries
                management, but also reducing this figure based on monitoring technology advancements
                discussed in section 4.1.
                      On the basis of the above policy decisions, PICs are able to capture 20 to 25 percent
                         of the estimated US$3 billion in delivered value of the purse seine catch in PNA
                         waters at 2014 catch levels (from a baseline of US$400 million in annual access
                                                                                                           105
                        fees for purse seine fishing in PNA waters, with a real delivered price of skipjack
                        in 2040 of US$1,800/mt and US$2,100/mt for yellowfin) – i.e. total public
                        revenues from access fees for purse seining in PNA waters on the order of US$600
                        to 750 million per year, or roughly US$13,000 to $16,500 per vessel day with a
                        total of 45,608 available days.
                    Potential adverse impacts of these policy decisions on local value added and food
                        security are minimized, such that decisions are phased slowly to allow the domestic
                        fleet to innovate and improve efficiency over time to avoid any losses in current
                        contributions to GDP, and local consumption of canned tuna in PNG is not
                        reduced.
                    Likely benefits would eventually emerge for the tropical longline fishery, though
                        are not included here.
                    An estimated US$28.6 million per year in additional access fees in real terms is
                        captured by PICs as a result of the introduction and maintenance of secure access
                        rights in the southern albacore longline fishery under the Tokelau Arrangement
                        (MRAG, 2012).
            o   PICs are able to establish a brand around tuna caught in their waters, in partnership with a
                number of retailers who share a portion of the profits on their private labels.
                    On the basis of this decision, PNA members capture a premium (or brand value)
                        of 5 to 8 percent of the processed value of on one third of tuna caught via purse
                        seining in their waters (i.e. 500,000 tons with a processed value of some US$1
                        billion), outsourcing harvesting and processing at costs equivalent to 10 percent of
                        the value at each level.

Decisions are taken to capture opportunities to move up the value chain:
   • Roadmap Goal#3: Increase Pacific Island employment in WCPO tuna fisheries
            o PICs support the development of regional tuna processing clusters via access fee
                concessions and regulatory reforms to ease the cost of doing business
                     An additional 120,000 mt of tuna are processed in PICs, generating an additional
                         US$711/mt in value added, at a cost of full concession of access equivalent to
                         4,000 vessel days at a price of $13,000 to $16,000 per day and assuming
                         productivity of 30 mt/day – split between PNG (66 percent), Solomon Islands (17
                         percent) and RMI (17 percent).
            o PICs support the development of vessel support service hubs through regulatory reforms
                to ease the costs of doing business
                     Such services represent 10 percent of estimated operating costs of purse seine
                         vessels fishing in PNA waters, or approximately US$20 million in expenditures,
                         from which 15 percent is value added, split evenly between PNG, Solomon Islands,
                         RMI and FSM.
   • PICs consider establishing a tuna trading company, with PNA members as shareholders, which
       purchases and sells a majority of the purse seine tuna catch from PNA waters, with potential for
       public revenues, employment and value added benefits (e.g. from storage and transshipping) not
       included, as well as price effects from control of supply.

Pacific Island food security maintained:
    • Roadmap Goal#4: Enhance Pacific Island food security
             o Estimates are not available of the cost of redirecting tuna catch to coastal communities to
                 help fill food fish gaps, but notably in PNG, Solomon Islands the Governments may need
                 to secure access to some portion of the tuna catch in their waters for communities.
             o Additionally, greater retention of purse seine by-catch (not including bigeye) could
                 provide additional sources of food fish where relatively large populations are nearby ports
                 and transshipment hubs (e.g. PNG, Solomon Islands).
                                                                                                        106
o   Vanuatu may be a concern, as the levels of recommended fish consumption for the
    population will exceed the total tuna catch in its waters.




                                                                               107
Table 15. Indicative Magnitude of Net Economic Benefits to PICs of Opportunity Scenario to 2040
Policy Strategy or Decision             Additional Public Additional             Additional     Food   Assumptions
                                        Revenues (US$)       Contribution to Employment Security
                                                             GDP (US$)
Overall: Maintain/enhance regional cooperation between PICs
Maintain sub-regional coalitions around       Pre-requisite for benefits below                         Individual PICs see greater or
defined fisheries, matching institutions to                                                            equal benefits over the long term to
spatial distribution of fishing effort as                                                              cooperation than alternatives
much as possible, e.g. PNA for purse
seine and tropical longline fisheries,
parties to the Tokelau Arrangement for
southern longline fishery
- Enhance flexibility, transparency
  among parties
- Communication, models to illustrate
  costs and benefits to individual parties
  of cooperation
Goal#1: Enhance sustainability of the resource as a prerequisite for greater benefits
PIC coalitions introduce, maintain and        N/A                                                      Assumed not to have significant
adjust target reference points for tuna                                                                economic costs, prerequisite for
stocks, and total fish catch and effort                                                                benefits below
limits for each
Enlarge coalitions to expand scale of fish    NA
catch and effort limits for stocks
- Indonesia and the Philippines
  participate in purse seine VDS
- Indonesia participates in longline VDS
- High seas restrictions continue/expand
  linked to national access
Combat effort creep, and eventually
transition to output-based rules as
monitoring technology advances




                                                                                                                                          108
Rebuild bigeye sequentially                  N/A                 N/A                   N/A   N/A   Rebuilding solely via reductions in
- Develop FAD management rules, e.g.                                                               purse seining under current fishing
  licensing scheme, to encourage                                                                   methods, could reduce the potential
  innovation alternatives                                                                          access fees to PICs from the VDS
- Invest in catch reduction in PNA waters                                                          by up to 40 percent
  (both purse seine and longline)



Goal#2: Enhance the economic value of the tuna fisheries without increasing production
Strengthen the durability, flexibility,      $228.6 to 378.6 m   Currently est. $551   N/A   N/A   -   Baseline of $400 m in access
transferability of access rules to enhance                       in value added/mt                     fees from purse seine fishery
rights and efficiency                                            caught by domestic                -   Real Delivered price of
     - Enhance durability among                                  fleet (approx.. 52%                   skipjack in 2040: $1800/mt
         parties, and potentially for                            Value Added ratio                 -   Real Delivered price of
         companies                                               to dockside value                     yellowfin in 2040: $2100/mt
     - Enhance transferability, incl.                            of catch), so if                  -   Catch levels maintained at 2014
         secondary markets                                       catch by domestic                     levels
     - Substitutability reduced – per                            fleet reduced in                  -   20 to 25% of the est. $3 bn in
         Goal#1 above                                            favor of more                         delivered value from PNA
Pooling of access among parties to                               efficient foreign                     purse seine fishery is captured,
coalitions                                                       fleets, then                          for total revenues of $600 to
Auctioning of access rights                                      potential negative                    750 m per year (or roughly
                                                                 impact on GDP                         $13,000 to $16,500 per day)
                                                                                                   -   Local consumption of canned
                                                                                                       tuna in PNG not reduced
                                                                                                   -   Changes phased slowly such
                                                                                                       that domestic fleet innovates
                                                                                                       and improves efficiency over
                                                                                                       time, no loss in domestic fleet
                                                                                                       and value added
                                                                                                   -   No estimates available of
                                                                                                       increased access fees captured
                                                                                                       from tropical longline fishery
                                                                                                   -   Estimated US$28.6 m in
                                                                                                       additional access fees captured
                                                                                                       by PICs in southern albacore
                                                                                                       longline fishery




                                                                                                                                    109
Invest in capacity for administration,   -$50 m            N/A       N/A        N/A            Baseline of $50 m in public
monitoring and enforcement of access                                                           expenditures, increase to 5% of
rights and limits                                                                              delivered value, with reductions for
                                                                                               advancements in monitoring
                                                                                               technology
Branding of PIC tuna products            $50 to 80 m       N/A       N/A        N/A            - Capture an increase in the price
                                                                                                  of 500,000 tons of PNA purse
                                                                                                  seine-caught tuna, equivalent to
                                                                                                  5 to 8% of the processed value
                                                                                                  (US$1 billion in real terms)
                                                                                               - Outsource harvesting (pay 10%
                                                                                                  mark-up)
                                                                                               - Outsource processing (pay 10%
                                                                                                  mark-up)

Goal#3: Increase Pacific Island employment in WCPO tuna fisheries
Regional processing clusters             -$52 to 64 m      $85.3 m   7,500 to   Potential      - Double 2013 purse seine catch
                                                                     15,000     impact on        volume processed locally
                                                                                local supply   - $711 va/mt processed
                                                                                of food fish   - Baseline of 120,000 mt
                                                                                                 processed locally 2013
                                                                                               - Assumes full concession of days
                                                                                                 (4,000 for 120,000 mt; 30
                                                                                                 mt/day), at $13,000 to
                                                                                                 $16,000/day
                                                                                               - Based on PNG and Solomon
                                                                                                 Islands range of 1 employee for
                                                                                                 every 8 to 16 mt processed
Vessel support service hubs              N/A               $3 m      N/A        N/A            - Islands could sell consumables
                                                                                                 and maintenance services, but
                                                                                                 would not enter bait or fuel
                                                                                                 servicing markets
                                                                                               - Consumables and maintenance
                                                                                                 services make up 10% of
                                                                                                 operating costs across all vessel
                                                                                                 types
                                                                                               - Margins for maintenance and
                                                                                                 consumables would be 15%



                                                                                                                                110
 Goal#4: Enhance Pacific Island food security
 Allocate portion of access rights to                 N/A – though in              N/A                 N/A        PNG             PNG would need to allocate
 coastal communities                                  cases of individual                                         allocates       roughly half of its PAE for coastal
 Invest in inshore FADs                               PICs, governments                                           access          fisheries, at 292,000 mt food fish
                                                      may likely need to                                          equivalent to   gap, considering 30 mt catch per
                                                      allocate some portion                                       needed levels   vessel day, to supply 35 kg fish per
                                                      of access to coastal                                        of food fish    person at projected population
                                                      fisheries, to shift food                                    per year        levels.
                                                      and livelihood
                                                      opportunities into the                                      Solomon         Solomon Islands would allocate
                                                      tuna fisheries where                                        Islands may     roughly 250 vessel days for inshore
                                                      feasible                                                    also need to
                                                                                                                  do the same     Vanuatu would allocate total
                                                                                                                                  albacore catch in its waters of
                                                                                                                                  6,898 mt in 2014, insufficient to
                                                                                                                                  raise consumption of fish to
                                                                                                                                  recommended 35 kg/person/year
 Trial efforts to retain more purse seine             N/A                          N/A                 N/A        Greater         PNG and Solomon Islands would
 by-catch (not including bigeye)                                                                                  retention of    aim to support greater distribution
                                                                                                                  by-catch (e.g.  and sale of purse seine by-catch
                                                                                                                  fin fishes,     landed at Rabaul and Noro for
                                                                                                                  etc.) could     example.
                                                                                                                  increase food
                                                                                                                  fish available
                                                                                                                  near ports or
                                                                                                                  transshipment
                                                                                                                  hubs
 TOTAL                                                176.6 to 344.6               88.3                7,500 to   Food fish gap filled in PNG and Solomon Islands,
                                                                                                       15,000     Vanuatu in deficit
Sources: Conservation International (2015); calculations from FFA (2014), FFA (2015); Arnason (2015)




                                                                                                                                                                   111
Table 16. Indicative Distribution of Net Economic Benefits to PICs of Opportunity Scenario to 2040

                           Additional      Public Additional Contribution                   Additional Employment
                           Revenues (US$)         to GDP (US$)
 Fiji                      5.3 m                  -                                         -
 FSM                       26.1 – 48.7 m          0.7 m                                     -
 Kiribati                  56.1 – 104.5 m         -                                         -
 RMI                       -1.4 – +5.0 m          15.3 m                                    1,275 – 2,550
 Nauru                     10.0 – 19.0 m          -                                         -
 Palau                     3.2 – 6.0 m            -                                         -
 PNG                       32.8 – 84.0 m          57.0 m                                    4,950 – 9,900
 Samoa                     3.9 m                  -                                         -
 Solomon Islands           14.7 – 29.1 m          15.3 m                                    1,275 – 2,550
 Tokelau                   4.4 – 8.4 m            -                                         -
 Tonga                     2.0 m                  -                                         -
 Tuvalu                    14.5 – 23.6 m          -                                         -
 Vanuatu                   5.1 m                  -                                         -
 Total                     176.7 – 344.6 m        88.3 m                                    7,500 – 15,000
Note: in terms of benefits from the purse seine fishery, distribution estimated from distribution of the location of catches and
indicative only, while distribution of southern albacore revenues based on Table 3 of MRAG (2012)

Figure 55. Upper Bound of Additional 2040 Public Revenues in Real Terms as % of 2013 GDP

 % GDP
    70

    60

    50

    40

    30

    20

    10

     0
                   FSM                    Kiribati                  Tuvalu




                                                                                                                           112
V. The Opportunity Scenario in 2040

Sub-regional coalitions of PICs are entrenched around the three tuna fisheries – purse seine, tropical
longline and southern longline, with norms of transparency and trust established, as well as flexible
formulas for distribution of returns on access to accommodate spatial shifts in the stocks as impacts from
climate change are felt. Countries continue to see greater benefits from cooperation to invest in growing
shared natural capital assets and many count upon their annual returns for stability funds and public
investment. Working together, these coalitions have set target reference points for the four tuna stocks as a
basis for firm total allowable catches from the zones under their jurisdiction, based on regular assessments
from the world’s top tuna biologists at SPC. The equatorial coalition comprised largely of PNA members
operates as a well-functioning organization, with a permanent board of global experts from within the
region, and a secretariat of professional staff from strong education and training programs within the region,
built over recent years with public revenues from the fisheries. Similarly, the Tokelau Arrangement’s
successor is governed by a permanent board with a well-staffed secretariat. Staff in both organizations are
highly skilled and focus on managing registries of tuna catch quota, monitoring trends in use and
synthesizing key biological, ecological and economic research for the board, as well as managing quota
auctions. FFA provides monitoring and surveillance services, among others, to the coalitions, recognized
as a world leader in cutting-edge surveillance technology that includes a series of unmanned aircraft
facilities. The sum of these institutional reforms allows the region to match fishing rules to the spatial extent
of the fisheries, allocate scarce resources to fit comparative advantages, and effectively administer, monitor
and enforce access rules to increase value rather than production from the waters.

Seeing a future constraint on returns and potential external influence from the WCPFC, PNA members
moved quickly in 2017 - 2018 to invest in research and development for by-catch reduction, and to
implement an innovative FAD licensing scheme to spur industry investment – particularly given projected
eastward shifts in distribution of the stock. The combination of technology advances and some initially
painful catch reductions, coordinated with similar action through the longline VDS, placed the bigeye stock
on a slow recovery path, with biomass eventually and steadily increasing towards 40 percent of unfished
levels. Albacore, skipjack and yellowfin stocks continue to remain healthy, with a slightly stricter target
reference point to provide some reserve should climate change make it necessary. These stocks provide the
world’s last healthy tuna stocks and have become an even more international fishery system, as global
demand for tuna products has remained steady with Asian and Middle Eastern markets becoming more
mature.

Inclusion of Indonesia in the purse seine and tropical long arrangements, and the Philippines in the former,
has enhanced the total allowable catch limits for both and placed most of the world’s skipjack under robust
management. Strong restrictions for fishing on the high seas, linked to access to national waters, was
recognized in 2020 by the WCPFC together with robust management and monitoring, and even with
shifting stocks high seas fishing is minimal. Some three quarters of the southern albacore longline fishery
operates on rules set through successors to the Tokelau Arrangement, with profitability on an upward trend.

As an example, gradually over the years PNA members enhanced the flexibility of internal vessel day
trading while increasing durability of allocations – with some countries moving slowly in order to give
domestic fleets time to adjust and improve efficiency (and thereby maintain contributions to local value
added). Days with longer duration were progressively issued to companies for higher returns, or in some
cases in exchange for local investment. Continued trials in pooling with successful results, as well as
improved auction designs, led to an agreement whereby the parties directed the secretariat to pool all access
rights, allocated via auctions, with revenues distributed to parties via the agreed formula. Several parties
opt to continue to invest access revenues in processing clusters, reducing the TAE and their distribution
accordingly. After years of investment in effort adjustments at the individual vessel level, the parties made
sufficient preparations for a transition of rules towards a quota-system. Secondary markets for quota

                                                                                                            113
developed, regulated by the parties and enhancing overall fleet efficiency. The efficiency gains, together
with the enhanced visibility and reduced risk for firms, led to significant investment in technology for higher
quality products, generating value throughout the supply chain. As a result of healthy fish stocks and a well-
functioning access market, resource rents and revenues are between 50 percent higher and double 2015
levels in real terms (after management costs and concessions for domestic processing are subtracted).

Building off of healthy stocks and efficiently-regulated access, the PNA countries (plus Indonesia and the
Philippines) have created a trading company that controls much of supply to processors and in some cases
direct to retailers, supported by freezing/storage facilities in key hubs throughout the region. A number of
PICs have well-developed vessel support systems that provide services to the fleets. Utilizing the pooled
access regime, several countries exchange revenue distributions for allocations to secure access coastal tuna
fisheries developed through nearshore FAD networks to help ensure sufficient flow of food fish. This
process began in the 2020s in advance of continued stagnation in coastal fisheries. Some countries have
established dedicated coastal community funds with tuna revenues, to invest in reef restoration and key
infrastructure and social goods.

As a result of the policy strategies and decisions pursued under the Regional Roadmap for Sustainable
Pacific Fisheries, public revenues are some US$177 to 345 million per year higher for PICs in real terms,
after concessions for onshore investment and investments in administration, monitoring and surveillance
are subtracted (this likely underestimates efficiency gains to harvesting from incentives created by the quota
market). This provides additional revenues equivalent to 16, 62 and 61 percent of 2013 GDP for FSM,
Kiribati and Tuvalu, respectively. A number of countries have increased local value added by an aggregate
US$88 million per year in real terms due to processing cluster and vessel service hubs (though many
processing facilities operate under capacity and at a loss given erosion of European trade preferences).
These efforts have created some 7,500 to 15,000 additional jobs in the region for processing, without
including the additional employment from service hubs. Over time an Oceanic Tuna Export Company
(OTEC) could develop and generate significant profits shared, as well as employment at storage facilities
throughout the region.

In retrospect, five strategies stand out:
     1. Regional cooperation around a shared resource, expanded to include key resource owners like
         Indonesia and the Philippines,
     2. Hard fishing effort and catch limits that maintained valuable natural capital assets in the water (and
         helped constrain supply and hence increase price), with proactive efforts and up front investments
         to rebuild the bigeye stock before further declines,
     3. Flexible access and eventually output rights for harvesters that enhanced the value of the fisheries
         without increasing production, and provided a tool for interested PICs to lever greater foreign
         investment in processing,
     4. Significant investment in skills and capacity to develop the world’s top tuna managers, and
     5. Inclusion of coastal communities in the fisheries where feasible, through dedicated access and
         inshore FAD networks, as well as targeted investments maintain food security with coastal fish
         supplies stagnating and growing populations.




                                                                                                          114
Annex I. Overview of Scenario Analysis as a basis for the Methodology

Definition of scenario analysis. Scenarios tell compelling stories that capture the imagination and
communicate future risks or opportunities, often for policy decisions (Swart et al., 2004). They are neither
predictions nor forecasts, but rather should be thought of as coherent and plausible stories, told in words
and numbers, about the possible co-evolutionary pathways of combined human and environmental systems
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000; Swart et al., 2004; Carpenter et al., 2005). Each scenario is one plausible
alternative image of how the future might unfold under particular assumptions, and a set of such scenarios
can support understanding of possible future developments in complex systems and policy making
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000; Carpenter et al., 2005). In this way, they assist policy-makers to understand the
upcoming choices that need to be made and
highlight developments in the present                              Origins of Scenario Analysis
(Carpenter et al., 2005). Scenarios are
typically developed through the joint This field arose in response to strategic questions about the possible
involvement of decision-makers and future states of complex systems that are either inherently unpredictable
scientific experts, and they represent a or have high scientific uncertainties, where long-range predictions or
promising mechanism for linking scientific forecasts were often not feasible (Nakicenovic et al, 2000; Swart et al,
                                                2004). While predictive modeling is appropriate for simulating well-
information to decision-making processes understood systems over sufficiently short times, as complexity
(Carpenter et al, 2005).                        increases and the time horizon lengthens, the power of prediction
                                                diminishes (Peterson et al., 2003; Carpenter et al, 2005). Quantitative
Scenarios generally include the following       forecasting is legitimate only to the degree the system state can be well
elements:                                       specified, the dynamics governing change are known and persistent, and
  • description of step-wise changes in         mathematical algorithms can be devised to validly represent these
    the future state of society and the         relationships (Carpenter et al., 2005). However, one method for
    environment;                                thinking about future opportunities and risks is the construction of
                                                scenarios, particularly in terms of complex systems such as fisheries and
  • driving forces, the main factors that
                                                their sustainability (Alcamo, 2001; Swart et al., 2004).
    influence the changes described;
  • base year;                                  The term ‘scenario’ has its origins in theater, describing the actions of
  • time horizon and time steps; and            performers or changes in the stage setting, before being applied to war
  • the storyline, a narrative description      game analysis after World War Two by Herman Kahn and his
    that highlights the scenario’s main         colleagues in the 1960s (Alcamo, 2001; Carpenter et al., 2005).
    features and the relationship (or           Beginning in the 1970s, Carpenter et al. (2005) note that scenario
    assumptions or theories about the           analysis was increasingly used in questions of sustainability and
                                                human-natural systems, including ambitious mathematical simulation
    relationship) between the driving
                                                models as well as speculative narrative. Michael Porter’s (1979) work
    forces and these main features              during this time established the basis for applying scenario analysis to
    (Alcamo, 2001).                             the development of business strategies, and a new round of integrated
                                                global analysis began in the late 1980s and 1990s in response to
Scenarios have been used in a wide array of     concerns with climate change and sustainable development (Carpenter
contexts, including: (i) ‘‘business strategy    et al, 2005). The time frame of climate change spurred a number of
scenarios’’ that explore uncertainty in a       scenario analyses, perhaps the most well-known of which was the
world that the business does not control in     Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) scenarios for
order to test the robustness of decision-       greenhouse gas emissions (Swart et al., 2004). Subsequently, a
making and to identify opportunities and        significant effort to develop scenarios of potential changes in
                                                ecosystems and their impacts on human welfare was conducted in the
challenges; (ii) ‘‘new conversation
                                                early 2000s as part of the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA),
scenarios’’ that explore new and unknown        which included a detailed history of scenario analysis up to that time
topics and can be used as an educational        (Carpenter et al., 2005).
tool for wide audiences; (iii) ‘‘groups-in-
conflict scenarios’’ that use scenario techniques to understand differences and jointly explore consequences
of actions; (iv) ‘‘public interest scenarios’’ that aim to shape the future by articulating a common agenda

                                                                                                               115
and highlighting potential actions and their consequences; and (iv) ‘‘scientific scenarios’’ examine the
possible long-range behavior of biophysical systems as perturbed by human influence (Carpenter et al.,
2005).

In all of these cases, scenarios can be either qualitative or quantitative, with qualitative scenarios taking the
shape of diagrams, phrases or outlines, or more commonly narrative texts (i.e. ‘storylines’), while
quantitative scenarios present numerical information in the form of tables or graphs (see figure one below)
(Nakicenovic et al, 2000; Alcamo, 2001). The qualitative scenario gives voice to important qualitative
factors shaping development such as values, behaviors, and institutions, providing a broader perspective
than is possible from mathematical modeling alone, while the quantitative scenario offers structure,
discipline, and rigor – in many cases the two are blended (Carpenter et al., 2005). Alternatively, scenarios
may be classified as (i) exploratory, where the scenario begins in the present and explores trends into the
future in a sequence of emerging events, and/or (ii) anticipatory, where the scenario starts with a prescribed
vision of the future and then works backwards in time to visualize how this future could emerge (Alcamo,
2001). Scenarios may also include policies to depict the effects of a policy reform, or ‘non-policy’ scenarios
that aim to describe changes in other drivers.

Schematic illustration of alternative scenario formulation, from narrative storylines to quantitative formal
models




                                      Source: (Nakicenovic et al., 2000)

General methodology for constructing scenarios. A good scenario should be plausible, transparent and
understandable (Alcamo, 2001). An example of a process for building a qualitative scenario might include
literature reviews and consultations to (Nakicenovic et al, 2000; Alcamo, 2001):
     • Identify the main drivers that will shape future events for the system under analysis (e.g.
         demography, technology, etc.), 30
     • For each of these drivers, select key variables (e.g. 10 to 15),
     • Outline mini-scenarios about the future changes to each variable,
     • Reduce the list of key variables for each driver to 5 or 6 priority variables (i.e. variables expected
         to best measure the magnitude and direction of the drivers),
     • Combine similar groups of mini-scenarios into full scenarios, and
     • Develop a ‘storyline’ around that scenario (e.g. 3,000 words).



30The discussion of drivers is often organized around the IPAT equation: Impact = Population x Affluence x Technology.
Essentially, environmental impacts (e.g. emissions) are the product of the level of population times the affluence (i.e. income per
capita) times the level of technology deployed (Nakicenovic et al, 2000).
                                                                                                                               116
Once narrative ‘storylines’ or qualitative scenarios       Example of scenario analysis for climate change
are developed, they can be quantified into
prototype scenarios with the use of models (i.e.       A well-known recent example of scenario analysis was the
formal representations of a system that allow          development of greenhouse gas emission scenarios as a
quantification of relevant system variables) that      basis for modeling projected impacts on the climate
assign internally consistent values to the various     (Nakicenovic et al, 2000). In this example, a set of scenarios
scenario characteristics (Nakicenovic et al, 2000).    for future emissions was developed based on extensive
                                                       assessment of the literature, six alternative modeling
                                                       approaches, and consultation and comments from the
                                                       public. More specifically, four storylines were developed
                                                       through an iterative process that identified driving forces,
                                                       key uncertainties, and modeling to produce quantitative
                                                       scenario families (Nakicenovic et al., 2000). While there is
                                                       an infinite number of possible scenarios, the team
                                                       consciously applied the principle of Occam’s Razor (i.e.
                                                       economy of thought) to identify the minimum number of
                                                       scenarios that could still serve as an adequate basis to assess
                                                       climate change – deciding eventually on four (Nakicenovic
                                                       et al., 2000). The development of these scenarios for future
                                                       emissions allowed other teams to model their impacts on
                                                       the climate system (Nakicenovic et al., 2000).




                                                                                                                117
    Annex II. Selected WCPO Tuna Fisheries Policy Statements and Instruments
                   Policies                                  Organizations                                              Policy Instruments & Agency Activities
 Document           Objectives, Strategy
                                                                                        Level: WCPO
Convention on     Context: In the early to mid-    Member countries: Australia, China,                Selected Conservation and Management Measures (binding decisions by the WCPFC):
the               1990s there was a growing        Canada, Cook Islands, European              WCPFC Record of Fishing Vessels (2013): Requires members to authorize all vessels flying their
Conservation      awareness of the need for a      Union, Federated States of Micronesia,      flags who wish to fish in WCPO, and transmit information to WCPFC for record of fishing vessels,
and               tuna management agency that      Fiji, France, Indonesia, Japan, Kiribati,   and prohibit vessels from landing fish caught in the WCPO at their ports that are not listed in the
Management of     would cover an area larger       Republic of Korea, Republic of              record.
Highly            than that encompassed by         Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Zealand,       Regional Observer Program (2007): Requires all vessels fishing in WCPO waters to have an
Migratory Fish    PICs and which would include     Niue, Palau, Papua New Guinea,              observer, collecting data on fishing catch and effort
Stocks in the     foreign nations with vessels     Philippines, Samoa, Solomon Islands,        Satellite-Based Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) (2014): Establishes a WCPFC VMS, requiring
Western    and    fishing in the WCPO. After 6     Chinese Taipei, Tonga, Tuvalu, United       all vessels fishing in WCPO to send signals to the VMS, and accepting signals from the FFA VMS
Central Pacific   years of complex negotiations    States of America, Vanuatu.                 High seas boarding (2006): members agree that vessels flying their flag may be boarded for
Ocean [entered    between the PICs and distant-    Participating Territories: American         inspection by vessels of participating countries recognized by the WCPFC when fishing in the high
into force in     water fishing nations known      Samoa, Commonwealth of the Northern         seas, for compliance with Commission measures
2004]             as the Multilateral High Level   Mariana Islands, French Polynesia,          List of vessels fishing illegally (2010): WCPFC will establish and maintain a list of vessels
                  Conference, the treaty was       Guam, New Caledonia, Tokelau, Wallis        documented by members as fishing illegally
                  opened for signature in Sept.    and Futuna.                                 Transshipment (2009): No purse seine vessels may transship at sea, and no longline vessels may
                  2000.                            Cooperating Non-Members: Ecuador,           transship in the high seas.
                                                   El Salvador, Mexico, Panama, Liberia,       South Pacific Albacore (2010): Members shall freeze the number of fishing vessels targeting
                  Objective: To ensure, through    Thailand, Vietnam.                          albacore in the South Pacific at 2005 levels
                  effective management, the        Secretariat established in 2004 based in    Conservation and Management Measures for Bigeye, Yellowfin and Skipjack Tuna (2014):
                  long-term conservation           Pohnpei, FSM.                               For the purse seine fishery: (i) use of fish aggregating devices (FADs)* in WCPO prohibited for 3-
                  and sustainable use of highly                                                month period, with additional measures to increase the closure period or reduce total number of
                  migratory fish stocks in the     Decisions are generally taken by            FADs, and all FADs in high seas to be prohibited in 2017; (ii) purse seining in the EEZs of PNA
                  WCPO in accordance with the      consensus of members, participating         countries agreed to be regulated by the VDS, with total fishing effort fixed at 2010 levels; while non-
                  UN Convention on the Law of      territories and cooperating non-            PNA coastal states in WCPO with at least 1,500 fishing days in their EEZs over the period of 2006
                  the Sea Treaty and the UN        members at meetings held annually.          to 2010 shall limit total effort to 2010 levels; purse seine effort on the high seas to limited 2,282
                  Fish Stocks Agreement            These decisions are informed by the         fishing days per year by an identified group of distant water fishing fleets; and all purse seine vessels
                                                   work of four subsidiary bodies: the         should carry an observer, in EEZs or high seas; and (iii) excluding PICs and Indonesia, countries
                  Strategy: Established the        Scientific Committee (best available        with purse seine fleets shall ensure that the number of vessels above 24 meters and with freezing
                  Western and Central Pacific      scientific information), the Technical      capacity does not increase.
                  Fisheries Commission             and        Compliance       Committee       For the longline fishery: (i) bigeye catch by longline fishing limited to 55,687 tons annually in 2017
                  (WCPFC) to carry out this        (recommendations on compliance with         by the fleets of China, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, U.S. and Taiwan, China; (ii) countries shall ensure
                  objective, as a Regional         decisions), the Northern Committee          that their longline catch of yellowfin does not increase; and (iii) excluding PICs and Indonesia,
                  Fisheries Management             (recommendations on species found           countries with longline fleets targeting bigeye shall not increase the number of vessels.
                  Organization (RFMO)              north of 20 degrees north), and the         Additionally, requires countries with fleets fishing in WCPO to provide operational catch and effort
                  recognized under international   Finance and Administration Committee        data, i.e. from logbooks, to the Secretariat on a confidential basis.
                  law (Article 64 of the UN        (recommendations          on       the      Harvest Strategy for each Stock (2014): Requires development of harvest strategies for each key
                  Convention on the Law of the     Commission’s budget). The SPC’s             fishery, including: (i) definition of management objectives for the fishery or stock; (ii) target and
                  Sea Treaty).                     Oceanic Fisheries Program serves as         limit reference points for each stock; (iii) acceptable levels of risk to breach reference points; (iv)



                                                                                                                                                                                             118
                                                    the Commission’s Science Services       monitoring strategy; (v) decision rules to achieve target reference points and avoid limit reference
                                                    Provider and Data Manager.              points; and (vi) management strategy evaluation.
                  Policies                                   Organizations                                           Policy Instruments & Agency Activities
 Document          Objectives, Strategy
                                                                            Level: Pacific Islands Region
South Pacific    Context: In the late 1970s,        Member Countries: Australia, Cook       Niue Treaty on Cooperation in Fisheries Surveillance and Law Enforcement in the South Pacific
Forum            many distant water fishing         Islands, FSM, Fiji, Kiribati, Nauru,    Region (1992, 2012 subsidiary agreement): Agreement among FFA members to cooperate on
Fisheries        nations wishing to fish in the     New Zealand, Niue, Palau, PNG, RMI,     enforcement of national fisheries laws and regulations, including agreement on regional surveillance
Agency           Pacific Islands area negotiated    Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau,        procedures and patrols, cross-vesting of enforcement powers to enable cooperative surveillance and
Convention       bi-laterally with PICs in what     Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu               enforcement activities, information sharing and development of a shared Treaty Information System,
[entered into    was perceived as a ‘divide and                                             etc.; as well as establish harmonized minimum terms and conditions for foreign fishing vessel access
force in 1979]   conquer’ strategy. Partially in    Governing body is the Forum Fisheries   to their waters, specifying consistent tuna access conditions throughout waters of PICs, including
                 response, FFA was established      Committee of member countries,          requirements in national regulations for: (i) vessels to be in good standing on the FFA tuna fishing
                 to help countries sustainably      aiming to take decisions by consensus   vessel registry in order to receive a fishing license for PIC waters, (ii) vessels licensed in PIC waters
                 manage their fishery resources     in annual meetings.                     to provide uniform minimum reporting on fishing activity and catch, as well as common
                 that fall within their 200 mile                                            identification markings, (iii) vessels fishing in PIC waters to have coverage of observers; PICs to
                 Exclusive Economic Zones           Secretariat established in 1979 in      share of national information with FFA and utilize its satellite-based vessel monitoring system
                 (EEZs). FFA is an advisory         Honiara, Solomon Islands.               (VMS), among others.
                 body providing expertise,
                 technical assistance and other                                             Multilateral Fishing Treaty with the United States (1987, amended in 2003): Agreement between
                 support to its members who                                                 FFA members and the United States for the country’s tuna fishing fleet to access waters of PICs on
                 make sovereign decisions                                                   common conditions and fees, together with targeted bi-lateral aid from the U.S.
                 about their tuna resources and
                 participate in regional decision                                           FFA Functions: Provides advice, information, policy recommendations, regional strategies,
                 making on tuna management                                                  technical support and development opportunities to members at the national and regional level, to
                 through agencies such as the                                               assist them to carry out three broad tasks:
                 WCPFC. The FFA was                                                         1. Developing and implementing effective regional and national policy: supporting policy
                 originally involved with all                                                  harmonization and advisory services to members, supporting consensus on regional policies,
                 fisheries, but in the early                                                   assisting members on relations with distant water fishing nations;
                 1990s,      refocused    almost                                            2. Providing national and regional tuna fisheries management services: supporting monitoring and
                 entirely on tuna.          FFA                                                surveillance of fishing activities and compliance with member regulations, including maintaining
                 originally provided secretariat                                               a tuna fishing vessel registry and a regional satellite-based vessel monitoring system (VMS)
                 services to the PNA, until the                                                (transmits to secretariat and to monitoring stations of members, conducting regional surveillance
                 PNA Office was established in                                                 patrols, providing training to national enforcement agents, training and advisory services on
                 2010.                                                                         research national management functions, and maintaining a regional observer program; and
                                                                                            3. Providing regional tuna fisheries development services: provides information, analysis and
                 Objective: To drive regional                                                  training to members to develop the fishery to harvest, process and market tuna
                 cooperation to create and
                 enable the maximum long term
                 social and economic benefit
                 from the sustainable use of
                 members’ shared offshore
                 fishery resources


                                                                                                                                                                                         119
                    Policies                                     Organizations                                             Policy Instruments & Agency Activities
 Document            Objectives, Strategy
                                                                     Level: Pacific Islands Equatorial Belt Sub-Region
Nauru              Context: Building from the          Parties to the Agreement: FSM,             First Implementing Arrangement (1983, amended in 2010): Sets out the minimum terms and
Agreement          context of the 1979 FFA             Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, PNG, RMI,          conditions for foreign fishing vessels to access the waters of Parties, including registration on the
Concerning         Convention, PICs in the             Solomon Islands, Tuvalu (Tokelau is an     FFA vessel registry, uniform licensing, reporting, minimum inclusion of Party nationals as crew, etc.
Cooperation in     equatorial belt began to            observer)
the                discuss       more       specific                                              Second Implementing Arrangement (1990): Prohibits transshipment at sea by any foreign vessels
Management of      cooperation around the tuna         Governing body is an annual meeting of     licensed to fish in Party waters, requires reporting of high seas catch by any foreign vessels licensed
Fisheries     of   fisheries in their waters.          the representatives of the parties,        to fish in Party waters
Common                                                 aiming to take decisions based on
Interest [agreed   Objective: to coordinate and        consensus if possible, if not then by a    Federated States of Micronesia Arrangement (1995): Mechanism for Parties’ domestic vessels to
in         1982,   harmonize the management of         vote of at least 5 Parties                 access the fishing resources of other parties, aiming to provide access for Parties’ domestic vessels
amended 2010]      fisheries with regard to                                                       to other Parties’ waters on terms no less favorable than those granted to distant water fishing nations;
                   common stocks shared across         Secretariat services provided by FFA       secure maximum sustainable economic benefits from tuna resources; promote greater participation
                   the zones of the parties.           until 2010, when the Agreement was         by nationals of Parties in fisheries & assist in development of national fisheries industries; allow
                                                       amended to establish a PNA Office          access to vessels on terms consistent with Palau Arrangement. Domestic vessels are eligible based
                   Strategy: to set uniform terms      (PNAO) as a legal entity acting as         on a number of criteria, including good standing on FFA’s vessel registry, details of the vessel, and
                   and conditions of access,           secretariat. FFA requested to support      home-Party license, among others. Fee for entering other Parties’ waters is calculated as 5% of the
                   including      a     centralized    PNAO and Parties with fleet                multiple of average regional catch for preceding 3 years and average tuna price for corresponding
                   licensing system, reporting,        information and fishing catch and effort   years.
                   identification, etc.                data.
                                                                                                  Third Implementing Arrangement (2009, amended in 2010): Closes the following high seas areas
                                                                                                  to foreign vessels wishing to obtain/maintain a license to fish in party waters: (i) the area of high
                                                                                                  seas bounded by the national waters of the Federated States of Micronesia, Indonesia, Palau and
                                                                                                  Papua New Guinea; (ii) the area of high seas bounded by the national waters of the Federated States
                                                                                                  of Micronesia, Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and
                                                                                                  Tuvalu; and (iii) any additional high seas areas located within 10˚N and 20˚S latitude and 170˚E and
                                                                                                  150˚W longitude; requires purse seine vessels to retain all tuna catch fit for human consumption.

                                                                                                  Palau Arrangement for the Management of the Western Pacific Purse Seine Fishery (1995,
                                                                                                  amended most recently in 2015): Aims to enhance management of purse seine fishing vessel effort
                                                                                                  in Parties’ waters by encouraging collaboration between them, and (i) promoting optimal utilization
                                                                                                  and conservation of tuna resources, (ii) maximizing economic returns, employment generation and
                                                                                                  export earnings from sustainable harvesting of tuna resources, (iii) supporting the development of
                                                                                                  domestic locally-based purse seine fishing industries, and (iv) promoting effective and efficient
                                                                                                  administration, management and compliance. Creates the vessel day scheme (VDS) to manage
                                                                                                  access to Parties’ waters for tuna fishing vessels, replacing a previous vessel number limit of 205
                                                                                                  vessels by setting a total collective limit on fishing days in those waters by licensed purse seine
                                                                                                  vessels each year (total allowable effort or TAE), and allocating that TAE among the Parties (Party
                                                                                                  allowable effort or PAE). All Parties agree to limit fishing effort in their water to the respective
                                                                                                  PAEs, using standard criteria for reporting fishing days. Parties may transfer unused days within
                                                                                                  their PAEs, or agree on arrangements to pool them for sale. Effort expended under the FSMA and
                                                                                                  US Treaty is included in the calculations for TAE and PAEs, and Parties must allocate a portion of

                                                                                                                                                                                               120
                                                                                                    their PAEs to account for any days fished by their national fleets in other Parties’ waters. To combat
                                                                                                    ‘effort creep’ (increasing fish catch per the same measure of fishing effort, i.e. increasing catch per
                                                                                                    fishing day), the following conversion factors are used: (i) every fishing day by a purse seine vessel
                                                                                                    with a length overall of less than 50 meters shall equate to a deduction of one half of a fishing day;
                                                                                                    (ii) every fishing day by a purse seine vessel with a length overall of between 50 meters and 80
                                                                                                    meters shall equate to a deduction of one fishing day; and (iii) every fishing day by a purse seine
                                                                                                    vessel with a length overall in excess of 80 meters shall equate to a deduction of one and one half
                                                                                                    fishing days. Oversight of the VDS carried out by a sub-committee of the annual meeting of the
                                                                                                    Parties, the Vessel Day Scheme Committee, meeting as needed. Governance of the scheme is set by
                                                                                                    the annual meeting of the Parties, including setting the TAE and taking decisions on any other
                                                                                                    measures needed to implement the VDS. The VDS is implemented as part of a Conservation and
                                                                                                    Management Measure agreed at the WCPFC.

                                                                                                    Palau Arrangement for the Management of the Western Pacific Tuna Fishery – Management
                                                                                                    Scheme (Longline Vessel Day Scheme) (2015): Aims to enhance management of longline fishing
                                                                                                    effort in the waters of the Parties in order to (i) promote optimal utilization, conservation and
                                                                                                    management of tuna resources, (ii) maximize economic returns, employment generation and export
                                                                                                    earnings from sustainable harvesting of tuna resources, (iii) support the development of domestic
                                                                                                    locally-based longline fishing industries, (iv) secure an equitable share of fishing opportunities and
                                                                                                    equitable participation in the tropical longline fisheries for the Parties; (v) increase control of the
                                                                                                    tropical longline fishery for the Parties; (vi) enhance data collection and monitoring of the fishery;
                                                                                                    (vii) promote effective and efficient administration, management and compliance; and (viii)
                                                                                                    encourage collaboration between the Parties. Creates VDS to manage access to Parties’ waters for
                                                                                                    longline tuna fishing vessels, by setting a TAE and allocating as PAEs to Parties. Parties undertake
                                                                                                    similar commitments to limit effort as purse seine VDS, with transferability of days between Parties.
                                                                                                    To combat ‘effort creep’ the following conversion factors are used: (i) every fishing day by a longline
                                                                                                    vessel with a length overall of less than or equal to 40 meters shall equate to a deduction of 0.8 of a
                                                                                                    fishing day; (ii) every fishing day by a longline vessel with a length overall greater than 40 meters
                                                                                                    shall equate to a deduction of 1.6 fishing days. Artisanal vessels are exempt from the VDS.
                                                                                                    Oversight of the VDS carried out by a sub-committee of the annual meeting of the Parties, the
                                                                                                    Longline Vessel Day Scheme Committee, meeting as needed. Governance of the scheme is set by
                                                                                                    the annual meeting of the Parties, including setting the TAE and taking decisions on any other
                                                                                                    measures needed to implement the VDS.

                                                                                                    PNAO Functions: Coordinate implementation of the Nauru Agreement, develop fisheries
                                                                                                    conservation and management initiatives for the Parties, formulate initiatives to maximize sustained
                                                                                                    economic benefits to the Parties and administer PNA management initiatives. PNAO maintains a
                                                                                                    register of purse seine vessels established (VDS registry), with registration on the FFA register as a
                                                                                                    pre-requisite and monitoring via the FFA VMS.
Sources: Gillett, 2014; WCPFC (www.wcpfc.int); http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/dfat/treaties/1979/16.html; FFA (www.ffa.int); http://www.state.gov/e/oes/ocns/fish/bilateral/c33153.htm;
http://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5085&context=theses *FADs defined as including: “any object or group of objects, of any size, that has or has not been deployed, that is living or non-
living, including but not limited to buoys, floats, netting, webbing, plastics, bamboo, logs and whale sharks floating on or near the surface of the water that fish may associate with”




                                                                                                                                                                                                       121
References
Albacore Working Group (2014) Stock Assessment of Albacore Tuna in the North Pacific Ocean in 2014. Tenth
        Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC, Majuro.

Alcamo, J. (2001) Scenarios as tools for international environmental assessment. Environmental Issue Report No.
        24. European Environment Agency, Copenhagen.

Anderson, L.G. and Seijo, J.C. (2010) Bioeconomics of Fisheries Management. Wiley-Blackwell, Ames

Arnason, R. (2015) Review of the PNA Purse Seine Vessel Day Scheme. PNAO, Majuro.

Australia Department of Foreign Affairs (1979) South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency Convention. Australian
         Treaty Series 1979 No. 16. Retrieved from: http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/other/dfat/treaties/1979/16.html

Bagwell, K., Brown, C.P., and Staiger, R.W. (2015) Is the WTO Passe? Policy Research Working Paper 7304.
        World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Barclay, K. (2010) History of Industrial Tuna Fishing in the Pacific Islands. In Christensen, J. and Tull, M. (eds)
         Historical Perspectives of Fisheries Exploitation in the Indo Pacific. MARE Publication Series 12.
         Springer, New York.

Barclay, K., Payne, A.M., and Mauli, S. (2015) Gender, Fisher, Trader, Processer: Towards Gender-Equitable
         Fisheries Management and Development in Solomon Islands. In Krushelnytska, O. (2015) Toward gender-
         equitable fisheries management in Solomon Islands. World Bank Group, Washington, D.C.

Bell, J.D., Johnson, J.E. and Hobday, A.J. (2011) Vulnerability of Tropical Pacific Fisheries and Aquaculture to
         Climate Change. SPC, Noumea.

Bell, J.D., Allain, V., Allison, E., Andréfouët, S., Andrew, N., Batty, M., Blanc, M., Dambacher, J., Hampton, J.,
         Hanich, Q., Harley, S., Lorrain, A., McCoy, M., McTurk, N., Nicol, S., Pilling, G., Point, D., Sharp, M.,
         Vivili, P., and Williams, P. (2015) Diversifying the use of tuna to improve public health in Pacific Island
         countries and territories. Marine Policy 51, 584–591.

Bromley, D.W. and Cernea, M. M. (1989) The Management of Common Property Natural Resources: some
       conceptual and operational fallacies. World Bank Discussion Paper No. 57. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Campling, L., Havice, E. and McCoy, M. (2015) FFA Trade and Industry News. Volume 8: Issue 5. FFA, Honiara.

Carpenter, S., Pingali, P.L., Bennett, E.M., Zurek, M.B. eds. (2005) Ecosystems and human well-being: scenarios:
        findings of the Scenarios Working Group, Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, Island Press.

CEA       (2012)      Charting     a     Course      to     Sustainable Fisheries.  Retrieved    from:
         http://www.ceaconsulting.com/CaseStudyFiles/Charting%20a%20Course%20to%20Sustainable%20Fisheri
         es%20Report.pdf. CEA, San Francisco.

Charles, A.T. (2001) Sustainable Fishery Systems. Blackwell Science Ltd., Oxford.

Charles, A. 2009. Rights-based fisheries management: the role of use rights in managing access and harvesting. In
         K.L. Cochrane & S. Garcia, eds. A fishery manager’s guidebook, pp. 253–282. Rome, FAO, and UK, Wiley-
         Blackwell.

Clark, S. (2015) Purse Seine Fishing Activity in PNA Waters. Eleventh Regular Session of the Scientific
         Committee. WCPFC, Pohnpei.


                                                                                                                      122
Claus S, De Hauwere N, Vanhoorne B, Deckers P, Souza Dias F, Hernandez F and Mees J (2014) Marine Regions:
         Towards a global standard for georeferenced marine names and boundaries. Marine Geodesy 37(2): 99-125.

Cochrane, K. (2009) Fisheries Management. K. Cochrane ed. A fishery manager’s guidebook: management measures
        and their application. Fisheries Technical Paper: 424. FAO, Rome.

Conservation International (2015) Value Creation Opportunities for WCPO island nations in the tuna industry.
        Discussion Document. Conservation International, Fairfax.

Cooke, J.G. (1984), Glossary of technical terms. In Exploitation of Marine Communities, R.M. May (ed), Springer-
        Verlag. Retrieved from the FAO Fisheries Glossary: http://www.fao.org/faoterm/collection/fisheries/en/.

Crowder, L. B., Osherenko, G., Young, O.R., Airame, S., Norse, E.A., Baron, N., Day, J.C., Douvere, F., Ehler, C.N.,
       Halpern, B.S., Langdon, S.J., McLeod, K.L., Ogden, J.C., Peach, R.E., Rosenberg, A.A., Wilson, J.A. (2008)
       Resolving Mismatches in US Ocean Governance. Science 313 (5787): 617-618.

Daghorn and Restrepo, V. (2011) Questions  and  Answers  About  FADs  and  Bycatch. ISSF Technical
       Report No. 2011-3

Doyle, M. and Windheim, J. (2014) Environmental management strategy: four forces analysis. Environmental
       Management No. 55: 6 – 18.

Drakou E. G. and Virdin J. (2016) Purse seine tuna fisheries in the South Pacific: Mapping the distribution of their
        benefits around the globe. In: MSEAS 2016. Understanding marine socio-ecological systems; including the
        human dimension in integrated ecosystem assessment. Brest, FR.

EC (2014) Ensuring the integrity of the European carbon market. Retrieved from:
       http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/ets/oversight/faq_en.htm

EUMOFA           (2015)        The         EU         Fish                Market.           Retrieved          from:
     http://issuu.com/eumofa/docs/en_the_eu_fish_market_ed_2015

FAO Fisheries Glossary. Retrieved from: http://www.fao.org/faoterm/collection/fisheries/en/.

FAO Fishery Statistical Collection. Retrieved from: http://www.fao.org/figis/servlet/TabSelector#lastnodeclicked

FAO (2000) Case studies on the allocation of transferable quota rights in fisheries. FAO Fisheries Technical Paper
       No. 411. FAO, Rome.

FAO (2014) State of the World’s Fisheries and Aquaculture. FAO, Rome.

FAO (2015) Globefish Tuna Market Reports. January through December 2015. Retrieved from:
       http://www.fao.org/in-action/globefish/market-reports/resource-detail/en/c/358022/

FFA      (2014)     Economic         Indicators  Report.         October,    2014.   Retrieved   from:
        http://www.ffa.int/system/files/Economic%20Indicators%20Report%20October%202014%20%28Interim
        %29.pdf

FFA (2015) WCPO Tuna Catch and Value Tables. Retrieved from: http://www.ffa.int/node/425.

FFA (2015b) Welcome to the Pacific Islands Forum Fisheries Agency. Retrieved from: http://ffa.int/about

FFA (2015c) Mixed bag of results leaves room for hope after dismal WCPFC12. Retrieved from:
       http://ffa.int/node/1610

FFA and SPC (2015) Future of Fisheries: A Regional Roadmap for Sustainable Pacific Fisheries. FFA and SPC,
       Honiara, Noumea.
                                                                                                                123
Folke, C. and Berkes, F. eds (1998) Linking social and ecological systems: management practices and social
         mechanisms for building resilience.

Garcia (2005) World inventory of fisheries. Towards a new fisheries governance. Issues Fact Sheets. Text by S.M.
         Garcia. In: FAO Fisheries and Aquaculture Department [online]. Rome. Updated 27 May 2005. Retrieved
         from: http://www.fao.org/fishery/topic/14888/en

Garcia, S. (2009) Rising to depletion? Towards a dialogue on the state of national marine fisheries. World Bank,
         Washington, D.C.       Retrieved from: http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTARD/Resources/336681-
         1224775570533/RisingtoDepletion.pdf

Garcia, S.M. and Charles, A.T. (2007) Fisheries systems and linkages: from clockworks to soft watches. ICES Journal
         of Marine Science, 64: 580–587

Gillett, R. (2007) A Short History of Industrial Fishing in the Pacific Islands. RAP Publication 2007/22. FAO,
          Bangkok.

Gillett, R. (2014) Pacific Island Fisheries: Issues and Challenges. A Report Prepared for the ESCAP Pacific Office.

Gillett, R. and D. Bromhead (2008) Tuna for Tomorrow? - Some of the Science Behind an Important Fishery in the
          Pacific Islands. Asian Development Bank and Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Manila, ISBN 978-971-
          561-651-5, 50 pages.

Gillett, R. and Cartwright, I. (2010) The Future of Pacific Island Fisheries. SPC, Noumea.

Global Fishing Watch (2015) Global Fishing Watch. Retrieved from: http://globalfishingwatch.org/

Govan, H. (2015) Preliminary review of public expenditure of the Fisheries Agencies of the Pacific Island Countries
        and Territories: Policy, operational budget and staffing support for coastal fisheries. SPC Division of
        Fisheries, Aquaculture and Marine Ecosystems.

Grafton, R.Q., Hilborn, R., Ridgeway, L., Squires, D., Williams, M., Garcia, S., Grovesg, T., Joseph, J., Kelleher, K.,
         Kompas, T., Libecap, G., Lundin, C.G., Makino, M., Matthiasson, T., McLoughlinn, R., Parma, A, San
         Martin, G., Satia, B., Christian Schmidt, C., Taita, M., Zhang, L.X. (2008) Positioning Fisheries in a
         Changing World. Marine Policy 32: 630-634

Hamilton, A., Lewis, A., McCoy, M.M., Havice, E. and Campling, L. (2011) Market and Industry Dynamics in the
        Global Tuna Supply Chain. FFA, Honiara.

Hampton, J., Lewis, A., and Williams, P. (1999) The Western and Central Pacific Tuna Fishery: Overview of the
       Fishery and Current Status of the Tuna Stocks. Background Paper No. 5. First Heads of SPC Meeting. SPC,
       Noumea.

Hampton J. 2006. Estimates of large-scale purse seine and longline fishing capacity in the western and central
       Pacific Ocean based on stock assessments of target species. Methodological Workshop on the Management
       of Tuna Fishing Capacity. La Jolla, CA, May 8–12, 2006.
       ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/fao/010/a1338e/a1338e06.pdf

Hanich, Q. and Y. Ota (2013) Moving Beyond Rights Based Management: A Transparent Approach to Distributing
        the Conservation Burden in Tuna Fisheries. International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law (28).

Harley, S., Williams, P., Nicol, S. and Hampton, J. (2011) The Western and Central Pacific Tuna Fishery: 2011
         Overview and Status of the Stocks. Tuna Fisheries Assessment Report No. 12. SPC, Noumea.

Harley, S., Davies, N., Hampton, J., and Mckechnie, S. (2014) Stock Assessment of Bigeye Tuna in the Western and
         Central Pacific Ocean. Tenth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC.

                                                                                                                  124
Harley, S., Davies, N., Hampton, J., and Mckechnie, S. (2014b) Stock Assessment of Yellowfin Tuna in the Western
         and Central Pacific Ocean. Tenth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC, Majuro.

Harley, S., Davies, N., Tremblay-Boyer, L., Hampton, J. and Mckechnie, S. (2015) Stock Assessment for South Pacific
         Albacore Tuna. Tenth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC, Pohnpei.

Havice, E. 2013. Rights-based management in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean tuna fishery: Economic and
        environmental change under the Vessel Day Scheme. Marine Policy, 42 (February): 259-67.

Havice, E., McCoy, M. and Campling, L. (2014) FFA Trade and Industry News. Volume 7: Issue 6. FFA, Honiara.

Havice, E., L. Campling, M. A. McCoy and A. Lewis. 2014. Pacific Island Countries and United States of America
        Development-Oriented Trade and Investment Study: Fisheries Component. Suva: Pacific Islands Forum
        Secretariat.

Hilborn, R. and Walters, C.J. (1992) Quantitative Fisheries Stock Assessment: Choice, Dynamics and Uncertainty.
         Routledge, Chapman and Hall, Inc.

Hoegh-Guldberg, O. et al. 2015. Reviving the Ocean Economy: the case for action - 2015. WWF International,
       Gland, Switzerland., Geneva.

Hurry, G. (2014) Western and Central Pacific Fishery Commission: Western and Central Pacific Tuna Fishery.
        Presentation Retrieved from: http://devpolicy.org/presentations/2014-Pacific-Update/Day-2/Glenn-
        Hurry.pdf.

ICCAT (2015) Skipjack Tuna. Retrieved from: https://www.iccat.int/Documents/SCRS/ExecSum/SKJ_EN.pdf

Ilakini, J. (2013) Fisheries Subsidies and incentives provided by the Peoples Republic of China (PRC) to its Distant
          Water Fishing (DWF) Industry. FFA Secretariat Paper, Honiara

International Finance Corporation (2000) Capturing economic benefits from tuna fisheries. Foreign Investment
         Advisory Service. IFC, Washington, D.C.

IOTC (2015) Report of the 18th Session of the IOTC Scientific Committee. Retrieved from:
       http://www.iotc.org/documents

ISSF (2015) ISSF Tuna Stock Status Update 2015: Status of the World Fisheries for Tuna. Retrieved from: http://iss-
        foundation.org/wp-content/uploads/downloads/2015/11/ISSF-2015-03A-Status-of-the-Stocks-Nov-
        2015.pdf

ISSF (2015b) ISSF Research on FADs. Retrieved from: http://iss-foundation.org/download-monitor-demo/download-
        info/issf-research-on-fads/.

Johnston, D. (2015) Marine Lab takes to the Air with Drones. Retrieved from:
        https://nicholas.duke.edu/about/news/marine-lab-takes-air-drones

King, M. (2007) Fisheries Biology, Assessment and Management. Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.

Kooiman, J., Bavinck, M., Jentoft, S. and Pulin, R. (eds) (2005) Fish for Life: Interactive Governance for Fisheries.
       Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam

Lackey, R. T. (2005) Fisheries: history, science, and management. pp. 121-129. In: Water Encyclopedia: Surface and
        Agricultural Water, Jay H. Lehr and Jack Keeley, editors, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., Publishers, New York,
        781 pp.



                                                                                                                 125
Lehodey, P., Senina, I., Calmettes, B., Hampton, J., and Nicol, S. (2012) Modelling the impact of climate change on
       Pacific skipjack tuna population and fisheries. Climate Change Vol. 113, No. 2.

Lehodey, P., Senina, I., Nicol, S. and Hampton, J. (2015) Modelling the impact of climate change on south Pacific
       albacore tuna. Deep Sea Research Part II: Topical Studies in Oceanography 113: 246-259.

Lewis, A. (2014) Exploration of market viability for the full retention of non-tuna species in purse seine fisheries:
        Interim report. ISSF Technical Report 2014-12. International Seafood Sustainability Foundation,
        Washington, D.C.

Lowman, DM, R Fisher, MC Holliday, SA McTee, and S Stebbins. (2013) Fishery Monitoring Roadmap.
      Environmental Defense Fund, Washington, D.C. Retrieved from:
      https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/FisheryMonitoringRoadmap_FINAL.pdf

Matangi Tonga Online (2015) Pacific and China on Collision Course over Albacore Tuna. 12 December 2015.
        Retrieved from: http://matangitonga.to/2015/12/10/pacific-and-china-collision-course-over-albacore-tuna

McClurg, T. (2014) Conceptual Framework – for Identification and Assessment of Potential Fisheries Investments.
       In Holmes, L., Strauss, C. K., de Vos, K., Bonzon, K. (2014). Towards investment in sustainable fisheries:
       A framework for financing the transition. Environmental Defense Fund and The Prince of Wales’s
       International Sustainability Unit.

McCoy, M.A., Itano, D.G. and Pollard, S.J. (2015) A Forward-Looking Study of Development Opportunities in FFA
       Member Countries in the Tuna Industry. Gillett, Preston & Associations, Inc.

MEA (2005) Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. Ecosystems and Human Well-Being: General Synthesis. World
      Resources Institute, Washington, D.C.

Milazzo, M. (1998) Subsidies in World Fisheries: A Re-examination. World Bank Technical Paper No. 406. World
        Bank, Washington, D.C.

Miyake, M.; Guillotreau, P.; Sun, C-H; Ishimura, G. (2010) Recent Developments in the tuna industry: stocks,
        fisheries, management, processing, trade and markets. Fisheries and Aquaculture Technical Paper No. 543.
        FAO, Rome.

Moe, K. (2014) Notes from the field: using drones to prevent poaching. Retrieved from:
        http://dronelife.com/2014/07/24/using-drones-prevent-poaching-knut-moe-eye-remote-solutions/

MRAG (2015) Enhancing Economic Returns from the Southern Longline and Other Fisheries: Phase 3 Report.

Nakicenovic, N., Swart, R., (Eds.), 2000. IPCC Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. Cambridge University Press,
        UK.

NOAA (2015) U.S. Fishermen get Cameras to Track Bycatch. Retrieved from:
      http://www.nmfs.noaa.gov/stories/2015/09/fishermen_cameras_tracking_bycatch.html

North, D. (1990) Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance.         Cambridge University Press,
        Cambridge.

OECD (2011) Fisheries Policy Reform: National Experiences. OECD, Paris.

Orbach, M. (1980) The Human Dimension. In R. Lackey and L. Nielsen (eds) Fisheries Management. Blackwell
        Scientific Publishers, London.

Ostrom, E. (1990) Governing the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action. Cambridge
        University Press, Cambridge.


                                                                                                                126
Ostrom, E. (2005) Understanding Institutional Diversity. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

Ostrom, E. and Schlager, E. 1996. The formation of property rights. In: Rights to Nature: Ecological, Economic,
        Cultural and Political Principles of Institutions for the Environment. Hanna, S., Folke, C. and Mäler, K.G.
        (eds). pp. 127–156. Island Press, Washington, U.S.A

Pacific Islands Forum (2014) Framework for Pacific Regionalism. Endorsed by Pacific Islands Forum leaders in July,
          2014.          Pacific     Islands     Forum      Secretariat,    Suva.            Retrieved      from:
          http://www.forumsec.org/resources/uploads/embeds/file/Framework%20for%20Pacific%20Regionalism_b
          ooklet.pdf.

Pacific Islands Forum (2015) Forty-Sixth Pacific Islands Forum Communique. Retrieved from:
          http://www.forumsec.org/pages.cfm/newsroom/press-statements/2015-media-releases/46th-pacific-islands-
          forum-communique.html

Pew (2015) The Virtual Watch Room. Retrieved from: http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/fact-
        sheets/2015/01/virtual-watch-room

Pilling, G. and Harley, S. (2015) Estimating potential tropical purse seine fleet sizes given existing effort limits and
          candidate target stock levels. Eleventh Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC, Pohnpei.

PNA (2010) Nauru Agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Management of Fisheries of Common Stocks (as
       Amended April 2010). PNAO, Majuro.

PNA (2015) Palau Arrangement for the Management of the Western Pacific Fishery as Amended – Management
       Scheme (Purse Seine Vessel Day Scheme) (Amended September 2015. Parties to the Nauru Agreement
       Office, Majuro.

PNAO (2015) Study of the Development of the PNA Purse Seine Vessel Day Scheme (VDS) – catch-based and
       effort-based options. Terms of Reference. Retrieved from:
       http://www.pnatuna.com/sites/default/files/ToR%20for%20Review.pdf

Porter ME (1979) How Competitive Forces Shape Strategy. Harvard Business Review, March/April, pp 137–145

Porter ME (2008) The Five Competitive Forces that Shape Strategy, Harvard Business Review, January, pp 86–104

Pratt, C. and Govan, H. (2010) Our Sea of Islands, Our Livelihoods, Our Oceania: Framework for a Pacific
          Oceanscape, a catalyst for implementation of ocean policy. Marine Sector Working Group, Apia.

Restrepo V. (1999): Annotated Glossary of Terms in Executive Summary Reports of the International Commission
        for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas´ Standing Committee on Research and Statistics (SCRS). ICCAT.
        Retrieved from: FAO Fisheries Glossary: http://www.fao.org/faoterm/collection/fisheries/en/.

Restrepo, V. (2015) Capacity of the large-scale tropical tuna purse seine fishing fleets. Draft Report of the Western
        and Central Pacific Ocean Purse Seine Bigeye Management Workshop. April 8 – 10, 2015. Western
        Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council, Hawaii. Retrieved from: http://www.wpcouncil.org/wp-
        content/uploads/2015/04/WCPO-Purse-Seine-Bigeye-Management-Workshop-report-draft-6-2-2015.pdf .

Rice, J., Harley, S., Davies, N., and Hampton, J. (2014) Stock Assessment of Skipjack Tuna in the Western and Central
          Pacific Ocean. Tenth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC, Majuro.

Scott, A. (2008) The Evolution of Resource Property Rights. Oxford University Press, New York.

SPC (2015) SPC Oceanic Fisheries Program. Retrieved from: http://www.spc.int/OceanFish/en/tuna-fisheries/tuna-
       species/296-skipjack.



                                                                                                                     127
Sumaila, U.R, Khan, A.S., Dyck, A.J., Watson, R., Munro, G., Tydemers, P., and Pauly, D. (2010) A bottom-up re-
        estimation of global fisheries subsidies. Journal of Bioeconomics.

Sumaila, Ussif Rashid, William Cheung, Andrew Dyck, Kamal Gueye, Ling Huang, Vicky Lam, Daniel Pauly
        (2012) Benefits of rebuilding global marine fisheries outweigh costs." PloS one 7, no. 7

Swart, R.J., Raskin, P., and J. Robinson (2004) The problem of the future: sustainability science and scenario analysis.
         Global Environmental Change No. 14: 137 – 146.

Tamate, Josie Malamahetoa Mata Molesi (2013) Balancing the Scales: the experience of the Parties to the Nauru
        Agreement, Doctor of Philosophy Thesis, Australian National Centre for Ocean Resources and Security,
        University of Wollongong. Retrieved from: http://ro.uow.edu.au/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=5085&context=theses

Tidd, A., Pilling, G. and Harley, S. (2015) Examining productivity changes within the tropical WCPO purse seine
         fishery. Eleventh Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. WCPFC, Pohnpei.

United Nations (1995) The United Nations Agreement for the Implementation of the Provisions of the United Nations
        Convention on the Law of the Sea of 10 December 1982 relating to the Conservation and Management of
        Straddling     Fish    Stocks    and    Highly      Migratory    Fish     Stocks.     Retrieved    from:
        http://www.un.org/Depts/los/convention_agreements/convention_overview_fish_stocks.htm

UN DESA (2015) Revisions of 2015 World Population Prospects. http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/

United Nations General Assembly (2015) Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015,
        Transforming our world: the 2030 agenda for sustainable development. A/Res/70/1. United Nations, New
        York. Retrieved from: http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/RES/70/1&Lang=E.

U.S. Department of State (2015) South Pacific Tuna Treaty. Retrieved from:
        http://www.state.gov/e/oes/ocns/fish/regionalorganizations/tuna/index.htm

USDA (2015) Food Availability Data System. Retrieved from: http://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-
      availability-(per-capita)-data-system.aspx

U.S. Energy Information Administration (2015) Annual Energy Outlook 2015. Retrieved from:
        http://www.eia.gov/beta/aeo/#/?id=3-AEO2015.

Virdin, J. (2001) Hard Facts, Hidden Problems: A Review of Current Data on Fishing Subsidies. WWF Technical
         Paper. WWF, Gland.

Washington Post (2014) How America Fell Out of Love with Tuna. Retrieved from:
       https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2014/08/18/how-america-fell-out-of-love-with-canned-
       tuna/

WCPFC (2010) Frequently Asked Questions and Brochures. Retrieved from: http://www.wcpfc.int/frequently-
      asked-questions-and-brochures.

WCPFC (2014) Summary Report of the Tenth Regular Session of the Scientific Committee. August 6 – 14, Majuro.
      Retrieved from: https://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/SC10%20-%20final_posted-rev.pdf.

WCPFC (2015) Data Catalogue. Detailed catch sheets by fleet. Retrieved from: https://www.wcpfc.int/wcpfc-data-
      catalogue-0

WCPFC (2015) About the WCPFC. Retrieved from: http://www.wcpfc.int/about-wcpfc.

Weeratunge, N., Snyder, K. A., & Choo, P. S. (2010). Gleaner, fisher, trader, processer: understanding gendered
       employment in fisheries and aquaculture. Fish and Fisheries, 11, 405-420.

                                                                                                                     128
Williams, P. and Terawasi, P. (2015) Overview of Tuna Fisheries in the Western and Central Pacific Ocean,
        including Economic Conditions: 2014. WCPFC-SC11-2014/GN WP-1; Rev 1 (28 July 2015). Paper
        prepared for the Eleventh Regular Session of the Scientific Committee; WCPFC, Pohnpei.

Wilson, J. A. (2006) Matching social and ecological systems in complex ocean fisheries. Ecology and Society Vol. 11
         Issue 1, p263-284

World Bank (2006) Where is the wealth of nations? Measuring capital for the 21st century. Washington, D.C.,
       World Bank.

World Bank (2012) Pacific Islands Fisheries Sector Engagement Strategy. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank (2012) Moving beyond GDP: How to factor natural capital into economic decision-making. World
       Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank (2013) Fish to 2030: Prospects for Fisheries and Aquaculture. Agriculture and Environmental Services
       Discussion Paper No. 3. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank (2014) Pacific Islands Regional Oceanscape Program. Program Appraisal Document. World Bank,
       Washington, D.C.

World Bank (2015) A Measured Approach to Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity: Concepts, Data, and
       the Twin Goals. IBRD, Washington, D.C.

World Bank (2015b) Commodity Markets Outlook, October 2015. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank and FAO (2009) The Sunken Billions: The Economic Justification for Fisheries Reform. The World
       Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Fishing and Aquaculture (2015) Nano-ice for faster chilling. Retrieved from:
        http://www.worldfishing.net/news101/products/fish-processing/ice-and-refrigeration/nano-ice-for-faster-
        chilling

WPRFMC (2015) Draft Report of the Western and Central Pacific Ocean Purse Seine Bigeye Management Workshop.
     April 8 – 10, 2015. Honolulu, Hawaii. http://www.wpcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/WCPO-
     Purse-Seine-Bigeye-Management-Workshop-report-draft-6-2-2015.pdf




                                                                                                              129
worldbank.org/PacificPossible
