Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Enhancing the Effectiveness of External
                               Support in Building Tax Capacity in
                               Developing Countries
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Prepared for Submission to G20 Finance Ministers


                               July 2016
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               International Monetary Fund (IMF)
                               Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
                               United Nations (UN)
                               World Bank Group (WBG)




                                                                       0
                                     Acronyms


AEOI     Automatic Exchange of Information

ATAF     African Tax Administration Forum

ATAIC    Association of Tax Administrations in Islamic Countries

ATI      Addis Tax Initiative

BEPS     Base Erosion and Profit Shifting

CATA     Commonwealth Association of Tax Administrators

CIAT     Inter-American Center of Tax Administrations

CD       Capacity Development

CREDAF   Centre de rencontres et d’études des dirigeants des administrations fiscales

DAC      Development Assistance Committee

DRM      Domestic resource mobilization

FARI     Fiscal Analysis for the Resource Industries

FTA      Forum on Tax Administration

IMF      International Monetary Fund

IOs      International Organizations joined in the Platform for Collaboration on Tax: the
         IMF, OECD, UN and WBG

IOTA     Intra-European Organisation of Tax Administrations

ISORA    International Survey of Revenue Administrations

ODA      Official Development Assistance

OECD     Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PITAA    Pacific Islands Tax Administrators Association

PCT      Platform for Collaboration on Tax

RA-FIT   Revenue Administration’s Fiscal Information Tool

RTO      Regional Tax Organization

SARA     Semi-Autonomous Revenue Authority

SDGs     Sustainable Development Goals

SGATAR   Study Group on Asian Tax Administration and Research

                                            1
TA        Technical assistance

TADAT     Tax Administration Diagnostic Tool

TPA-TTF   Tax Policy and Administration Topical Trust Fund

TIWB      Tax Inspectors Without Borders

UN        United Nations

UNDP      United Nations Development Programme

WBG       World Bank Group




                                           2
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report responds to the February 2016 request from the G20 for the IMF, OECD, United
Nations and World Bank Group to:

         “…recommend mechanisms to help ensure effective implementation of technical
         assistance programs, and recommend how countries can contribute funding for tax
         projects and direct technical assistance, and report back with recommendations at our
         July meeting.”

The report has been prepared in the framework of the Platform for Collaboration on Tax
(the “PCT”), under the responsibility of the Secretariats and Staff of the four mandated
organizations. The report reflects a broad consensus among these staff, but should not be
regarded as the officially endorsed views of those organizations or of their member countries. 1, 2

The request arises in the context of increased recognition of the centrality to development
of strong tax systems and of the importance of external support in building them, and a
correspondingly increased willingness of advanced economies to provide substantially greater
financing and other support for this. It recognizes that, while real progress has been made on
increasing tax revenues in low income countries over the past two decades, for many countries
revenues remain well below levels that are likely needed to achieve the 2030 Sustainable
Development Goals, and to secure robust and stable growth. The report also takes as a
fundamental premise that it is not just how much revenue is raised that matters for development
and growth, but also how it is raised—and that strong tax systems are key for both equity
objectives and enhancing state building.

In that context, the report uses the experiences of the international organizations to
analyze how support for developing tax capacity can be improved. It does not attempt to
reiterate the nature of the challenges faced by developing countries, about which much has been
written—but rather focuses on ensuring that the countries have the support needed to overcome
them.

An indispensable prerequisite to improving tax capacity is enthusiastic country
commitment. While such political commitment must arise within the country and its government
and cannot be created by external support, the report assesses ways in which such support can




1 Reflecting these facts, it should be noted that to the extent that recommendations included herein imply certain
tasks to be undertaken by the PCT, implementation would be premised on adequate resources being made
available to do so.
2 It has benefited from comments submitted by countries, CSOs, business organizations and individuals received

during a public review period, June 30-July 8 2016.

                                                        3
encourage and reinforce that necessary commitment. Given such commitment, the report points
to several key enablers to building tax capacity:

        •       A coherent revenue strategy as part of a development financing plan

        •       Strong coordination among well-informed and results-oriented providers

        •       A strong knowledge and evidence base

        •       Strong regional cooperation and support

        •           Strengthened participation of developing countries in international rule setting

The report arrives at a number of recommendations for measures to strengthen or achieve
those enablers. These are summarized in Appendix 4. The primary ones include: (i) options
through which the G20, IOs and other development partners can encourage political support for
tax systems development; (ii) the development of country-owned medium-term revenue
strategies, or tax reform plans depending on country circumstances; (iii) support to non-
government stakeholders; (iv) support by development partners to increase managerial, as well
as technical, skills in taxation agencies; (v) various approaches to developing better coordination
and collaboration among providers, and avoidance of fragmented support and approaches; (vi)
intensification of work by PCT partners and others to produce comparable and reliable data; (vii)
increased partnerships and support for regional tax organizations; and (viii) support to
developing countries to facilitate meaningful participation in international tax policy discussions
and institutions.

The agenda going forward would include implementation of 3 to 5 pilot medium-term
revenue strategies (MTRSs); support for developing countries to participate effectively in
international tax policy discussions and institutions; work by the international
organizations (IOs) to measure and report upon the impact of various different
interventions; and a follow up report by the IOs within 3 years, to reflect lessons learned
from actions hereunder.




                                                    4
INTRODUCTION
    This report responds to the February 2016 request from the G20 for the IMF, OECD,
    United Nations and World Bank Group to:


           “…recommend mechanisms to help ensure effective implementation of technical
           assistance programs, and recommend how countries can contribute funding for tax
           projects and direct technical assistance, and report back with recommendations at our
           July meeting.”

The report has been prepared in the framework of the Platform for Collaboration on Tax,
under the responsibility of the Secretariats and Staff of the four mandated organizations. The
report reflects a broad consensus among these staff, but should not be regarded as the officially
endorsed views of those organizations or of their member countries.

The structure of the report is as follows: Section 2 provides context, and sets out overall aims
for tax system reform and the role of capacity building, Section 3 briefly outlines the current state
of play of tax capacity development, looking at the actors, cooperation, and aid effectiveness
principles. Section 4 draws on experience and evidence to identify the enabling elements of
successful capacity development and make recommendations. These recommendations are
summarised in Appendix 4.




CONTEXT
A. External Support for Developing Tax Capacity

There is increased recognition of the centrality to development of strong tax systems, and
the potential importance of external support in building them…Notably, the Addis Ababa
Action Agenda (Addis Agenda) recognizes that “significant additional domestic public resources,
supplemented by international assistance as appropriate, will be critical to realizing sustainable
development and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals” 3. The Addis Agenda stresses the
need for assistance to developing countries to improve their capacity to collect tax and other
revenues, and contains commitments to provide international support to developing countries in
reaching targets for enhanced domestic revenue.

…and a willingness of advanced economies to substantially increase their support for
building such fiscal capacity, currently at modest levels. An important instance of this
commitment, though not the only one, is the Addis Tax Initiative (ATI). Launched in July 2015, this
initiative aims to double support for technical cooperation in taxation by 2020, and includes a
restatement by partner countries of their commitment to strengthen revenue mobilization so as



3   Addis Agenda, para. 22.
                                                   5
to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and ensure inclusive development. 4
Ambitious though intentions to step up assistance in the tax area are, they start from a very low
base. Accurate statistics are difficult to come by as, until now, there has not been a standard
OECD Development Assistance Committee (DAC) code against which to report tax projects—and
the first year of data (2015) using the new code will not be available until late 2016. Such data as
are available, however, suggest that only around 0.15 percent of all official development
assistance (ODA) is targeted to tax projects (Figure 1). 5 This is around one-fifth of that provided
to public finance management, and one-eightieth of that provided for the health sector. 6

           Figure 1. ODA Commitments to Tax and Development Capacity Building




              Source: OECD DAC – see footnote 3



B. Progress and Objectives

Real progress has been made on increasing tax revenues—but in many developing
countries these remain below levels likely needed to achieve the SDGs and, more generally,
secure robust and stable growth. There has been a slow but marked increase in tax ratios since
around the turn of the century, with median tax revenues in low-income countries increasing by
4.3 percent of GDP between 1990 and 2014 (Figure 2), though there is wide variation across
countries (Figure 3). There is no single target for the tax ratio appropriate to all countries: their
potential, in terms of resource endowments and geographic location, differ, as do governments’
views as to an appropriate level of taxation. There is increasing evidence, however, that it is hard
to secure lasting growth with a tax ratio below around 15 percent, 7 and higher levels may be


4 See https://www.addistaxinitiative.net/
5 The data are based on a key word search in the CRS. Totals are likely to be underestimated as they are based
only on projects where it was possible to identify a tax component in individual descriptions.
6 Data from OECD DAC Statistics

7 Gaspar, Jaramillo and Wingender (2016).


                                                       6
needed to secure broad based sustainable development outcomes. This leaves much to do: in
2013, the median tax ratio in low-income countries (LICs) was around 13 percent, with 16 LICs
having ratios below 15 percent. 8

              Figure 2. Development in Tax Revenues (median, by income group)




       Source: IMF Revenue Longitudinal Dataset (WoRLD), June 2016. Country classification according to World
      Bank country income groups.

                              Figure 3. Distribution of Tax Ratios, 2013




       Source: WoRLD data.



8Among lower middle income countries, the median tax ratio was around 18 percent, and 17_had tax ratios
below 15 percent, on average by 2.5 percent.
                                                     7
Strong revenue performance is a core ultimate objective, but a single-minded pursuit of
revenue can be deeply counter-productive. The total amount of tax (and non-tax) revenue is
the primary concern in meeting infrastructure, social and other spending needs, including those
required to achieve the SDGs, while also reducing dependence on volatile and the sometimes
disempowering aid—which may also blunt the incentive to develop own sources of revenue 9—
and securing macroeconomic stability and resilience. Strict pursuit of ill-conceived short-term
revenue targets, however, is a common source of bad practice (in, for instance, the denial of VAT
refunds, the harassment of taxpayers, or offering tax amnesties that undermine the credibility of
the wider tax system). This damages economic activity and feeds a vicious cycle of mistrust
between taxpayer and tax authorities.

It is not just how much revenue is raised, but how it is raised that matters, for growth…
Focus on revenue can help to promote structural reforms in some cases (such as the switch from
tariffs to VAT, or reducing reliance on a proliferation of withholding taxes) that can set the stage
for well-designed and revenue-enhancing improvements in the medium term. There is fairly
strong evidence, for example, that some forms of taxation (such as tariffs) are less supportive of
growth than others (such as property taxes and VAT), 10 though details are important within these
broad categories (in the design, for instance of the corporate income tax). Conversely, revenue is
often foregone in low-income countries by offering tax incentives that may have little impact in
attracting investment or growth. 11 In terms of implementation too, burdensome procedures
(such as requiring unnecessary documentation or inordinate judicial delay) can act as significant
obstacles to business and can undermine compliance. Moreover governments able to rely heavily
on revenue from natural resource rents may be less likely to be held accountable by the citizenry
than those needing to rely on revenue sources more salient to them. 12

…and also in addressing corruption. One rationale for the support given to the spread of the
VAT in developing countries, for instance, is that of inculcating experience with methods of self-
assessment by the taxpayer rather than the direct assessment that provides avenues for corrupt
bargaining and extortion. And the shift in many countries towards semi-autonomous revenue
agencies (SARAs) has aimed to both reduce the risk of political intervention in tax collection and
incentivize officials to limit the attractions of corruption. Success in these areas is hard to assess,
and has evidently been less than complete—the VAT, for instance, can offer its own opportunities
for collusion.

Strengthening tax systems is also key to achieving equity objectives and enhancing state
building—with strong links to the expenditure side. Governments’ distributional preferences
naturally differ, across countries and over time, but all need the tools to match them. This is not
only, or even mainly, a matter of taxation: most distributional objectives, especially in developing


9 Whether aid reduces reliance on own sources of revenue remains contentious.
10 Acosta-Ormaechea and Yoo (2012) find a hierarchy of taxes by relative growth–friendliness broadly similar to
that for advanced countries found by Arnold and others (2012).
11 The evidence on this is reviewed in IMF, OECD, UN and WBG (2015).

12 See for instance International Center for Tax and Development (2015).



                                                        8
countries, are likely to be best achieved on the spending side. 13 Moreover, the perception that
the better off are not paying a reasonable amount or — often no less damaging — that some are
escaping tax while others who are similarly positioned, perhaps competitors, are not, can
undermine broader trust in and compliance with the tax system. 14 Key to building that trust in
the tax system, and hence the wider legitimacy of the state, is establishing a clear and credible
link between the revenue that is raised and the services it finances, an area in which a number of
countries are making greater effort. 15 Too often, weak tax systems have undermined state
building: governments do not trust taxpayers to behave honestly, and taxpayers have little
incentive to do so—which prove self-fulfilling prophecies. Reversing this vicious cycle by
strengthening tax capacity can be critical to improving governance and accountability, by
fostering a shared interest of government and citizen in economic growth and encouraging the
development of respected revenue administrations that can spur improvements in other aspects
of state capacity, and engaging taxpayer-citizens in politics. 16 Recent disclosures have re-
emphasized that the legitimacy of domestic tax systems needs to be seen in an international
context—and that international cooperation is a requisite for establishing fair tax systems that
citizens can trust.

International tax reforms are integral to domestic tax system development. The
international tax landscape is changing rapidly, presenting developing countries with both
challenges and opportunities in dealing with tax avoidance and evasion. The current G20/OECD-
led drive to address Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) and to exchange information for tax
purposes between tax sovereignties are welcome efforts. They can help provide developing
countries with the tools to address these international tax challenges, but only if they are
integrated as part of the domestic tax system reform. Developing countries can benefit
significantly from these advances. Importantly, however, ensuring that they do is not only a
matter of capacity development, but of ensuring that the emerging international rules are
appropriate for their circumstances and priorities. Work on this is underway in the Platform for
Collaboration on Tax (PCT), 17 notably in preparing the ‘toolkits’ requested by the G20
Development Working Group to support BEPS implementation and other international tax
priorities.

There has been significant progress since the IO’s 2011 report 18 to the G20 on building
effective tax systems in developing countries—but several recommendations there remain
relevant. A summary of those common recommendations, and developments since, is set out in

13 See for instance IMF (2014a).
14 See for instance OECD (2013)
15 Such as the use of bill boards in Lagos state to highlight links between tangible improvements in local services

and the payment of taxes and the reform of tobacco taxes in the Philippines in 2014, which in part succeeded
because a clear link was established between tobacco excises raised and improvements in public health services.
Ali, Fjeldstad and Sjursen (2014) establish an empirical link between compliance and public service provision in
Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and South Africa.
16 OECD (2010).
17 “The Platform for Collaboration on Tax,” Concept Note, IMF, OECD, UN and World Bank, April 19, 2016

(available on all four organizations’ websites).
18 IMF, OECD, World Bank and UN (2011).


                                                         9
Appendix 1. Areas of significant progress include the adoption of country-by-country reporting
as a minimum standard under the G20/OECD-led BEPS project and several other aspects of
international taxation, and the development of TADAT as a commonly accepted objective and
standardized tool for assessing the performance of tax administration systems. However less
progress has been made in reviewing the tax exemptions still often required for donor-financed
projects and in establishing the assessment of spillover effects on developing countries as a
routine part of evaluating major tax reforms in advanced countries.

Against this background, this report focuses not on the technical challenges to be faced in
improving revenue mobilization but on how support for developing tax capacity can be
improved. Much has been written on the nature of the challenges faced by developing
countries—not wholly dissimilar to those in advanced, but generally writ much larger—and these
are briefly recounted in Appendix 2. 19 The emphasis is rather on ensuring that countries have the
support needed to help overcome such challenges. For this, the paper takes a broad view of
capacity development (CD), defined by the DAC as “the ability of people, organisations and
ultimately society as a whole to manage their affairs successfully.” 20 CD in the tax area is
ultimately the responsibility of government but external assistance providers can help at three
levels:

•          Establishing an effective enabling environment for tax reform—such as supportive civil
           society or sustained political commitment. External actors can help here, for example
           through policy dialogue at the highest levels of government and by promoting an
           evidenced-based discussion based on accurate data and analysis.

•          Building effective policies, practices and organisations—external assistance can help
           greatly with technical co-operation and technical assistance, on the full range of issues in
           tax policy, legislation and administration.

•          Developing individual talent, including leadership and specialist technical skills—again,
           outsiders can help, including with the task of training.

C. Stakeholders in the Tax System

Tax systems—a term we use to encompass policy, legal and administrative aspects of all
revenue-raising, formally tax or non-tax—are ultimately political objects. Political economy
considerations must thus loom large in any account of opportunities and challenges for CD in
this area.

Tax capacity development must take account of a complex and multi-layered environment.
The purpose of external support is to help countries build robust ‘tax capacity’—meaning the
enabling environment, organizations and skills—equipping them to raise the revenue they need
in ways that are conducive to stability, growth, good governance, and fairness. Achieving this in
today’s advanced economies has been the work of centuries, with upheavals of war,

19   For more detail, see for instance IMF (2011) and World Bank and others (2015).
20   OECD DAC (2006).
                                                         10
democratization and experimentation all playing key roles. 21 Unsurprisingly, experience shows
that there are no easy or quick fixes for establishing broad fiscal capacity. 22 But it also shows that
patient, focused reform can achieve a great deal. Understanding the country context, the
potential drivers, supporters and blockers of reform, and capacity needs, is a crucial part of
capacity development design.

A range of actors in the enabling environment determine the prospects for successful
capacity development and reform. Figure 4 provides a representation of some of the key
domestic players whose actions and interactions determine the design and performance of
national tax systems. Non-governmental actors, including tax advisers, civil society, business and
the media play key roles. Involvement of these stakeholders is critical, particularly if excluded
groups can act as blockers. In addition, ‘weakest link’ dynamics among a wider set of
stakeholders may hold back reforms. The justice system, for example, may be unable to process
tax disputes in a timely and disinterested way.

                      Figure 4. Stakeholders Shaping Tax System Performance




Within the public sector, tax agencies deal only with tax matters—but several other
organizations play a central role in tax system performance while having a wider set of
responsibilities: such as the Ministry of Finance, the customs agency, and ministries dealing with
natural resources. Change challenges powerful vested interests within these organisations,
whether in terms of entrenched rent-seeking, bureaucratic inertia and/or the sheer turmoil
involved. Establishing a SARA, for instance, may require identifying and dismissing corrupt staff,
requiring all to reapply for their jobs, and can lead to strikes and legal challenges. 23 These can be



21 See for instance Besley and Persson (2011).
22 Keen (2013).
23 See also Fjeldstad and Moore (2009).


                                                  11
fundamental distractions from continuing core operations, and change management—with
dedicated staff—is often a key but neglected, element of substantial reform.

Tax administrations face significant human resource and skills challenges. In many low
income countries, for instance, large numbers of staff are employed on very low-yielding
activities, effectively taking part of their remuneration in corrupt payments—all of which can itself
become an obstacle to constructive reforms (such as simplification of complex small business
regimes). And high turnover at Commissioner level has, in many cases, made sustained reform
difficult. 24 Salary structures, including bonus arrangements, can have significant effects on tax
officials’ behavior, and on the likelihood of their remaining in the public service. Bonuses related
to amounts collected, for instance—which seem to be more common than often supposed—may
reduce incentives to collusively reduce tax payment but can incentivize extortion. 25 Developing
and retaining necessary specialist skills is a major challenge, and not just within the revenue
authority. Skills may also need to be developed outside government, not only among tax
professionals, but also, for instance, among journalists.


CURRENT CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT
This section summarizes the current state of play in external support for the development
of tax capacity, and some of the challenges faced—particularly in light of the prospective
scaling-up of such support. It also looks at the opportunities that exist through the different
ways of delivering support and ways to improve performance.

A. Actors in Tax Capacity Development

A wide range, and large number, of organizations are involved in financing and/or
delivering support for building tax capacity. Within their differing expertise, membership and
mandates, the International Organizations (IOs) authoring this report have large and diverse
experiences in tax CD; these are briefly summarized in Appendix 3. But the IOs are by no means
the only actors in this area. In recent years, up to 25 bilateral donors have been providing direct
assistance. 26 In addition to bilateral donors other institutions also provide assistance; the
European Commission combines support for direct assistance, such as in transfer pricing, with
policy coherence with EU policies such as transparency of extractive industries reporting; the
World Customs Organization helps its member countries improve the capacity of their
customs administrations to carry out a broad range of functions (including, for instance,
valuation and trade facilitation); the Regional Development Banks, to differing degrees, provide
support on a range of tax policy and administration issues, as well as undertaking policy
development work. The Regional Tax Organizations (RTOs) also play an important role in building
capacity, summarized in Box 1.



24 As shown, for instance, in Figure 10 of IMF (2015).
25 As found for instance in Khan, Khwaja and Olken (2014).
26 Source: OECD analysis of DAC reporting



                                                       12
                                  Box 1. The Regional Tax Organizations

 Regional organizations are an increasingly important part of the international capacity building
 architecture, being especially well-placed to construct and share experience and information within regional
 networks:

 •          ATAIC - (Association of Tax Administrations in Islamic Countries) Affiliated with the Organization of
            Islamic States, and currently having 28 members, it was established in 2004 to facilitate improvement
            of tax administration, and to promote Sharia taxation with particular reference to Zakat within Islamic
            countries.

 •          ATAF – (African Tax Administration Forum) ATAF’s mission is to improve the capacity of African Tax
            Administrations, advance the role of taxation in governance and state building and develop
            partnerships between African countries and development partners.

 •          CATA – (Commonwealth Association of Tax Administrators) helps member countries through
            conferences, training programs, publication and knowledge sharing to develop effective tax
            administrations that promote sustainable development and good governance.

 •          CIAT – (Inter-American Center of Tax Administrations) promotes mutual assistance and cooperation
            among member countries. It develops specialized technical assistance programs based on the needs
            and interests of its member countries, as well as encouraging studies, research and the exchange of
            experiences and best practice.

 •          CREDAF – (Centre de rencontres et d’études des dirigeants des administrations fiscales) brings
            together the tax administrations of its francophone members to share experiences, develop practical
            guides and deliver training to improve implementation and operation of priority issues.

 •          IOTA – (Intra-European Organisation of Tax Administrations) is a forum to assist its 46 members
            improve tax administration, primarily through workshops to exchange view, experiences and best
            practice.

 •          PITAA – (Pacific Islands Tax Administrators Association) seeks to build capacity through provision of
            training and resources as well as providing a forum to discuss administration and policy issues with
            most relevance for the Pacific Islands and their characteristics.

 •          SGATAR – (Study Group on Asian Tax Administration and Research) provides a platform to enhance
            the performance of tax administrations in the Asia-Pacific region by promoting collaboration and
            communication among members, primarily through its annual forum.



In a comprehensive mapping of tax projects, the International Tax Compact showed that up to
five donors are sometimes working on tax issues in the same country while other countries are
not supported at all (Figure 5). 27 Within sub-Saharan Africa alone, an IMF stocktake counts 50
providers active in the area, an average of 5-6 per country, and a total of 208 programs.




27   Köhnen, Kundt and Scuppert (2010)
                                                         13
     Figure 5. Country-Specific Mapping: Worldwide Activities on Taxation and Development




     Source: Köhnen, Kundt and Scuppert (2010)


This complex environment creates risks of duplication or fragmentation. Three countries
alone are estimated to have received more than one-third of the total bi-lateral support reported
by developed country governments donors over the last decade. 28 Other reports suggest that
fragile states are less likely to receive support in the tax area. There is evident risk of unwarranted
duplication—though some larger countries have made good use of taking advice from a range of
providers—while the needs of some countries are neglected. No less troubling is the risk of a
country receiving advice on related but distinct issues—restructuring of tax administrations and
strengthening of IT systems, for instance—that is inadequately sequenced, or of interventions
being driven more by the interests and expertise of providers rather than by a country-owned
assessment of priorities.

For-profit providers play a supporting role in all aspects of building tax capacity—
sometimes engaged by donors, sometimes directly by developing country governments (in the
latter case, sometimes reportedly paid in part by commission on additional revenue raised).
Private foundations, however, have not been heavily engaged in the tax area other than in
supporting policy development work.

B. Co-operation

There is, despite the risks of fragmentation just described, extensive cooperation among
the major organizations active in the tax area, to help address these issues. Some current
examples include:

•          The OECD and UNDP have recently launched Tax Inspectors Without Borders (TWIB),
           which deploys tax audit experts to work directly under the management and supervision
           of local officials in developing country tax administrations on audits, with a particular
           emphasis on international tax matters, including those covered in the BEPS Action Plan
           (Box 2).


28   Afghanistan, Tanzania, Mozambique – See Ifan and Strawson (2016)
                                                       14
                                  Box 2. Tax Inspectors Without Borders

    Tax Inspectors Without Borders (TIWB) is a joint initiative of the Organisation for Economic Co-
    operation and Development (OECD) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP),
    which was launched during the Third International Conference on Financing for Development (Addis
    Ababa, 13-16 July 2015). The initiative is designed to support developing countries in building tax audit
    capacity. It complements the broader efforts of the international community to strengthen international
    cooperation on tax matters and will make a significant contribution to the domestic resource
    mobilization efforts of developing countries.
    TIWB facilitates well-targeted, specialized tax audit assistance in developing countries. Under
    TIWB, tax audit experts work alongside local officials of developing country tax administrations. In this
    way, TIWB aims to build the capacity of and transfer technical know-how and skills to tax auditors of
    developing countries, as well as to share general audit practices.
    There is evidence of revenue increases gathered through the pilot implementation of the TIWB
    programme, including increases in tax collection in Colombia, Kenya, Senegal, Vietnam and Zimbabwe.
    In total well over $200m of extra revenue has been achieved through the program so far.


•          The IMF and WBG have long cooperated in tax projects, typically with the IMF focused
           on strategic policy advice and support on policy and administration and the WBG taking
           the lead on implementation of large and usually loan-based projects. A reasonably typical
           experience is the work in Bulgaria described in Box 3.

                       Box 3. An Example of IMF-WBG Collaboration—Bulgaria

    Gaps in management, human resources, business processes and IT systems identified in a joint
    IMF/World Bank mission were addressed through this project. The main objective was to implement a
    sustainable system through the establishment of an efficient public revenue collection system that
    facilitates private sector development and complies with requirements for EU accession.
    Project objectives were achieved and results exceeded expectations. The Ministry of Finance executed a
    model change management plan to establish the National Revenue Authority (NRA). Strong
    coordination between donors resulted in complementarity – the IMF provided technical assistance,
    including for the legal framework, and—for example—the EU supported the NRA call center.
    Improvements in voluntary tax compliance and increased efficiency in revenue collection created the
    basis for Bulgaria to reduce its tax and social contribution rates in order to ensure competitiveness as an
    investment location in the region. Lower tax and social security rates helped reduce the share of the
    informal economy by 30 percent between 2002 and 2008.


•          A recent joint initiative of the IMF and WBG includes the development of improved
           diagnostic frameworks for tax policy. This builds on their joint experience—together with
           donors and regional tax organizations—in developing TADAT, described in Box 4.




                                                        15
                   Box 4. Tax Administration Diagnostic Assessment Tool (TADAT)

    TADAT is a standardized, evidence-based diagnostic tool for assessing the health of a country’s
    system of tax administration. The July 2015 Addis Ababa Action Agenda encourages countries to
    undertake diagnostic assessments of their tax systems to identify key areas where capacity building and
    reform measures will be most effective; TADAT promotes that approach.
    TADAT is the result of a collaborative effort by several partners—and now extends beyond the
    founding partners. This initiative, initially led by the IMF, at an early stage expanded to involve the WB,
    several RTOs, and contributing countries, and the framework is now being used by other agencies as
    well. Teams of qualified assessors are drawn from different agencies to conduct country assessments--
    which encourages collaboration between institutions and tax administration experts, enhances a
    common understanding by all stakeholders in a country, and minimizes duplication, promoting cost-
    effective delivery of support to reforms. To date, 30 countries have undertaken TADAT assessments.
    TADAT enables better identification of tax administration strengths and weaknesses, by:
    promoting a shared view among all stakeholders; helping set the reform agenda (objectives, priorities,
    and implementation sequencing); facilitating the management and coordination of external support for
    reforms; and providing a basis for monitoring and evaluating progress.


•          CIAT, IMF, IOTA, and OECD launched in 2016 ISORA (the International Survey of
           Revenue Administrations) to provide global, comparable information on revenue
           administrations’ features and performance.

                   Box 5. International Survey on Revenue Administration (ISORA)

ISORA is an excellent example of international collaboration in tax administration. It was jointly
developed by the IMF, CIAT, IOTA, and the OECD, and a memorandum of understanding was signed by the
partner organizations in April 2016. Other regional organizations may also join the partnership.
ISORA is hosted on the IMF’s RA-FIT Data Collection Platform. This is the first time all organizations
have used an online platform, facilitating the automation of data gathering and allowing better analysis
before data is disseminated. The 150 participating tax agencies will realize significant cost reduction
through the ability to respond online to a single, common, standardized tax administration survey.
Benefits of ISORA include better benchmarking and performance analysis:
•      Intensify the focus on performance measurement and reporting by revenue administrations;
•      Develop data and analyses to improve cross-country comparisons, greatly valued by country officials;
•      Provide a much larger set of comparable quantitative and qualitative tax administration information.


•          The EU, OECD, and WBG began in 2011 a program of support for developing countries
           seeking to strengthen their transfer pricing rules and their implementation, and several
           country and regional projects are in the formative stages.

C.     Principles for Effectiveness

Aid effectiveness principles can help in the design and evaluation of capacity development.
The aid effectiveness principles as elaborated by the Paris, Accra and Busan communiqués
provide a framework to help with the issues of coordination between development partners, as
well as how to design support programs to deliver maximum impact. Ensuring adherence to

                                                        16
these principles in support for tax systems is therefore a necessary part of the design,
implementation and evaluation of programs. The OECD’s Task Force on Tax and Development
has produced 10 Principles for International Engagement in Supporting Developing Countries in
Tax Matters 29 (Box 6) that provide guidance to donors on how support for tax matters can be
aligned to best practice.

     Box 6. Ten Principles for International Engagement in Supporting Developing Countries
                                          in Tax Matters

        •   Follow the leadership of government and agree on country level co-ordination and mechanisms
        •   Do no harm
        •   Promote transparency in tax matters
        •   Balance revenue collection imperatives with governance and social objectives
        •   Encourage broad-based dialogue on tax matters that includes civil society, business, and other
            stakeholders
        •   Strengthen revenue and expenditure linkages
        •   Take account of international aspects of taxation
        •   Consider a range of assistance modalities
        •   Take a whole of government approach
        •   Measure progress and build the knowledge base on tax matters


As support for tax matters is due to increase substantially, it is important that the support aligns
with such principles, and also that best practice is shared among development partners to aid the
continuous evolution of support. The OECD members of the Addis Tax Initiative have already
agreed to follow the Tax and Development Task Force Principles and the development of more
detailed guidance is a logical next step.


SUCCESSFUL TAX CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT:
LESSONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This section identifies key enablers for the successful development of tax capacity, and sets
out recommendations for making external support more effective. The diverse experiences
of the IOs, and the wider literature, make clear that success is reliant on some key enablers being
in place. The following is structured around these, and on how development partners can ensure
that the support they provide reinforces enablers and overcomes blockers. We begin with an
overarching prerequisite:

Essential: Deep Country Commitment Within a Supportive Political Environment

Successful strengthening of tax capacity can only be country-driven, requiring continued
energy, enthusiasm and commitment from the highest levels. External support can provide

29   https://www.oecd.org/ctp/49836627.pdf
                                                        17
critical help, as will be seen. But ultimately it is the country itself that will determine success or
failure. The initial motivation for reforms to strengthen revenue mobilization differ. They can
reflect broader government reform programs (notably social programs in need of resources, but
also whole-of-government modernization programs), societal pressure or political imperatives for
change, changes to an economic context (be they cyclical or an external shock), technological
progress, regional trends/commitments, peers’ encouragement (pressure), and obligations
arising from external assistance and borrowing. Whatever their origin, however,

what is needed for ultimate success is not a matter of passive ‘ownership,’ or of vague ‘political
will, but of very specific, lasting and energetic desire by senior political figures and officials to
make a sea change in revenue mobilization methods and achievements. This can mean taking on
formidable opposition—from powerful groups, whether quietly from the rich and influential or
more noisily, and in the streets and courts, from discontented traders, officials and other pressure
groups.

Illustrations of this abound. Box 7 reports the positive experience of Colombia, and there are
many others. There are also negative examples. In one country, the Ministry of Finance and the
Revenue Agency could not agree on the implementation plan for a WBG project, leading to its
failure. In another, the Tax Department refused even to meet with the IMF/WBG team that was
diagnosing the situation. Ultimately, in a show of real commitment, the Prime Minister
established an entirely new revenue agency—with a much smaller staff and fewer decentralized
offices—which had been identified as a locus of much corruption. The ministry and new agency
worked enthusiastically together to implement the CD project, contributing fundamentally to its
success.

                              Box 7. The Importance of Commitment

 Colombia
 A project was designed in 1998, while Colombia was suffering the effects of a sharp economic recession
 due to low oil and coffee prices and limited availability of international finance. To address a rising
 deficit, the government requested a three-year extended fund facility from the IMF. To implement the
 public financial management reforms targeted under this program, the authorities requested World Bank
 support to reinforce the institutional capacity of the tax and customs administration and strengthen
 public expenditure management at the central government level.
 High-level commitment supported the achievement of project objectives. The initiative made a
 substantial contribution toward improving Colombia’s revenue performance in terms of increasing tax
 revenues, decreasing the compliance gap and contraband, and improving the efficiency of the tax and
 customs administration, as measured by the cost-of-collection ratio. Colombia now has a modern and
 high performing tax administration. Its management system is comprehensive and closely aligns its
 structure and systems to agency and national goals; its performance ranks among the best in the Latin
 American region.


Energy and commitment can be hard to sustain, so that progress with reform programs is
almost never linear—there will be setbacks. Much has been said of the importance of
individual ‘champions’ for reform, but champions often move on. In one African country, the
departure of a reform-minded head of the tax administration to become Minister of Finance, and

                                                   18
his replacement by a less reform-minded director, clearly slowed the implementation of key
reform measures. Momentum was resumed after the head of the tax administration was again
replaced. While it is true that in many countries relatively few people can make a real difference,
commitment ultimately needs breadth and depth. Changes of government can clearly have an
impact, including on administrative issues. And in some cases, reform is simply swept off course
by political turmoil or conflict: as, currently, in another African country, where several important
reforms had taken place as a result of the establishment of a new revenue agency, but a major
political crisis has brought all reforms to a standstill.

Many of the recommendations in this report are intended to support a deep and lasting
enabling in-country political environment…. These include, for instance, setting out clear
medium term plans to anchor public debate, the nurturing of CSOs and the media in their roles
in public debate and in holding government accountable, and the inclusion of developing
countries in international discussions on tax norms and rules.

…. which development partners can be more active in stimulating. Achieving this requires a
range of aid and support instruments to be utilized 30. Beyond the provision of effective and
timely technical support, this can be done in a variety of ways. By, for instance:


•        Elevating DRM issues as a central element in high level political conversations.

•        Designing support to include mutual accountability provisions such as those in the
         Addis Tax Initiative.
•        A strong focus on taxation within wider initiatives to address corruption. The need
         to develop a project with tax administration personnel makes it difficult to face the
         problem directly and to have the project focus on corruption problems. Indeed, there are
         several instances in which resistance by corrupt officials has derailed CD projects.

•        The use of financial or other tangible incentives to reward progress. Relatively little
         thought has been given to the ways in which incentive schemes might be used to
         stimulate and reward enthusiasm for strengthening fiscal capacity. There are many
         possibilities. One could conceive, for instance, of countries being offered a menu of
         choices among support schemes differing in the extent to which reaching milestones
         brings some additional budget or other support. The WBG has introduced mechanisms to
         link disbursements of funds for loan-based capacity building to delivery of specific
         outcomes and results (most notably in Program-for-Results loans). There is evidence from
         IMF programs that IMF loan conditionality in relation to strengthening DRM raises
         revenue performance (Box 8). 31 Contentious though the topic is, it is also unavoidable: in
         any program of support there may come a point at which, for instance, if progress is
         poor, continuing support should be reviewed. This report expresses no view on these


30For a fuller discussion on the role of different aid instruments in capacity development see OECD (2013a).
31There is a relation here with the literature on the impact of aid on domestic revenue collection. OECD (2010)
concludes more optimistically, that conditionality and technical assistance, when applied carefully, can contribute
to the emergence of tax systems that are likely to foster broader governance improvements.
                                                        19
            issues—except to note that, with the stepping up of external support, now is a good time
            to consider these wider issues.

           Box 8. Evidence of Effectiveness of IMF Program Revenue Related Conditionality

     300                                                                                 285
                     Total SB
                                                                    257
     250             Total IT

     200
                     Fiscal SB
                     Fiscal IT
     150
                     Revenue SB          114
     100             Revenue IT                                            79                   85
             49                                                                     44                    53
      50                                          30
                      13         10                       18
       0
                  2002-03                       2007-08                   2009-10              2010-11


      Source: Crivelli and Gupta (2014).
      Note: Structural benchmarks (SB), indicative targets (IT).

 Revenue-related conditionality in Fund-supported programs—which have become more extensive
 in recent years—appear when targets are met, to be associated with higher revenue collection. For
 a panel of 126 low-and middle-income countries over 1993–2013, Crivelli and Gupta (2014) find an
 overall impact on tax revenue collection in the period following the year in which revenue target was met
 of around 0.5 percentage points of GDP, with a long run effect of around 1.5 points. Half of this gain
 comes from an impact on receipts from taxes on goods and services.
 The impact of revenue–related conditionality is: Stronger in low-income countries, especially over the
 longer-term; similar for policy and administrative measures (so far as they can be distinguished);
 insignificant where corruption is high.


 Recommendation 1. G20, the international organizations (IOs) and development
 partners should encourage political support for tax systems development. Options
 include explicit requirements for financial support and mutual accountability provisions
 such as those in the Addis Tax Initiative.


With the precondition of enthusiastic commitment in place, five broad enablers can play a
key role in building success—and can be enhanced by improvements in external support.

Enabler 1: A Coherent Revenue Strategy as Part of a Development Financing Plan

A Medium Term Perspective

Experience repeatedly points to the importance of sound and comprehensive reform
strategies, with priorities and sequencing clearly identified. The example of Senegal is
described in Box 9. Typical stages in such a strategy by the IMF are illustrated in Diagram 1 32 (in
the context of revenue administration, with a similar structure applicable on the policy side).There
is increasing experience with the formulation and implementation of strategies of this kind (for
instance, within the multi-donor Tax Policy and Administration Trust Fund at the IMF and the
Strategic Country Diagnostics and Country Program Frameworks as the organizing framework for
WBG support to developing countries), pointing to clear scope to develop these as more explicit


32   With a similar pattern followed in WBG projects.
                                                               20
instruments for combining and coordinating the efforts of all active providers, and engaging all
key stakeholders.

         Box 9. IMF TA Support for Tax Administration Reform in Senegal (2011-2014)
 Context. Senegal was endorsed by the Tax Policy and Administration Topical Trust Fund (TPA-TTF) as a
 recipient for IMF technical assistance under the TTF, after a request for TA to reform the administration.
 Diagnostic Phase. The first diagnostic mission under the TPA-TTF in September 2011 assessed tax
 administration TA needs and agreed that FAD could assist with developing and implementing the
 modernization program by focusing on the following key reform priorities: (1) administration
 organization, (2) tax procedures and core functions, and (3) enforcement.
  • Assessment approach: Previous FAD reports, data and information provided by the tax department as
    well as other donors’ reports were developed into a Strategy Note that was discussed with the senior
    tax administration staff, development partners and the ministry of Economy and Finance.
  • Main findings: Three key issues were identified to establish a modern, service-oriented tax
    administration: (1) the excessively wide scope of responsibilities in the tax administration; (2) lack of
    flexibility to organize tasks; and (3) insufficient consideration of risks and priorities.
 Strategy Design Phase. The 2011 mission proposed a three-point reform strategy: (1) reorganization of
 the tax department along functional lines, and taxpayer segmentation; (2) registration of the taxpayer
 population and the establishment of a system for processing tax payments through the banks; and (3)
 control and reduction of tax arrears, and establishment of risk-based audit.
 Implementation Phase. During the first phase of the TA program (2012-2014), follow-up HQ-led
 missions and a number of short-term expert assignments supported implementation:
  • Reform ownership. The reform strategy proposed a governance framework to implement the strategy,
    with a change management unit reporting to the General Director, a steering committee, and
    dedicated project teams.
  • Collaboration with other partners. Activities under the program are systematically reported to the
    TTF’s donors. The reform strategy also established better coordination of technical assistance with the
    WBG, the EU, and the French government, integrating work programs and sharing TA findings.
 Monitoring and Evaluation Phase. IMF TA activities in Senegal are monitored under results-based
 management principles. The TTF integrates four core results-based monitoring principles: (1) clear
 linkage between country strategies and specific TA projects; (2) indicators at module/project level to
 track progress and identify results; (3) use of performance management tools e.g., RA-FIT to track and
 report on results; and (4) use of performance information for accountability and decision-making.
 Impacts and Results. The Senegalese authorities laid a solid foundation for modernization:
         Revenue performance is above the results achieved in most other West African countries;

         Taxpayer segmentation principles have been implemented, including the launch of a pilot
          medium-sized taxpayer office in Dakar and the streamlining of several small tax offices;

         Electronic-procedures for returns filing and payment were introduced at the large taxpayer
          office. Recently, a new version of e-tax procedure has been introduced;

         Risk-based audit and an implementation plan to control tax arrears have been introduced;

         Technical solutions and operational procedures for reporting and analysis better management
          of taxpayers have been defined.




                                                       21
                                                          Diagram 1. IMF Revenue Administration Reform—TA Framework

   Diagnostic of Current                                                                                                    Reform                                              Monitoring &
                                                            Reform Strategy Design
        Situation                                                                                                       Implementation                                           Evaluation
Main Government-Led Tasks                              Main Government Tasks                                      Main Government-Led Tasks                             Main Government-Led Tasks
• Review/understand RA current situation and           • Define scope of reform (incremental or                   • Establish reform governance framework               • Prepare periodic progress reports
   performance                                           transformational)                                        • Design reform agenda and implementation             • High level monitoring of reform execution
• Conduct environmental scan, including of political   • Determine prioritization and sequencing                    calendar                                              and results
   commitment
                                                       • Develop reform program:                                  • Develop and implement communication plan            • Continuous monitoring of strategic and
• Review trends and new developments                                                                                                                                      operational performance
   (international and regional)                          - Identify areas for intervention (organization, core    • Assign and mobilize resources
                                                            processes, etc.)                                      • Operationalize reform into daily business           • Prepare annual reports
• Review existing reform program and main
   achievements                                          - Define outcomes                                        • Continue to carry out regular business              • Undertake internal reviews
• Identify TA needs                                      - Establish milestones and key indicators                • Identify TA needs                                   • Undertake taxpayer surveys
                                                         - Identify risk and mitigation strategies                                                                      • Conduct independent (external) reviews
                                                       • Identify resource requirements, including TA needs                                                             • Prepare final assessment
Key Inputs                                             Key Inputs                                                 Key Inputs                                            Key Inputs
• Management report on need for change                 • Baseline diagnostic reports on current performance       • Strategic reform plan                               • Reform governance framework
• RA annual reports                                       and areas for improvement                               • Medium-term reform plan                             • Action plans and timetables
• Senior management seminars on current                • Senior management seminars on future strategy,           • Key outcomes and indicators                         • Periodic external review
   performance and challenges                             objectives and outcomes
                                                                                                                  • Key stakeholder consultations on detailed           • Independent (external) evaluation
• Key stakeholder consultations (internal and          • Key stakeholder consultations (internal and external)      action plans
                                                          to identify strategic direction and ways to address                                                           • Key stakeholder consultations
   external) to identify change needs and areas for
   improvement                                            areas for improvement
• RA performance data
• Reform strategy advice
• Benchmarking studies, e.g., RA-FIT, TADAT
• Data analysis, including tax gap study, e.g., RA-
   GAP, and cost-benefit analysis of tax expenditure
Key outputs                                            Key outputs                                                Key outputs                                            Key outputs
• Baseline diagnostic reports on current               • Strategic reform plan                                    • Reform governance framework                         • Progress reports
   performance and areas for improvement               • Medium-term reform plan                                  • Detailed action plans and timetables                • Regular internal reviews by Steering
• Communication plan                                   • Resource requirements                                    • Allocated budget                                      Committee and RA agency reports
                                                       • Budget approval                                          • Communication plan                                  • Updated action plans, timetable,
                                                                                                                                                                          communication plan and budget
                                                       • Key outcomes and indicators
                                                                                                                                                                        • Annual reports
                                                       • Communication plan
                                                                                                                                                                        • Taxpayer survey reports
                                                                                                                                                                        • External review and evaluation reports
IMF TA                                                 IMF TA                                                     IMF TA                                                IMF TA
• Conduct diagnostic, jointly with RA agencies         • Help design reform strategy, jointly with RA agencies    • Financial and advisory support for investment in    • Conduct reviews and project surveillance
• Dialogue with government; shared diagnostic and      • Seek government approval of reform strategy                reform in reform areas such as business             • “Backstopping” experts
   need to reform                                                                                                   processes, ICT, organization, and HR
                                                       • Coordinate with donors on complementary TA                                                                     • Report to donors, coordinate with other TA
• Coordinate with donors, other TA providers, and                                                                 • Appoint a lead (e.g., resident) advisor to assist     providers, and tax agencies
                                                       • Consult with stakeholders                                  RA agencies manage implementation
   TA agencies                                                                                                                                                          • Communicate with stakeholders
• Consult with stakeholders                                                                                       • Assign peripatetic experts to assist on selected
                                                                                                                    RA areas                                            • Inputs to external evaluations
                                                                                                                  • Help mobilize/coordinate with other donors, TA
                                                                                                                    providers, and tax agencies: complementary TA
                                                                                                                  • Consult with stakeholders




                                                                                                             22
The formulation of medium term plans is fully consistent with, and supportive of, the
Addis Ababa Action Agenda. This affirms that ‘’cohesive nationally owned sustainable
development strategies, supported by integrated national financing frameworks, will be at the
heart of our efforts.” 33

All countries benefit from a medium-term perspective on their revenue strategies—and in
many developing countries there is scope to formulate and implement nationally-owned
plans – termed medium-term revenue strategies, or MTRSs in this paper. Even where
capacity is very low, and/or political turmoil makes substantive reform unrealistic, it is important
to have a vision of where the tax system is heading beyond immediate and possibly narrow
concerns—otherwise short-term revenue imperatives dominate, with ultimately damaging
effects. Alternatively where the tax system is instead seen as part of the state (re)building process,
more positive results can be seen. 34 In many developing countries there is scope and need to be
more ambitious, and shape efforts around an explicit multi-year plan within which support from
differing providers, according to their resources and comparative advantage, is sequenced and
coordinated. Without such a vision, not only will the ambition to reform be limited, at best, to
marginal changes; worse, reforms may be ill-conceived and poorly implemented.

The core elements needed for an MTRS are becoming clear…. These are outlined in Box 10.
At the outset, a clear revenue mobilization objective for the medium-term has to be determined.
This needs to be driven by the country’s own objectives, be compatible with achieving the SDGs,
reflect the macro fiscal context, and be complementary to the other sources of available
(projected) financing. Once the revenue goal is set, the tax system has to be reviewed and
reforms in its three core dimensions—policy, administration, and legal framework. Steady and
sustained implementation will be crucial for realization of the MTRS. This should include,
importantly, “quick-win” measures that dovetail with medium-term reform strategies, as a way to
demonstrate the value of reform and to sustain support and momentum.

                                      Box 10. Core Elements of an MTRS
        A social contract on the level of revenue mobilization effort for the medium-term (5-10 years) with
         due consideration to the poverty and distributional implications of the associated measures
        A comprehensive reform plan for the tax system, reflecting country circumstances and the state of
         institutional capacity:
           o   A redesign of the policy setting to meet the revenue goal.
           o   A reform of the revenue agencies to properly administer the policy setting and to achieve a
               high level of taxpayers’ compliance to meet the revenue goal.
           o   A strengthening of the legal framework to enable the policy redesign and administration
               reform, including by balancing revenue agencies’ powers and taxpayers’ rights.
        A country’s commitment to a steady and sustained implementation, notably by securing political
         support and resourcing.
        Secured financing for the CD effort (technical assistance and training) to support the country in
         overcoming domestic constraints to formulate and implement an MTRS effectively.


33 Paragraph 9 of Addis Ababa Action Agenda – available at http://www.un.org/esa/ffd/wp-
content/uploads/2015/08/AAAA_Outcome.pdf.
34 See OECD (2014).


                                                      23
…though many details will require further thought. Country-specifics will be important, of
course, but generic issues also arise, such as: the incentives for countries to commit to an MTRS;
the involvement of non-state stakeholders; conditions for the withdrawal/expansion of support;
building in sufficient flexibility to accommodate, for example, changes in government that may
bring quite different views on tax policy design; and balancing the risks of over-reach in coverage
                                                  35
and of taking too piecemeal an approach.

An MTRS will require reforms to tax policy, administration, and the legal framework to be
tightly coordinated. Ad-hoc tax policies that have fragmented objectives and dispersed policy
aims can create incentives and opportunities for noncompliance and constrain improvement in
tax administration. An inadequate legal framework creates uncertainties for taxpayers and does
not properly balance tax administration’s powers and taxpayers’ rights. Lack of harmonization
among these tax system components leads to poor revenue performance (high evasion and
avoidance), higher collection cost, opportunistic behavior (frivolous disputes, harassment…), lack
of integrity, and other adverse effects. A holistic approach to reforming the tax system and its
three components should be an overarching objective.

 Recommendation 1a: National authorities, with support from IOs who are active in a
 country, and development partners engaged in support on tax reform, to develop country
 specific MTRSs, 36 with a view to launching [3 to 5] pilot MTRSs by [July 2017]. Building on
 this experience Platform partners will draw and disseminate lessons for the development
 of further MTRSs, and revenue reform plans more generally.


All stakeholders need to be a part of creating country ownership of the tax system. Tax
systems will only be viable, and result in positive development outcomes, if accepted as
legitimate by society. As such it is necessary to include all stakeholders (businesses,
parliamentarians, civil society, journalists) in the process of creating the enabling environment.
Local stakeholders are key to shaping and informing public debate, and in holding governments
to account; they can play a role in both supporting and unblocking tax reform efforts.

There are two complementary ways to get private sector involvement and support for a
reform project. One is to have the private sector involved in the project steering committee.
This happened in Kazakhstan, in the context of a WBG-supported program of tax reform. The
WBG-supported Bulgaria project described in Box 3 included a consultative forum with external
members. The second approach is to include project activities aimed at improving cooperation
with the private sector, in particular taxpayer associations and tax intermediaries. The WBG-
supported program of tax reform in Russia (TAMP II) had such an approach.




35 As, for instance, whether or not to cover all revenue administration or differentiate between tax administration
and customs.
36 Issues to address include incentives for countries to participate, the phasing of implementation, building in

flexibility to deal with potential policy changes as governments and circumstances change, stakeholder
involvement, and modalities for support.


                                                        24
Similar approaches can be taken with other stakeholders, though in many cases their capacity
(of journalists and civil society, for example) may need to be built to enable their effective
engagement. The EU/OECD/WBG programs on transfer pricing in Colombia and Zambia are
working with both business and civil society. G20 and other donor countries are well placed to
support these efforts.

    Recommendation 1b: Donor/G20 countries to encourage and facilitate capacity building
    of local stakeholders (business, CSOs, media) to engage in reforms and MTRS
    development.


Enabler 1.1: Adequate diagnosis of problems, risks and options

Good diagnosis is essential for successful tax reform—and so must be a key element of any
MTRS, or medium term strategy more generally. In Myanmar, for instance, a thorough diagnosis
of the situation led to the conclusion that the program’s focus had to be on building a modern
headquarters capacity with knowledge of the core tax administration functions, modernizing core
functions and the IT system, and setting up a large taxpayer compliance operation that could begin to
secure higher revenues. In the case of Senegal, identifying that the tax department had to divest itself
of non-tax functions was one key element of the reform strategy. The aim, of course, is not diagnosis
for its own sake, but rather as an anchor for a reform plan.

Evidence-based, objective diagnostics can also be a focal point for coordination among
providers—and help assess progress. A shared understanding among providers facilitates the
development of reform strategies that integrate their differing contributions. And, as discussed further
below, repeat assessments—including potentially self-assessments, or assessment by peers—provide
a natural metric of progress and, albeit indirectly, of the effectiveness of support.

Several new tools are coming on-stream, or are under development, to provide enhanced
diagnostics and enable better-targeted support:

•        TADAT is helping diagnose strengths and weaknesses in the performance of tax
         administrations; 37

•        ISORA (powered by RA-FIT) will gather tax administrations’ performance indicators to
         facilitate benchmarking;

•        The IMF and World Bank are working on improved diagnostic frameworks for tax
         policies; and

•        The Fiscal Analysis for Resource Industries (FARI) simulation tool is supporting the
         assessment of fiscal regimes in the extractive industries.




37As an internationally-owned/accepted tool, TADAT helps all CD stakeholders focus on areas prioritized by the
authorities, in a coordinated manner—exploiting complementarities and synergies, avoiding overlapping and
sometimes competing activities.
                                                      25
A diagnostic that will help countries navigate the international tax issues could have
significant impact. The international tax agenda—BEPS and Automatic Exchange of Information
(AEOI), changing transparency concerns (as now with the focus on beneficial ownership)—is
complex. The experience of the joint EU/OECD/WBG program on transfer pricing in over 20
developing countries shows the importance of making linkages between instruments. The
success of the BEPS project’s country-by-country reporting actions, for example, depends on the
development of exchange of information tools. A simple tool enabling developing countries to
make a comprehensive assessment of the full range of cross-border tax risks, challenges, and
possible solutions could be extremely useful. This would not be intended to enforce standards,
and might be supplemented by more detailed diagnostics within the areas covered. The aim
rather would be to provide a broad picture that many countries lack.

    Recommendation 1c: IOs to develop a diagnostic tool/framework for assessing
    cross-border tax issues, covering avoidance, evasion and tax crimes.

Enabler 1.2: A strong managerial and skills base to develop and implement reform
strategies

Self-sustaining improvements in tax system performance, and effective reform programs,
require assuring and maintaining high quality managerial skills. Progress can be marked
when these are strong, but reform programs have often been blocked by weaknesses in senior
management—with some recurrent problems.

One common difficulty is a rapid turnover of senior tax administration personnel, which can
stall progress and reduce commitment. Typically, however, one must prepare for some turnover
of political leadership and perhaps at the head of the revenue agency. To deal with this, it is
important to develop a broad consensus for the CD project, particularly in the Ministry of Finance
and the revenue agency. In Bulgaria, the project had strong support from the top technocrats in
the National Revenue Administration; and when there was turnover at the top of the Ministry and
the National Revenue Administration, technocrats worked with the World Bank team to prepare
briefings for the new officials, assuring that the project moved forward despite changes at the
top.

Another is inadequate attention to change management, which often requires a dedicated
full-time team: without this, the demands of driving reform while maintaining routine business
can prove overwhelming, to the detriment of both.

There is considerable potential for development partners to support improvement in this
area, including by:

•        A greater, explicit focus on encouraging and supporting the appointment of able senior
         managers;




                                                 26
•          Providing specialist managerial training; 38

•          Mentoring arrangements with senior staff in advanced countries (with which there is
           some encouraging experience);

•          In select cases, twinning arrangements with advanced tax agencies, across both functions
           and levels of seniority; and

•          Better coordination of proliferating international meetings on tax issues, to reduce what
           has become a significant drain on the time of senior management.

Technical skills remain in many cases weak and shallow—even in many middle income
countries. The ability to undertake even basic analysis of potential tax policy options is
commonly poor, with similar weaknesses in administration and legal drafting. Here several
actions can help. A greater focus on establishing and ensuring appropriate staffing of (and
information flows to and from) tax policy units is clearly needed. The provision of scholarships for
the increasing number of university-level courses in tax analysis can promote a promising stream
of able staff. Peer-to-peer networks, such as that under the Public Expenditure Management Peer
Assisted Learning (PEMPLA) initiatives, and TIWB, are showing the value of connecting officials
across countries. Massive open online training courses have begun to show their value (in
relation for instance to energy subsidy reform), and the TADAT experience is showing a strong
demand for the acquisition of broad perspective and skills in relation to tax administration.

    Recommendation 1d: As part of the efforts to build organizational capacity, G20 and
    development partners to encourage and support the development of high quality senior
    management, including in technical and management skills, in agencies that deal with
    taxation.


In addition, though, it is important not to lose sight of the more concrete aspects of support from
donors and development partners that are needed to create feasible and successful medium term
reforms—including hardware and software for the adoption of modern IT systems. Clearly this is
a major problem for many developing countries.


    Recommendation 1e: Platform partners will review and assess the use of diagnostic tools
    (such as TADAT) in informing the prioritization of reforms through MTRSs and the
    development of tax reform programs, and will consider, as a result of such assessments,
    what more if anything would be useful in this regard.




38   Analogous, perhaps to the Toronto Centre for Global Leadership in Financial Supervision

                                                         27
Enabler 2: Strong coordination among well-informed and results-oriented providers

Co-ordinating programs and activities

With international support for building tax capacity increasing in both scale and ambition,
coordination will need to be reinforced at all levels, not only to pre-empt risks of duplication,
gaps and misalignment of support but, more positively, to ensure maximum effectiveness. Views
may differ on the severity of coordination issues at present, but scaling-up of support of the
magnitude in prospect would evidently require greater assurances of strong co-ordination. Some
recent developments are helpful in this respect, such as the Addis Tax Initiative, the formation of
the PCT and the introduction of TADAT as a common tool for developing a shared understanding
of revenue administration reform priorities. There is a widespread recognition, however, that
more systematic mechanisms will be needed.

Co-ordination among providers is currently extensive, facilitated by a broad consensus on
the comparative advantages of the organizations involved—but is essentially ad hoc. It
occurs within the co-operative programs mentioned above, for instance, as well as periodic
meetings between agencies—between, for example, the IMF and WCO. The Forum on Tax
Administration (FTA) has begun to seek ways to improve co-ordination and sharing of best
                                                                          39
practice among tax administrations providing capacity building.                IMF and WBG TA in-country
missions routinely arrange to meet interested donors and providers as a core part of their visit. It
is still the case, nonetheless, that information flows between potentially interested agencies,
remain to a large degree matters of happenstance and personal contacts. Previous attempts to
centralize information flows have not succeeded: the former International Tax Dialogue
attempted to do this by providing a public website on which providers were invited to list past
and upcoming activities, but this ultimately failed, reflecting some lack of pressure to provide
regular updates on complex TA programs as well as remaining imperfections of information flows
within some IOs (which have now eased).

Importantly, the recipient countries themselves rarely have dedicated counterparts aiming to
coordinate incoming advice and support.

While it is important to be realistic in the extent of co-ordination that can be achieved,
there is clear scope for improvement. Providers will wish to retain some discretion, including
on the contraction/expansion of their activities and the modalities of their engagement; and their
expertise and institutional priorities may change. Still more important, countries should have the
opportunity to seek the best advice: if one provider fails to deliver useful support, it is reasonable
to approach another—even, in some cases, simply to seek a second opinion. And overly




39 The Forum on Tax Administration (FTA) brings together tax administrations from 47 countries; their 2016 report
(OECD 2016) reflects the commitment of tax commissioners to improve their coordination as part of the wider CD
efforts, and among its recommendations calls for further support and development of a Knowledge Sharing
Platform.


                                                       28
burdensome reporting requirements are already a concern that coordination should aim to
alleviate, but may risk aggravating. There are, however, evidently opportunities for improvement:

•         An MTRS provides a natural framework for explicit coordination between providers,
          matching their resources and comparative advantages to a commonly endorsed and
          country-owned revenue strategy. This, indeed, is one of its primary benefits.

•         There have been positive experiences with in-country topic-based coordinating
          groups, often catalyzed by development partners.

    Recommendation 2a: IOs involved at the country level should facilitate explicit
    collaboration among providers and other stakeholders as a central part of the pilot
    MTRSs and, more broadly, facilitate the development of in-country coordination, by
    both donor groups and developing coordinating country counterparts.


Support for tax systems should adhere to aid effectiveness principles. Section 2 highlighted
the need for assistance to meet aid effectiveness criteria to ensure the best results from capacity
building. To further assist development partners in the development of their programs a manual
should be developed to provide guidance on how the Task Force on Tax and Development
principles (set out in Box 6) can be applied, showcasing best practice. Ideally this should be
complemented by a voluntary peer review process among development partners to verify
adherence to the principles and encourage sharing of best practice.

    Recommendation 2b: To support country level cooperation, Platform partners to develop
    a manual for good practices building on the Principles for International Engagement in
    Supporting Developing Countries in Tax Matters and a voluntary peer review mechanism
    among development partners. This would include how to facilitate coordination among
    providers and different in-country stakeholders, such as business and CSOs. 40


In the area of international taxation, there is an immediate need for the main providers to
develop a comprehensive plan to support developing countries in responding to—and
being part of—the fast moving agenda, including to safeguard the UN principle of ‘no country
left behind’ that underpins the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The work on ‘toolkits’
and related outputs under the PCT is one element of such support, but a coherent approach on
CD aspects is critically important.

    Recommendation 2c: The Platform to develop mechanisms to support the development
    of coordinated plans for all development providers’ work in relation to BEPS
    implementation and wider international tax issues.




40This would also support recommendation 2d through providing further details on several issues including:
review of donor and partner coordination, which mechanisms appear to be least/most effective, pre-requisite
factors/conditions for successful co-ordination, including the case for ‘whole of government’ approaches, and
mechanisms to routinely embed co-ordination between all development providers.

                                                       29
Enabler 2.1: Avoiding fragmentation in the delivery and receipt of support

Effectiveness of support is blunted when providers interact with only a subset of actors in
the tax area, and/or do not exploit their institutions’ wider interactions with the recipient
authorities. As stressed in Section 2, there are many relevant players in the tax area beyond the
tax agencies. This makes it critical to adopt a comprehensive approach to CD that engages the
full range of those who can play a direct, reinforcing or blocking role. As noted above, full
involvement of CSOs and independent media can contribute importantly to improved
governance, and acceptance of reforms by society as a whole. It is very important, too, to draw
upon the knowledge and expertise of business. International taxation is an obvious example, and
there is some experience to build on of companies providing CD through explaining from the
corporate perspective how certain sectors and supply chains function and are structured. There is
also a broader potential where the private sector can, for example, contribute expertise in change
management, human resources, information technology integration, and similar management
challenges.

A common difficulty in improving tax administration, for example, is a large backlog of appeals in
the judicial system, addressing which requires interacting with the judiciary. While this to some
considerable degree happens at present, more can be done. It is important that providers from
institutions that interact with countries on a wide range of related areas—judicial and civil service
reform, macroeconomic and financial policies, PFM etc. —ensure that tax CD issues are given
appropriate attention at all entry points. And reform strategies clearly based on shared
diagnostics and built around an MTRS will help identify the key agents with which it will be
important to engage, and provide a framework for doing so.

A ‘whole of government’ approach is needed from both development partners and
developing countries. For the former, this means—as identified by the Forum on Tax
Administration 41—aligning their tax administration, development agencies and finance
departments, as some countries (such as the UK and Netherlands) are doing. Donor countries
also need to increase the supply of experts with scarce skills and reduce the bureaucratic hurdles
to their being used. Developing countries should seek to adopt a whole-of-government
approach, to ensure that the full range of technical and capacity building needs are identified
and addressed, and reduce the risk of excluded parts of government undermining reform efforts.
This requires, not least, ensuring that all directly tax-relevant agencies are involved (including by
sharing information with each other on support received); poor relations between ministries of
finance and resource ministries, for instance, have been a repeated obstacle to progress in the
design and implementation of improved fiscal regimes in the extractive industries. It is also
necessary to ensure that all levels of taxation are included in CD programs: local/sub-national
taxation, especially property taxes have a significant role to play, but are often neglected by both
developing countries and development partners.




41   See OECD (2016).

                                                  30
 Recommendation 2d: Providers and recipients of CD support on tax matters should be
 well coordinated, including: effective coordination across different agencies active in tax
 reform in recipient countries, fully supported by providers of CD support (‘whole of
 government’ approach); while IOs should ensure internal coordination where they are
 active in different areas affecting the tax system, and across their different entry points
 into taxation (‘whole of institutions’ approach).


Initiative and meeting fatigue has become a significant risk. At the global/multilateral level a
proliferation of new initiatives and processes, if not co-ordinated, can be counter-productive,
increasing transaction costs, diverting scarce capacity and slowing the transmission of both
funding and learning. Several developing countries have strongly raised this concern: new
initiatives should not be launched without a clearly identified need.

 Recommendation 2e: G20 and development partners should more effectively facilitate
 the participation of their serving tax officials in capacity building, including through the
 timely and efficient release of such officials to participate in capacity building efforts.


Enabler 2.2: Clear and common measures of the effectiveness of support

There are some broad signs—essentially case study evidence—that improved tax system
performance has been associated with external support. The review 42 in OECD (2015), for
instance, suggests that assistance: contributed to the marked resilience of tax ratios during the
global financial crisis and a general improving trend; supported trade liberalization (with the
contribution of import duties to tax revenues declining in some countries during the reform
period); and reduced transaction costs for the public and for business in several countries; and
that even in fragile environments revenues increased significantly. The TIWB program has shown
how bringing specific skills (such as in transfer pricing) in to support committed governments can
realize significant revenue gains. For example, Kenya has seen its transfer pricing adjustments
double in two years from US$54 to US$107 million. Further cases of apparently successful
interventions are described in IMF (2015). But there are, of course, also cases in which
interventions have evidently failed—for reasons taken up below.

In some cases, interventions can with reasonable confidence be associated with specific
improvements—but this is difficult for broad-based reform programs. The TIWB program,
for instance, has generated additional revenues to date of more than US$200 million. In the
Philippines, IMF work in the context of an MCC program helped to collect US$196 million of
outstanding arrears. 43 Such attribution is more difficult on larger, more complex programs with


42 This is based on case studies from Asia (Bangladesh, Vietnam and Afghanistan), Europe (Bosnia and
Herzegovina, and Georgia), Latin America (Paraguay), and sub-Saharan Africa (Rwanda). The cases and findings
have been verified by the countries concerned.
43 Other examples include concrete results from support provided by the Bank and OECD under the International

Tax Transparency program, funded by Luxembourg, Switzerland and the UK: in Colombia transfer pricing
adjustments made as a result of audits of multinational enterprises increased revenues ten-fold from US$3.3m in
2011 to over US$33m in 2014;; and in Vietnam enhanced audit efforts yielded transfer pricing adjustments of
US$150m by the end of 2014.
                                                      31
large aims – most IMF and WBG engagements. In such programs, external factors outside the
control of the program (and authorities) can have a significant impact, making reliable attribution
and assessment of effectiveness of support in purely revenue raised terms difficult.

There is an increasing focus on developing indicators of impact, inferred from changes in
measurable outcomes—but there is more to be done. The counterfactual issue still arises of
course, since outcomes might have changed in the absence of support—indeed all success (and
failures) are ultimately attributable to the recipient country itself. Nonetheless, indicators shaped
to an appropriate set of principles, to ensure they are informative, acceptable and
non-manipulable, can provide a critical aid in assessing the impact of support. The wide range of
objectives requires a range of indicators to assess ‘success,’ with scope for both improving data
and further conceptual development: Box 11 elaborates. Investments in complex evaluation tools,
however, should not be allowed to detract from a focus on program delivery.

                  Box 11. Indicators for Assessing Progress in Strengthening DRM
 Tools and/or information are available to assess several aspects of tax system performance,
 including:
 •          Tax ratios can provide useful targets within a fully specified reform strategy, but can be
            contaminated by errors and adjustments in GDP;
 •          Compliance gaps (the difference between tax legally due and that actually collected) go to the
            heart of the performance of the revenue administration, and their dissection can suggest areas
            for improvement. Relatively few low income countries, however, are able to routinely calculate
            these for a wide range of taxes;
 •          TADAT assessment of tax administration performance enable improvements to be tracked…
 •          …while ISORA is increasingly enabling benchmarking of tax administrations relative to
            peers.
 •          Aspects of transparency that can be fairly readily assessed include: compliance with
            international standards of information exchange, features covered by Fiscal Transparency
            Evaluations, and the regular publication of comprehensive tax expenditure budgets.
 Some aspects of tax policy lend themselves to quantitative assessment, such as effects on incentives to
 invest. In some areas, assessment is likely to remain largely judgmental, however:
 •          In relation to progressivity of tax systems, views are likely to differ widely on its appropriate
            degree; in such cases, TADAT/PEFA-like scoring is unlikely to be appropriate. There is more--
            though not universal--consensus on other issues (such as that a shift from tariffs to VAT is
            generally desirable).
 •          Surveys can be helpful—but can be expensive and not always reliable. Innovative survey
            methods, for instance crowd-sourced data on tobacco prices in the Philippines to assess
            compliance with excises, suggest that lower-priced alternatives exist for detailed and real-time
            data collection. 44
 •          Tax morale issues will always be subjective to those responding, but greater understanding of
            the taxpayers views of the system can help in tax system design 45
 In other areas, there is scope to do more in building effective indicators:



44   Kaiser, Bredenkamp, and Glesias (2016).
45   See http://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-global/TaxMorale_march13.pdf
                                                       32
    •        Some aspects of tax policy-making —in terms of analytical basis, consultation and other
             dimensions—may lend themselves to assessment;
    •        Compliance costs to tax payers, for instance, are much less understood than are administrative
             costs and should be better assessed;
    •        Developing fairly simple methods for assessing compliance gaps for personal and corporate
             income taxes is important;
    •        Tools and metrics are needed for tracking results and evaluation of outcomes of specific tax
             administration capacity building programs (as a part of the FTA Capacity Building work
             program).
    •        Simple but analytically-based rules of thumb can be further developed on such practical
             issues as the appropriate levels of VAT refunds and of thresholds under the VAT and personal
             income tax;
    •        Information sharing and effective reporting can be improved—for instance, between tax
             administrations and financial intelligence units (for international tax avoidance and evasion), and
             tax administrations and ministries collecting extractive royalties and other nontax revenues (for
             uniform treatment of revenue collection from taxpayers); and
    •        The links between tax systems, effective institutions, and development outcomes are
             currently poorly tracked and understood; further consideration is needed as to both indicators
             and methods to track and monitor the wider impacts of tax system reform.


    Recommendation 2f: The Platform will review 46 the range of results indicators currently
    used with a view to establishing sound-practice results frameworks and guidance to
    track progress in ongoing reforms of the tax system (policies and administration)
    against a broad range of indicators, taking account of the need to ensure a proper
    balance between the needs of development partners and reporting burdens and the
    appropriateness of fit within the country context.


Enabler 3: A Strong Knowledge and Evidence Base

To inform both national actions and external support for CD, data collection and analytical
research can have a major impact. A strong evidence base is important for:

•          Enabling tax administrations and policy makers to assess their own situation and
           performance, including relative to peers. Here the various diagnostic tools referred to
           above—current and potential—can play a key role, not least in identifying countries’ own
           weaknesses in the information currently assembled. ISORA can allow tax administrations
           to place their own performance in context—for which purpose it is important to
           encourage full participation from as many countries as possible, including those G20
           members who do not yet do so.

•          Drawing lessons from the experiences of others. The last few years have seen
           something of a revolution in the application of modern empirical methods to tax issues in
           developing countries, especially by using taxpayer-level administrative data. This work



46   Subject to additional resourcing.
                                                        33
         has cast new light, for instance, on the operation of VAT compliance chains 47 and on the
         possibility that improved third party reporting may be undone by taxpayers’ adjustment
         on other, less closely monitored margins. 48 Much more can be expected in the coming
         years—and developing the skills to undertake and understand such work will need to be
         a core part of the development of tax policy skills highlighted above. And, though in
         some respects more difficult, it will be important too to take forward research that seeks
         to tease out the links between the development of tax capacity and state building/good
         governance more generally.

One area in which progress is needed is in the collection of reliable, comparable revenue
data. This is critical to tax analysis, and to the SDG monitoring process. The emerging risk is now
not that of no data—other than in relation to the extractives, where initiatives are in progress 49—
but of multiple, slightly different datasets. What is needed is for the IOs and others active in the
area to share information and co-ordinate their efforts and exploit their differing comparative
advantages—with ISORA as a good precedent for such collaboration and cooperation.

 Recommendation 3a: Platform partners and others to intensify their collaborative work
 to produce comparable, reliable data on revenue statistics, and intensify efforts to build
 statistical capacity in the tax area (including in revenue administrations), —while
 avoiding unnecessary duplication.
 Recommendation 3b: G20 to encourage full participation in the International Survey of
 Revenue Administrations (ISORA), leading by example. 50


Enabler 4: Strong Regional Co-operation and Support

The regional tax organizations already play a unique role in strengthening tax capacity in
developing countries... The RTOs differ quite widely in their maturity and the extent and nature
of their functions and activities. All, however, bring a deep knowledge of regional traditions and
practices, and a network of contacts and interactions, that can lend particular effectiveness and
credibility to the support they provide to their members.

…and still have untapped potential. There is widely recognized to be scope and need, for
instance, to strengthen the RTO presence in South East Asia: the contribution already made by
ATAF, over a relatively short period, suggests how valuable this could be. In other cases,
opportunities for expanded activities are severely limited by resources. Among the many aspects
of CD to which they can contribute, the RTOs are particularly well-placed to provide enhanced
support for building tax capacity in several targeted areas, such as in the critical area of change
management highlighted above. They are also well-positioned to provide an important link and
aggregating function in ensuring that developing countries fully participate in the wider
international tax architecture and the global discussion of tax issues more generally; the RTOs will


47 Pomeranz (2015).
48 Carillo, Pomeranz and Singhal (2014).
49 With the support of donors under the IMF’s Managing Natural Resource Wealth trust fund.

50 An initiative of CIAT, the IMF, IOTA and the OECD to collect comparable, global data on revenue administration.


                                                       34
be vital, for example, in facilitating the engagement of developing countries in the Inclusive
Framework for BEPS Implementation. It is important that they be closely involved in the work of
the PCT. There is also significant untapped potential in South-South co-operation in capacity
development. RTOs are already playing a significant role in this regard, and should be
encouraged and supported to help develop, design and implement further South-South co-
operation.

 Recommendation 4: G20 countries and development partners to continue to work in
 close partnership with RTOs and provide support for; increasing their strength and
 coverage, in fostering local networks and exchange of experiences, supporting CD in
 targeted areas, and in influencing and implementing of international rule setting.


Enabler 5: Strengthened Participation of Developing Countries in International Rule
Setting

The international tax landscape is changing rapidly, and developing countries have much
to gain. Recent years have seen significant and rapid changes in the international tax landscape,
especially the move to AEOI and the BEPS Project. Developing countries have been estimated to
suffer, in relative terms, the largest revenue losses from cross-border corporate tax avoidance; 51
they also have the most, in proportional terms, to gain through new approaches to access to
information on offshore accounts 52 .

Including developing countries in this process has been a priority for the G20 for the last
five years, and there has been rapid progress. The Global Forum on Transparency and
Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes has seen its membership expand with a significant
number of developing countries among its 135 members. Most recently, as part of the Inclusive
Framework on BEPS, 85 countries, including 39 developing countries (of which 16 are African),
are working on an equal footing on implementation and further standard setting on BEPS related
international tax issues. Following the inaugural meeting held in Kyoto in July 2016, it is expected
that more developing countries will join the Inclusive Framework and through their participation
in the decision-making process, they will have a direct influence in shaping international tax rules
to tackle BEPS and ensuring a level playing field.

For several years, the UN Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters,
which is a subsidiary body of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), has provided an
inclusive venue for cooperation and standard setting on international taxation by giving special
attention to developing countries. In recognizing the importance of its work, the Addis Agenda
provided for increasing the frequency of its meetings and its engagement with ECOSOC, and
called for supporting increased participation of developing country experts at sub-committee
meetings, with a view to strengthening the Committee’s effectiveness and operational capacity.




51   IMF (2014).
52   Global Forum (2014)
                                                 35
Making these structures work effectively requires more than just membership. Developing
countries need to be supported and empowered to make the most of their membership in these
structures. This requires a commitment from all relevant actors to make relevant institutional
structures work and to accommodate countries with varying capacities, including in the tailoring
of rules and standards to their circumstances.

More support must be provided to equip developing countries to participate in global
discussions and decision-making, and to enable the lessons learned from technical assistance
programs to feed through to the international tax policy discussions. Box 12 below shows how
these elements have come together in Kenya, enabling a world class approach to international
tax.

     Box 12. Kenya: Engaging in International Rule Setting and Using Coordinated Technical
                      Support a to Address International Tax Challenges.

 In 2014, the IMF reported 53 that Kenya’s capacity to address international tax issues was world class. A
 combination of sustained commitment and leadership, engaging in international standard setting fora
 and making effective use of coordinated technical support from the Global Forum on Tax Transparency,
 the OECD and the WBG have been key:
        •    Kenya has engaged in International tax co-operation and in actions to improve domestic
             capacity. Kenya has influenced the revisions of the international tax rules through participating
             in the OECD/G20 BEPS project and by mobilizing African countries through chairing the African
             Tax Administration Forum Cross-Border Taxation Technical Committee.
        •    In early 2016, Kenya signed the Multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in
             Tax Matters, providing a powerful new instrument to fight tax evasion and avoidance, building
             on its membership in the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax
             Purposes, which it joined in 2010.
        •    To support its international efforts, Kenya operationalized a transfer pricing capacity
             development program with support from the OECD and the WBG in 2012, financed by several
             G20 partners. A review of transfer pricing legislation has been completed and the steps towards
             implementing an Advanced Pricing Agreement program are underway.
        •    Kenya is also participating in the OECD/UN TIWB: having previously received assistance, Kenya is
             now keen to assist other African countries to build their international taxation audit expertise
             through South-South TIWB deployments.


 Recommendation 5: IOs, RTOs and development partners to support developing countries
 to participate effectively in international tax policy discussions and institutions. Good
 experiences would be disseminated with a view to scaling them up.


Enabler 6: Learning from Experience

The agenda and recommendations set out above are ambitious—appropriately so, given the
commitment to substantially step up support for CD in the tax area. It will be important to take
stock of their implementation and effectiveness.


53   “Enhancing Border Protection, Facilitating Trade and Increasing Revenues,” IMF, January 2014.


                                                          36
 Recommendation 6a: Working with other stakeholders, the Platform will gather and
 disseminate experiences to further understand what has worked and not worked in tax
 development programs, including by measuring the impact of different interventions.
 Recommendation 6b: IOs to produce a follow-up report to this report within [3] years to
 reflect lessons learnt on effective support for CD in the tax area including on the
 development and implementation of proposals covered in this report.


The recommendations in this section are summarized in Appendix 4.




                                             37
     Appendix 1. Status of Recommendations in the IOs’ 2011 Report


                                   Summary of Recommendations
     MAIN
                                         SUPPORTING G-20 ACTIONS                       DEVELOPMENTS SINCE
     POLITICAL
                                                                                              2011
     MESSAGES
                                   We will:
Message 1.              •   Review the level of our assistance dedicated to supporting Commitments made to
Deepening                   tax systems in developing countries.                       increased support,
International                                                                          including in ATI
Co-operation.           •   Undertake ‘spill over’ analyses of the impact of any
We commit to                significant changes in our own tax systems on those of Important progress
deepening                   developing countries, and support efforts to develop (notably Ireland and
international co-           tools to counter tax evasion and avoidance in developing Netherlands), but more
operation and               countries.                                                 to be done.
strengthening long
                        •   Share our efforts to identify, quantify and make more     Incentives report, with
term support to
                            transparent tax       expenditures and request the        tools, produced: IMF,
developing countries
                            international organizations to develop an analytical      OECD, UN and World
to help them
                            framework to assess the cost & benefits of special tax    Bank (2015). Tools
mobilize domestic
                            treatments and develop guidance for countries using tax   implemented by IMF,
tax resources fairly
                            incentives to attract FDI.                                WBG, and others.
and effectively, as
the cornerstone of      •   Make transparent our exemptions on ODA funded goods Limited progress, some
statebuilding, social       and services, and encourage other donors to follow.
                                                                                     countries (notably
inclusiveness and
                                                                                     Denmark, Netherlands,
better governance.
                                                                                     Sweden and Poland)
                                                                                     have called for a review
                                                                                     and end to exemptions
                        •   Link tax and expenditure in our assistance programs,
                            ensuring taxation promotes statebuilding, accountability Continuing, but
                            and equity, encouraging other donors to do likewise.     significant scope for
                                                                                      more




                                                    38
                                    We will:
Message 2.                                                                                     98 countries are
                        •   Promote the Multilateral Convention on Administrative
Multinational                                                                                  signatory to the
                            Assistance in Tax Matters, support spontaneous
Enterprise                                                                                     Multilateral
                            information sharing in international tax fraud cases and
transparency and                                                                               Convention, including
                            include anti treaty shopping provisions in our tax treaties
compliance.                                                                                    over 30 developing
                            with developing countries.
                                                                                               countries
We will require
Multinational           •   Request international organizations to advise G-20
                                                                                               BEPS Action 13
Enterprises to              leaders on how to make improvements in the
                                                                                               provides for Country
improve tax                 transparency in the operations of MNEs in developing
                                                                                               by Country reporting
transparency and            countries, taking into account the current debate on
                                                                                               to tax authorities. This
compliance in               country- by-country reporting, best practice in business,
                                                                                               is one of the four BEPS
developing countries        and developments in national legislation (e.g., Dodd Frank
                                                                                               minimum standards.
and place good tax          in the US).
                                                                                               Many countries
compliance more
                                                                                               have/are in the process
firmly at the centre    •   Strongly encourage MNEs to provide the relevant and
                                                                                               of legislation and
of their corporate          necessary information to developing countries in which
                                                                                               preparing for
governance and risk         they operate, and apply domestic rules to ensure that
                                                                                               exchange of
assessment systems.         the transfer pricing practices of any particular entity do
                                                                                               information, including
                            not result in a misallocation of profit out of its jurisdiction.
                                                                                               44 through the MCAA
                        •   Urge international organizations and other donors to
                            strengthen their programs to assist developing countries            20+ countries have
                            to effectively implement transfer pricing rules, in the            received training
                            context of their broader tax administration capacity               programmes
                            development efforts.                                               BEPS Actions 8-10 and
                                                                                               forthcoming toolkits
                                                                                               on comparables and
                                                                                               documentation



                                    We will:

Message 3.              •   Encourage international organizations to map assistance            Continuing
Measuring                   programmes on an ongoing basis, improve the reporting
progress.                   of those programs, and develop dedicated knowledge
                            management platforms.
We commit to
working with            •   Share our own benchmarking of performance and                      Launch of TADAT in
developing countries        structure of our tax administrations; support international            2015
to track results from       and regional organizations (e.g., ATAF) to benchmark tax
their own revenue           administrations and to develop a core set of indicators to         Inauguration of ISORA,
raising efforts and         monitor and assess capacity improvement in tax                         2016
the efforts of their        administrations and other revenue related areas.
international
partners.               •   Urge international and regional organizations to improve
                            the quality and consistency of statistics on tax systems of        Progress:
                            developing countries.                                              Publication of IMF
                                                                                               WoRLD data set; IMF-
                                                                                               based ICTD dataset
                                                                                               OECD Revenue
                                                                                               statistics expanding
                                                                                               scope, 54 countries,
                                                                                               new Africa report



                                                       39
      Appendix 2. Common Elements of Strategies for Tax Reform in
                       Developing Countries

Advice to developing countries has commonly stressed:

•      Establishing effective revenue administrations making proper use of withholding and
       third-party information, and capable of building on these to implement voluntary
       compliance and self-assessment—taxpayers calculating and remitting tax themselves,
       subject to audit and penalties—both as a prerequisite for expanding the tax base and to
       help address corruption.

•      Assuring strong control of the largest taxpayers, in a dedicated office (and with
       specialized units for the most critical sectors), as a key step towards introducing risk
       assessment and fuller taxpayer segmentation.

•      Implementing policies and procedures that limit opportunities for rent seeking and help
       identify and punish inappropriate behavior in the revenue administration.

•      Designing and applying forceful and efficient strategies to deal with non-compliance.

•      Ensuring that laws and regulations are reasonably simple, readily available, coherent
       across taxes, and provide good taxpayer protection (including effective appeals
       procedures).

•      Replacing inefficient production or sales taxes, after adequate preparation of both the
       administration and taxpayers, by a simple VAT—including to catalyze administrative
       reforms.

•      Levying a VAT on a broad base, with a high threshold (the level of turnover at which
       registering for the tax becomes compulsory) and avoiding multiple rates, to realize its
       potential as a reasonably efficient source of government finance.

•      Coordinating any prospective loss of trade tax revenue with measures to replace it from
       domestic sources.

•      Avoiding exemptions—under all taxes—that jeopardize revenue and good governance,
       are hard to reverse, and generate no clearly offsetting social benefit.

•      Removing minor taxes and fees that are inordinately costly to comply with and
       administer.

•      Building CITs that are simple (in their depreciation and carry forward provisions, for
       instance) and sufficiently broad-based to allow statutory rates competitive by
       international standards, with effective tax rates that are reasonably low and uniform
       across investments.


                                                40
•   Strengthening capacity to deal with profit-shifting by multinationals, while recognizing
    the extreme difficulty of doing so.

•   Extending the coverage of the PIT (particularly through inclusion of smaller businesses
    and professionals) and establishing coherent taxation of capital income, with an effective
    rate structure consistent with the authorities’ distributional preferences.

•   Exploiting the potential for regional cooperation, in both policy and administration—
    particularly on business taxation and excises—to limit mutually damaging competition.

•   Balancing royalties, auctioning and profit-related charges in taxing natural resources.




                                             41
        Appendix 3. The Work of the IOs on Tax Capacity Development

IMF

Scope of activities in tax development for lower income countries; methods of assistance
delivery

Technical assistance in taxation is one of the core functions of the IMF. Bi-lateral assistance
on tax policy, revenue administration design, tax law drafting and capacity building has been
provided to the Fund’s member countries on demand for over 50 years, through a headquarters
staff that has grown to now total approximately 60 professionals split between administration,
policy and legal experts. This expertise is supplemented by professional staff located in 9 IMF
regional technical assistance centers, covering the vast majority of low income countries; and
other short term experts drawn from governments and academia, working under close
supervision of headquarters staff. Staff assist approximately 100 countries annually on aspects of
tax policy, tax legislation and revenue administration. For lower income countries, such assistance
frequently takes the form of comprehensive multi-year programs of reform.

IMF TA is closely tied to the IMF’s surveillance and lending programs, with design based in part
upon the staff’s deep connection to the member countries’ macroeconomic frameworks, with the
overarching discussions of reform taking place at the level of Ministers/Deputy Ministers of
Finance and Commissioners of Revenue, based upon detailed technical work with their staffs.
Headquarters tax staff provide regular support to the IMF’s country teams in their
assessments of fiscal situations, in addition to providing direct TA. Staff also engage in extensive
analytic work drawing on information gained and problems observed in TA, which in turn
supports the development of solutions to problems regularly encountered in the field.

Recent tools and developments

(i)     Diagnostic tools for revenue administration and compliance include: TADAT, the tax
administration diagnostic assessment tool, developed by the IMF and now operated through an
independent secretariat housed there; ISORA, a revenue administration benchmarking
methodology for measuring performance on a variety of relevant metrics, now used for this by a
number of international organizations; and RA-GAP, a standardized methodology for measuring
compliance gaps in specific taxes at countries’ requests.

(ii)    Further integration of tax policy and administration issues into IMF surveillance for
all member countries, in a pilot project with specific focus on lower income countries and on
international tax issues.

(iii)   The first (of eight) BEPS toolkits has been published (with the OECD, UN and World
        Bank) on Effective and Efficient Use of Tax Incentives for Investment




                                                 42
 OECD

 Scope of activities in tax development for lower income countries; methods of assistance
 delivery

 The OECD seeks to improve global tax systems through the development of standards and norms
 and their effective implementation. Capacity building is an integral part of this work, and
 information sharing and problem analysis from that work in turn feeds back into further
 refinement and development of standards. The OECD also produces internationally comparable
 statistics on both development assistance and taxation.

 The primary methods by which the OECD contributes to capacity building are through:

 (i)     Bringing experts together to share experience and practices--the Global Relations
 Program holds over 60 multilateral and bilateral events each year with some 2000 tax officials
 from over 100 countries; the International Academy for Tax Crime Investigation brings together
 officials from tax and other agencies, promoting both international and inter-agency cooperation
 on tax crimes; the Forum on Tax Administration enables revenue agencies to work together
 toward increasing the efficiency, effectiveness and fairness of tax administration, as well as
 producing comparative data on 56 tax administrations.

 (ii)    Building technical capacity through practical instruments and mechanisms—the
 Taskforce on Tax and Development works with the European Commission and World Bank to
 deliver intensive support on relevant tax matters to over 20 countries; the Tax Inspectors Without
 Borders project, in collaboration with UNDP, provides experts to work on international tax audits
 and its pilot phase between 2012 and 2014 assisted in the collection of an extra $185million in
 revenue; the Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes (to
 which the OECD serves as secretariat) provides guidance and training to developing countries in
 adopting international standards in exchange of information.

 (iii)      Integrating developing countries into international processes – Over 80 developing
 countries and other non-OECD/non-G20 countries to participated in the BEPS process through a
 combination of direct engagement in technical working groups, regional consultations and
 thematic global fora, this engagement shaped the outcomes, and increased awareness and
 understanding by developed countries of developing countries’ issues; the Inclusive Framework
 on BEPS takes this integration further and is open for all interested countries to join on an equal
 footing.

 Recent Tools and Developments

(i)      A new purpose code has been introduced to DAC ODA reporting to enable donor support
 on tax projects to be tracked in the OECD’s regular development statistical collection. Donors are
 now using this coding for 2015 spending, and the first reports will be available next year.




                                                  43
(ii)    Developing countries are being supported to produce revenue statistics in an
internationally comparable basis, in a long term project. 2016 saw the first publication of Revenue
Statistics in Africa, covering 8 countries in Africa, joining comparable publications for OECD, Latin
American and Caribbean, and Asian economies.


(iii)   Extractive industries case studies on mineral product pricing practices are being produced
to assist developing countries improve their understanding of mineral product transactions and
pricing. The first three drafts were provided for public consultation with several more to come.

The World Bank

WBG support for client countries to build the capacity of their tax systems is provided through a
range of instruments, which ensures support throughout their lifecycle, from diagnosis to
analysis of causes ad solutions of tax issues, design of a program of capacity building,
implementation, and, finally, evaluation. Specifically, WBG provides financial support in the
form of loans to IBRD countries and IDA credits and grants, including: (i) Investment Project
Financing for building physical and social infrastructure, such as Information Management
Information Systems and business process re-engineering for tax administrations; (ii)
Development Policy Financing for a program of policy and institutional actions, such as
changes in tax laws and arrangements for providing tax incentives to foreign investors; and (iii)
Program-for-Results operations that link disbursements directly to the delivery of defined
results. Presently, some 9 countries have lending projects with significant tax components,
adding to about $400 million in support, including $50 million for technical assistance. In
addition, Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) provide WBG clients with customized expertise
and analytics, either as stand-alone services or as a complement to financial support programs.
This includes Economic Sector Work, involving diagnostic and analytical reports aiming to
influence policy choices and programs; Non-Lending Technical Assistance to assist clients
building capacities or strengthening institutions through events and reports; and impact
evaluation and training. On-going ASA support is provided to some 39 countries. Funding for
these activities is through WBG’s own resources, including from the International Development
Association, donor-provided trust funds, and clients themselves may also reimburse the WBG for
advisory services.

Expertise on tax is mostly focused in the Equitable Growth, Finance and Institutions (EFI) Vice
Presidency. EFI has some 30 tax experts on staff, and an additional 80 or so staff members who
are substantially involved with tax in their work programs. EFI’s 9-member Global Tax Team is
responsible for global engagement on tax issues, contributing guidance, tools and research, and
supporting country engagement on tax issues. Other tax experts are in regional units, and
provide direct support for capacity building in client countries. Other WBG units work on specific
tax issues, including extractives revenue management, and carbon and sin taxes among others.

WBG support for capacity building in the area of taxation covers tax administration, tax policy
and international tax issues. This support is provided within the context of country programs,
reflecting local circumstances and needs. Tax administration reforms addressed through WBG

                                                 44
engagements include reform of laws and regulations; organizational reform, such as shifting
from an organizational structure by tax type to a function-based structure, and reform of large
taxpayer offices; functional review and reforms, such as improvements in arrangements for
taxpayer registration and audit business; process re-engineering and improving IT systems; and
human resources training and reform (including in Afghanistan, Colombia, Ghana, Pakistan, Peru,
Vietnam). In tax policy, on-going and recent work includes support to comprehensive tax
reforms (Armenia and Colombia), natural resource tax reforms (Burkina Faso), tobacco excise
reform (Ghana and Botswana), technical dialogue (Philippines), equity impact scenarios for tax
reform (Chile), tax incentives rationalization and simplification (Gabon), and revenue forecasting
(Pakistan). The international tax work stream supports countries to design and implement
instruments and administrative procedures to address key sources of base erosion, such as
transfer mis-pricing, tax treaty application issues, detecting and adjudicating aggressive tax
planning structures and other methods of profit shifting, and tax transparency through exchange
of information. Examples of support include Vietnam recovering over $150 million in the first two
years of doing transfer pricing audits and the Philippines recovering over $1 million through its
first two requests for information.

Recent tools and developments

(i)         During the first six months of 2016, consultations on transfer pricing (with the IMF) and
            on proprieties for tax CD in Africa (in Tanzania) and East Asia and the Pacific (in Korea).
(ii)        Publications on ‘Transfer Pricing and Developing Economies: From Implementation to
            Application’ and ‘Transfer Pricing in the African Mining Industry’ (both forthcoming).
(iii)       Modular tools for detailed assessment of tax administration. 54

UN

Scope of activities on tax and development: methods of assistance delivery

The UN capacity development programme on international tax cooperation is focused on the
needs and priorities of developing countries, especially least developed ones. It is carried out
through a collaborative engagement of tax officials from developing countries, members of the
Committee of Experts on International Cooperation in Tax Matters (the Committee), relevant
international and regional organizations and prominent academics. This multi-stakeholder
approach aims at ensuring that all activities are demand-driven and effectively address the needs
of developing countries.

The programme consists of training activities, delivery of technical assistance, and production
of publications and other capacity development tools. Presently, the work focuses on three
main areas: double tax treaties; transfer pricing; and tax base protection for developing
countries. The programme largely draws on the outputs of the Committee, with a view to
disseminating and operationalizing them for the benefit of developing countries. These include


54    Available at http://www.iamtax.org/.

                                                     45
the United Nations Model Double Taxation Convention between Developed and Developing
Countries, the United Nations Manual for the Negotiation of Bilateral Tax Treaties between
Developed and Developing Countries, and the United Nations Practical Manual on Transfer Pricing
for Developing Countries.

Courses on both double tax treaties and transfer pricing are normally delivered in regional
settings, in cooperation with regional organizations of tax administrations. These courses
combine theoretical and practical aspects and feature small-group discussions of real-life
examples and case studies. In addition, regional and country experts are invited to provide
practical insights and share relevant experiences from their country practice, with a view to
facilitating South-South collaboration. In order to allow for broader accessibility to training
materials, online courses are also being developed to complement the offering of face-to-face
training.

Recent tools and publications

(i)     The United Nations Handbook on Selected Issues in Administration of Double Tax Treaties
for Developing Countries and Papers on Selected Topics in Negotiation of Tax Treaties for
Developing Countries are two recent publications aimed at strengthening the capacity of
developing countries to negotiate and apply double tax treaties.

(ii)    The main tool in the area of tax base protection for developing countries is the United
Nations Handbook on Selected Issues in Protecting the Tax Base of Developing Countries, which is
intended to support developing countries in increasing their potential for domestic revenue
mobilization. In order to complement and further operationalize this Handbook through more in-
depth and hands-on practical guidance, a series of Practical Portfolios on Protecting the Tax Base
of Developing Countries is now being developed, including on base-eroding payments for
services, interest, rents and royalties.

(iii)   The joint UN-CIAT publication entitled Measuring Tax Transaction Costs in Small and
Medium Enterprises presents an empirical methodology to assess the costs borne by taxpayers
when complying with their obligations, as well as the costs faced by the tax administration for
ensuring compliance by taxpayers, with a view to identifying potential measures to reduce these
costs and achieve greater compliance, while realizing sustainable increases in government
revenues.




                                                 46
                       Appendix 4. Summary of Recommendations

The Essential: Deep Country Commitment Within a Supportive Political Environment

Recommendation 1. G20, the international organizations (IOs) and development partners
should encourage political support for tax systems development. Options include explicit
requirements for financial support and mutual accountability provisions such as those in
the Addis Tax Initiative.

Enabler 1: A coherent revenue strategy as part of development financing plan
Recommendation 1a: National authorities, with support from IOs that are active in a country,
and development partners engaged in support on tax reform, to develop country specific
MTRSs, 55 with a view to launching [3 to 5] pilot MTRSs by [July 2017]. Building on this
experience Platform partners will draw and disseminate lessons for the development of
further MTRSs, and revenue reform plans more generally.

Recommendation 1b: Donor/G20 countries to encourage and facilitate capacity building of
local stakeholders (business, CSOs, media) to engage in reforms and MTRS development.

Enabler 1.1: Adequate diagnosis of problems, risks and options for revenue strategy
development
Recommendation 1c: IOs to develop a diagnostic tool/framework for assessing cross-
border tax issues, covering avoidance, evasion and tax crimes.

Enabler 1.2: A strong managerial and skills base to develop and implement reform
strategies
Recommendation 1d: As part of the efforts to build organizational capacity, G20 and
development partners to encourage and support the development of high quality senior
management, including in technical and management skills, in agencies that deal with
taxation.

Recommendation 1e: Platform partners will review and assess the use of diagnostic tools
(such as TADAT) in informing the prioritization of reforms through MTRSs and the
development of tax reform programs, and will consider as a result of such assessments, what
more if anything would be useful in this regard.

Enabler 2: Strong coordination among well-informed and results-oriented providers
Recommendation 2a: IOs involved at the country level should facilitate explicit
collaboration among providers and other stakeholders as a central part of the pilot MTRSs




55 Issues to address include incentives for countries to participate, the phasing of implementation, building in
flexibility to deal with potential policy changes as governments and circumstances change, stakeholder
involvement, and modalities for support.


                                                         47
and, more broadly, facilitate the development of in-country coordination, by both donor
groups and developing coordinating country counterparts.

Recommendation 2b: To support country level cooperation, Platform partners to develop
a manual for good practices building on the Principles for International Engagement in
Supporting Developing Countries in Tax Matters and a voluntary peer review mechanism
among development partners. This would include how to facilitate coordination among
providers and different in-country stakeholders, such as business and CSOs.

Recommendation 2c: The Platform to develop mechanisms to support the development
of coordinated plans for all development providers’ work in relation to BEPS
implementation and wider international tax issues.

Enabler 2.1: Avoiding fragmentation in the delivery and receipt of support is avoided
Recommendation 2d: Providers and recipients of CB support on tax matters should be well
coordinated, including: effective coordination across different agencies active in tax
reform in recipient countries, fully supported by providers of CB support (‘whole of
government’ approach); while IOs should ensure internal coordination where they are
active in different areas affecting the tax system, and across their different entry points
into taxation (‘whole of institutions’ approach).

Recommendation 2e: G20 and development partners should more effectively facilitate the
participation of their serving tax officials in capacity building, including through the timely
and efficient release of such official to participate in capacity building efforts.

Enabler 2.2: Clear and common measures of the effectiveness of support
Recommendation 2f: The Platform will review the range of results indicators currently used
with a view to establishing sound-practice results frameworks and guidance to track
progress in ongoing reforms of the tax system (policies and administration) against a
broad range of indicators, taking account of the need to ensure a proper balance between
the needs of development partners and reporting burdens and the appropriateness of fit
within the country context.

Enabler 3: A strong knowledge and evidence base
Recommendation 3a: Platform partners and others to intensify their collaborative work to
produce comparable, reliable data on revenue statistics and key tax policy parameters, and
intensify efforts to build statistical capacity in the tax area (including in revenue
administrations)—while avoiding unnecessary duplication.

Recommendation 3b: G20 to encourage full participation in the International Survey of
Revenue Administrations (ISORA), leading by example. 56




56   An initiative of CIAT, the IMF, IOTA and the OECD to collect comparable, global data on revenue administration.

                                                          48
Enabler 4: A strong regional co-operation and support
Recommendation 4: G20 countries and development partners to continue to work in close
partnership with RTOs and provide support for; increasing their strength and coverage, in
fostering local networks and exchange of experiences, supporting CD in targeted areas,
and in influencing and implementing of international rule setting.

Enabler 5: Strengthened participation of developing countries in international rule
setting
Recommendation 5: IOs, RTOs and development partners to support developing countries
to participate effectively in international tax policy discussions and institutions. Good
experiences would be disseminated with a view to scaling them up.

Enabler 6: Learning from experience
Recommendation 6a: Working with other stakeholders, the Platform will gather and
disseminate experiences to further understand what has worked and not worked in tax
development programs, including by measuring the impact of different interventions.

Recommendation 6b: IOs will produce a follow-up report to this report within [3] years to
reflect lessons learnt on effective support for CB in the tax area including on the
development and implementation of proposals covered in this report.




                                              49
                                           References

Acosta-Ormaechea, Santiago and Jiae Yoo, 2012, “Tax Composition and Growth: A Broad Cross-
        Country Perspective,” IMF Working Paper /12/257.

Adhikari, Bibek, 2014, “Does Introducing a VAT Increase Efficiency? Evidence from Synthetic
        Control Methods,” Unpublished paper (New Orleans: Tulane University).

Ali, Merima, Odd-Helge Fjeldstad and Ingrid Hoem Sjursen, 2014, “To Pay or Not to Pay? Citizens’
        Attitudes Toward Taxation in Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and South Africa”, World
        Development, vol. 64, pp. 828-842.

Arnold, Jens B., Bert Brys, Christopher Heady, Åsa Johansson, Cyrille Schwellnus and Laura Vartia,
        2011, “Tax Policy for Economic Recovery and Growth,’” Economic Journal, Vol. 121, pp.
        F59-F80.

Besley, Timothy and Torsten Persson, 2011, Pillars of Prosperity: The Political Economics of
        Development Clusters (Princeton: Princeton University Press).

Carillo, Paul, Dina Pomeranz and Monica Singhal, 2014, “Dodging the Taxman: Firm Misreporting
        and the Limits to Tax Enforcement,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
        Paper No. 20624.

Crivelli, Ernesto, and Sanjeev Gupta, 2014, “Does Conditionality in IMF-Supported Programs
        Promote Revenue Reform?” IMF Working Paper 14/26 (Washington: International
        Monetary Fund).

Fjeldstad, Odd-Helge, and Mick Moore, 2009. “Revenue authorities and public authority in sub-
        Saharan Africa,” Journal of Modern African Studies, 47, 1, pp. 1–18.

Gaspar, Vitor, Laura Jaramillo and Philippe Wingender, 2016, “Tax Capacity and Growth: Is there a
        Tipping Point?” forthcoming IMF Working Paper.

Global Forum on Transparency and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes, 2014, “Automatic
        Exchange of Information: A Roadmap for Developing Country Participation”, available at
        http://www.oecd.org/tax/transparency/global-forum-AEOI-roadmap-for-developing-
        countries.pdf

Ifan, Guto and Tim Strawson, 2016, Aiding Domestic Revenue Mobilisation, a Development
       Initiatives report, available at http://devinit.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/Aiding-
       domestic-revenue-mobilisation_report.pdf

International Centre for Tax and Development, 2015, “Making VAT More Visible Can Be an
        Efficient Tool in Building a Tax-Paying Culture”, at
        http://www.ictd.ac/blogs/entry/making-vat-more-visible-can-be-an-efficient-tool-in-
        building-a-tax-paying-culture

International Monetary Fund, 2011, “Revenue Mobilization in Developing Countries”, available at
        http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2011/030811.pdf



                                                 50
International Monetary Fund, 2014a, “Fiscal Policy and Income Inequality,” Available at
       https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/012314.pdf.

International Monetary Fund, 2014b, “Spillovers in International Corporate Taxation,” available at
       https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2014/050914.pdf.

International Monetary Fund, 2015, “Current Challenges in Revenue Mobilization: Improving Tax
       Compliance”, available at https://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2015/020215a.pdf

International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, United
       Nations and World Bank, 2011,” Supporting the development of More Effective Tax
       Systems,” available at https://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/110311.pdf

International Monetary Fund, 2014, “Enhancing Border Protection, Facilitating Trade and
       Increasing Revenues.”

International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, United
       Nations and World Bank, 2015,“Options for Low Income Countries’ Effective and Efficient
       Use of Tax Incentives for Investment,” available at
       https://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/101515.pdf

International Monetary Fund, Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, United
       Nations and World Bank, 2016, “The Platform for Collaboration on Tax,” Concept Note
       available on all four organizations’ websites.

Kaiser, Kai, Caryn Bredenkamp, and Roberto Iglesias (2016), Sin Tax Reform in the Philippines:
       Transforming Public Finance, Health, and Governance for More Inclusive Development
       (Washington DC: World Bank).

Keen, Michael, 2013, “Taxation and Development—Again,” pp.13-41 in Clemens Fuest and
       George Zodrow (eds), Studies of Critical Issues in Taxation and Development (Cambridge:
       MIT Press)

Keen, Michael, and Ben Lockwood, 2010, “The Value-Added Tax: Its Causes and Consequences,”
       Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 92, pp. 138–51.

Khan, Adnan Q., Asim Khwaja and Benjamin Olken, 2014, “Tax Farming Redux: Experimental
       Evidence on Performance Pay for Tax Collectors,” Unpublished paper, Massachusetts
       Institute of Technology.

Köhnen, Daniel, Thorben Kundt and Christian Schuppert, 2010 “Mapping Survey, Taxation and
       Development” an International Tax Compact Report for GTZ (Eschborn: GTZ)

Naritomi, Joana, 2013, “Consumers as Tax Auditors,” Unpublished paper, Harvard University.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2006, The Challenge of Capacity
       Development – Working Towards Good Practice, (Paris: OECD).




                                                51
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2010, From Citizen-State Relations,
       Improving Governance Through Tax Reform (Paris: OECD). Available at
       https://www.oecd.org/dac/governance-peace/governance/docs/46008596.pdf

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2013a Tax and Development: Aid
       Modalities for Strengthening Tax Systems, (Paris: OECD). Available at
       http://www.oecd.org/fr/publications/tax-and-development-9789264177581-en.htm

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2013b, “What Drives Tax Morale” Tax
       and Development working paper (Paris: OECD) Available at http://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-
       global/TaxMorale_march13.pdf

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2014, “Domestic Revenue
       Mobilization in Fragile States. (Paris: OECD). Available at
       http://www.oecd.org/dac/governance-peace/conflictfragilityandresilience/docs/FSR-
       2014.pdf

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2015, Examples of Successful DRM
       Reforms and the Role of International Cooperation (Paris: OECD). Available at
       https://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-global/examples-of-successful-DRM-reforms-and-the-role-
       of-international-co-operation.pdf

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, 2016, Tax Administrations and
       Capacity Building: A Collective Challenge, (Paris: OECD). Available at
       http://www.oecd.org/ctp/tax-administrations-and-capacity-building-9789264256637-
       en.htm

Pomeranz, Dina, 2015, “No Taxation without Information: Deterrence and Self-Enforcement in the
       Value Added Tax,” American Economic Review, Vol. 105, pp. 2539-2569.

Ufier, Alex, 2014, “Quasi-experimental Analysis of the Effects of Adoption of a Value Added Tax,”
       Economic Inquiry, Vol. 52, pp. 1364–79.

World Bank Group and others, 2015, “From Billions to Trillions: Transforming Development
       Finance,” available at
       http://siteresources.worldbank.org/DEVCOMMINT/Documentation/23659446/DC2015-
       0002(E)FinancingforDevelopment.pdf




                                                 52
