                 Ebbs and Flows
Analyzing Gender and Social Inclusion Issues in India’s
     Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Sector




                                                          1
      1. Introduction
1.1     BACKGROUND
        Why Focus on Gender in Urban Water Supply and Sanitation

Cities in the developing world are witnessing unprecedented growth rates. It is expected that 70% of
the global population will live in cities by 2050 (Birch et al., 2011). This increase in urban population
is not matched by an equal increase in access to basic services. In particular, limited access to water
supply and sanitation (WSS) services poses a challenge to creating sustainable cities. Birch et al
(2011) have argued that the current process of urbanization has led to changes in lifestyles, including
altering the ways in which water is accessed and used. However, despite these changes, traditional
gender roles have remained intact and women and girls continue to be responsible for managing
access to water supply and sanitation for the household.
 In urban areas, as in rural areas, women and girls are often the primary users, providers and
managers of water in their household, and are the guardians of household hygiene and health (WSP,
2009). Consequently, they are most affected by inadequate water supply. While the time taken to
access water in urban areas is less when compared to rural areas, women and girls face greater
challenges, such as health risks associated with contaminated water, safety risks related to fetching
water, and reproductive risks linked to poor water quality and quantity (Birch et al., 2011). Women
are also more affected than men by inadequate sanitation services; in particular they face greater
safety and health risks as a result of poor facilities. Among women and girls too, the impact of
inadequate WSS services is felt more by those living in poverty.
In spaces of urban poverty, such as slums, women and girls experience ‘multiple deprivations’ that
arise from insecurity of land tenure, informal access mechanisms, over- crowding, and the various
stresses of urban life. These further affect women’s access to water supply and sanitation services.
Despite the wide acknowledgement in literature that limited access to water supply and sanitation
services in urban areas disproportionately impacts women and girls, these consequences are not
being measured in a systematic way. And, even as women and girls are often looked at as key
beneficiaries of water supply programs their involvement in designing, managing and operating WSS
systems and programs remains limited. The water supply and sanitation sector, then, is the juncture
at which broader goals of poverty alleviation, social development, gender equality and sustainable
urban development converge. Particularly now, when it has become clear that the millennium
development goals (MDGs) of halving the population without access to improved water supply and
sanitation by 2015 will not be met, it becomes critical to re-think WSS policies and programs in a way
that they address the rapidly increasing urban population and engage with the specific needs of
women, girls and socially excluded groups.
How issues of gender and urban poverty can be addressed comprehensively in the design and
implementation of urban water supply and sanitation (UWSS) programs is not yet well understood.
In order to address these gaps in knowledge, the World Bank commissioned a study to analyze
UWSS issues among the urban poor through a gender and social exclusion lens. Using India, with its
burgeoning population and growing number of urban poor, as the context, this study assesses how
women, girls and socially excluded groups1 are impacted by poor access to water supply and

1
  In India, strong prohibitions related to caste still affect the use of common water supply and sanitation facilities. As a
result, lower caste residents and socially excluded groups in low income communities face a disproportionate burden of



                                                                                                                               2
sanitation and how they can be engaged in the design and management of water supply and
sanitation programs. This study is at the intersection of several critical gaps in literature. It is
expected that the findings from this study will inform Government of India’s policies in this sector
and assist in the design of future World Bank-supported urban water supply and sanitation (UWSS)
projects.

1.2 OVERVIEW OF THE STUDY
OBJECTIVE
The overall objective of this study is to clarify issues related to gender and social inclusion in the
design and implementation of UWSS programs targeting urban poor populations of India in order to
improve their effectiveness. The specific objectives are to (i) assess gender-differentiated WSS needs
in urban poor communities; (ii) clarify issues related to poverty, gender, social exclusion and
disability; (iii) highlight successful approaches and project design features that address some
identified issues, needs and roles; (iv) create an ‘action plan’ to incorporate gender in UWSS
projects.

Methodology
The study uses an integrated methods approach. It includes a review of available national and
international literature, a field study of 100 slums each in Gwalior and Pune that includes surveys
and group discussions, and seven case studies that analyze specific WSS interventions in the cities of
Agra (Uttar Pradesh), Mumbai and Pune (Maharashtra), Kalyani (West Bengal), Tiruchirapalli (Tamil
Nadu), Belgaum (Karnataka) and Gwalior (Madhya Pradesh).
Literature Review
The literature review analyzes available information, from India and elsewhere, on gender needs and
roles in the UWSS sector. It also critically examines existing programs and policies in India that
attempt to address issues of water access and service delivery. The analysis from the literature
review was used to inform survey and interview questions.
Field Study
Site Selection: Since there are more than 50 million-plus cities in India, 468 Class I cities2, and 738
cities and towns that together house a slum population of about 115 million, the sampling universe
for this study was large. In order to narrow the universe, a ‘dipstick’ survey was conducted. Based on
this analysis, it was decided to cover a large sample of 100 slums in two cities. One large city, with a
population of over 1 million and another smaller city, with a population of less than a million was
selected. In order to select these two cities, a list of 19 potential sites was drawn up. Each of the 19
cities selected had previously demonstrated innovative approaches to supplying water supply and
sanitation services. Finally, two cities – Gwalior and Pune - were selected from this universe.
Gwalior was selected to represent smaller cities (with population of 100,000 or less). Gwalior has
constructed accessible public toilets that also have incinerators for better menstrual hygiene. The
management of these innovatively designed toilets has been handed over to a local NGO. Gwalior
was also a part of a small UN-HABITAT initiative that looked at gender mainstreaming in the water
sector. This work was later scaled up in ADB and DFID-funded UWSS projects.


limited access to water supply and sanitation. In order to understand water supply and sanitation service deprivation in
urban poor communities of the country more comprehensively, socially excluded groups were also included in this analysis
2
    Class I cities have a population of over 100,000 people


                                                                                                                       3
Pune was selected to represent cities with a population of over one million residents. The operations
and maintenance of public toilets in Pune is typically handed over to the slum communities. NGOs in
Pune have also completed detailed digital mapping of slums, providing valuable data for this work.
Sample Size: 100 slums each in Pune and Gwalior were included in the survey. In Pune, this sample
size represented 28% of all 341 notified slums for which detailed secondary information was
available. In Gwalior, it represented 44% of the 229 notified slums. A two stage sampling was carried
out; first to identify the slums, and the second to identify the households to be interviewed within
each slum. The population and the distribution across the administrative zones of the city formed
the main basis for the stratified random sampling of slums. In each of the selected slums, household
interviews and group discussions were carried out to collect a mix of qualitative and quantitative
information using both open-ended and close-ended questions.
Survey Methodology: Given time and budget constraints, the sample size for the household survey
was fixed at 15 households per slum. This included five households that had house taps, five that
had toilets and five households with members having a range of special needs. A sample of 1500
slum households each in Pune and Gwalior were surveyed. The 10 households with either a house
tap or a household toilet were selected using random walks. The households with members that had
special needs were selected purposively.
Group discussions: As part of the field study, a total of 443 group discussions with men and women,
283 group discussions with users of public water points and public toilets and 2,344 household
interviews were carried out. Some of the qualitative issues discussed in groups, especially those
pertaining to user satisfaction and service delivery from public and household infrastructure, were
probed using the Quantified Participatory Assessment (QPA). As a part of the QPA, semi-structured
group discussions are used to elicit community responses to a particular question, and then the
responses are converted into quantitative date using an ordinal scale. Responses are assumed to
range from the worst case (score of 0, with a detailed description of this score) to the ideal (score of
100, with a description), with an optional ‘benchmark’ score of 50 (scores of 50 and above are
generally considered ‘satisfactory’ or ‘neutral’, while those below 50 are ‘not satisfactory’). These
semi-structured group discussions are conducted by trained facilitators and the issues are discussed
till a consensus is reached. The response from each group is recorded (as ‘Reasons for Score’), and
based on this reason, the facilitators assigned a final score.
QPA has the following three key features:
       QPA surveys groups of participants, just as household questionnaires survey individual
        respondents. Findings reported are therefore a proportion of the total number of groups
        that gave a particular (qualitative) response (i.e., reason for score), which was then
        converted into a number (‘score’). Typically the number of groups is large (i.e., >100).
       The QPA scoring is consensual across the group, with the ‘reason for the score’ recorded
        separately from the ‘score’, and providing qualitative detail.
       In comparison to other scoring systems, each QPA score has a description attached to it,
        which makes it more ‘robust’ than other scoring systems like Likert scales.
Since the QPA looks at both qualitative and quantitative information, it is an integrated approach, as
opposed to the mixed methods approach that seeks to keep the qualitative methods separate from
quantitative methods. For this study, the scores were used for statistical analysis (including tests of
significance of differences, e.g., between men and women, between cities, and across summer and




                                                                                                       4
non-summer months) and the qualitative responses gathered during the discussions gave some
indication of the ‘reason for scores’ as well as some contextual factors.
On the basis of QPA questions, a water supply service delivery ladder was constructed and used to
assess user perceptions around the following parameters of service delivery:
      Adequacy: Whether or not adequate water was available for all users for drinking and other
       domestic uses.
      Pressure: The time taken to fill a 10-litre bucket was a proxy for water pressure, with longer
       times indicating lower pressure.
      Quality: Whether or not water supply was considered fit for human consumption in terms of
       taste, smell and appearance (e.g., muddy or colored).
      Predictability: Whether or not water was supplied at scheduled timings and for scheduled
       durations.
      Reliability: The time taken to fix breakdowns in service and alternate arrangements made
       during breakdowns – on the basis that the faster breakdowns are fixed the more reliable the
       supply
For each water point, whether PWPs or house taps, the QPA scores for these five parameters were
assessed and then aggregated to derive the service level. The aggregation rule followed was that
lowest service level achieved on each of the five parameters was taken as the service level of the
water point – even if it achieved higher levels on one or more individual parameters
Sanitation service delivery was similarly assessed using QPA-based questions on user perceptions
around the following four parameters:
      Cleanliness: Whether or not floors, walls and pans are clean and whether or not there is
       water for flushing the toilet.
      Convenience: Whether or not toilets have adequate ventilation, lighting and provisions for
       water and soap for washing hands after using the toilet.
      Privacy and safety: Whether or not the toilets have doors that close properly and bolts or
       hooks to lock the door while using the toilet and whether or not users feel safe using the
       toilet
      Reliability: Whether or not blocks and other problems with the toilet are resolved quickly.


Case Studies
The information from the literature review has been used to identify 25 innovative initiatives that
incorporate gender and social inclusion concerns in a wide variety of UWSS programs. From this list,
seven ‘best practices’ in Indian towns were selected based on geographical distribution and the
nature of the initiative. These best practices were further analyzed and have been presented as case
studies later in this report.




                                                                                                        5
RATIONALE
The World Bank’s World Development Report (2012) indicates that the inequalities in access to
water supply and sanitation, particularly for women and girls, are intensified in low-income
communities. Despite the wide acceptance, literature looking at gender and poverty in the water
supply and sanitation sector continues to have a rural focus and there is a dearth of work on
analyzing gender dimensions of inadequate water supply and sanitation in urban areas. This study,
by examining the gender dimensions of WSS access in slums, begins to address this gap.
This study focuses on notified slums, even though the services in non-notified slums were adjudged
to be ‘markedly worse in non-notified slums than in notified slums’ (GOI, 2010). Currently, more
notified than non-notified slums are served by public utilities, and thus, notified slums provide a
better site from which to analyze the role of the public utility in providing access to adequate WSS
service to meet the specific needs of urban poor men and women.
This study also responds to the lack of literature looking at gender-differentiated water and
sanitation needs in secondary and tertiary cities. The number of secondary and tertiary cities in India
has grown exponentially in the last decade. The UN (2006) reported that the water supply and
sanitation situation in these cities is significantly worse that in the mega cities due to inexperienced
utilities, inadequate infrastructure, and haphazard development. By looking at the situation in Pune
and Gwalior this study provides valuable input on how to respond to GSI issues in the water supply
and sanitation sector of rapidly growing secondary and tertiary cities.

STRUCTURE OF THIS REPORT
The report is organized as follows. Chapter 2 discusses the findings from the literature review. The
field survey findings are reported in Chapter 3 and Chapter 4 presents the case studies. Finally, the
conclusions of the study and the possible ways forward, in terms of both programmatic and policy
interventions, are presented in Chapter 5.




                                                                                                        6
7
    2.      THE LITERATURE REVIEW



2.1 INTRODUCTION
Gender, poverty, and access to water supply and sanitation remain unfavorably connected. At least
85% of the world’s water is being used by 12% of the wealthiest people, and 20% of the poorest
people have the least access to clean water. At this time, almost two in three people that lack access
to clean water survive on less than $2 a day, with one in three living on less than $1 a day. More
than 660 million people without sanitation live on less than $2 a day, and more than 385 million on
less than $1 a day (UN HDR, 2006). Because 70% of the world’s poorest residents are women (UN
WOMEN, 2012), this issue is also closely linked to gender development.

The JMP data corroborates this claim and notes that, in the global context, poor ‘[i]n almost three-
quarters of households without access to drinking water on premises, women and girls have the
primary responsibility for collecting water’, and that in some countries, women are responsible for
more than 90% of the water collection (WHO/UNICEF, 2011, p. 28). Women and girls are also
responsible for looking after livestock and kitchen gardens wherever these exist. These, however,
are the more visible roles. Women are also ‘guardians of household hygiene’ (WB, 2007a, Rop, 2010)
and primary caretakers for family members suffering from any illness. In sanitation, as well, women
have greater responsibilities than men, as they often clean and maintain household toilets. In a
study done by UNHABITAT (2013), women from cities in Brazil, India, Jamaica, South Africa, and
Uganda reported that, for them, the most problematic area in terms of access to infrastructure was
sanitation. This was especially true for women living in slums.

Although women from slum and non-slum areas of cities experience a similar range of challenges in
accessing WSS services, the greater concentration of poverty in slum settlements, further
aggravated by overcrowding, insecurity, lack of security of tenure, water and sanitation, as well as
lack of access to transport, and sexual and reproductive health services, magnifies their problems
(UN HABITAT, 2011, xii). Even within this group of slum residents, households headed by women,
suffer more due to “any combination of lack of durable housing, lack of sufficient living area, lack of
access to water, sanitation, and a lack of security of tenure.’ (UN Habitat, 2011, p. xvi). Thus, globally
poor women living in slums are disproportionately affected by the lack of access to water supply and
sanitation services.
Gender and poverty issues in water supply and sanitation (WSS) have been well-documented and
discussed in the literature. While this has raised awareness around the issue, the focus has largely
been on the problems faced by women and socially excluded groups in rural areas. The World Bank,
for instance, acknowledges that its work on gender and UWSS has largely been focused on
willingness-to-pay (WTP) household surveys that assess some gender-related aspects of improving
access (WB, 2007a), rather than on a systematic and comprehensive understanding of the issues and
their consequences.




                                                                                                         8
In order to address existing gaps in analysis, this chapter begins by describing the current status and
past trends in access to water supply in urban areas, both, globally and in Indian cities. Even though
urban areas have seen progress and are have better water access than rural areas, much more
remains to be done. The chapter also highlights the specific challenges faced by poor women and
socially excluded groups in accessing water supply and sanitation in urban areas in India. It then goes
on to critically describe the major initiatives undertaken by the Government of India in addressing
these challenges. Finally, it outlines the key issues that are addressed in this study
At the outset, however, four important contextual issues need to be mentioned. First, since
examining ‘water supply and sanitation’ jointly leaves sanitation as the ‘poor cousin’ of water (Evans,
2007, p. 4), this analysis treats urban water supply and urban sanitation separately. Second, it is
acknowledged that drinking water is only a small part of the water resources sector – with irrigation
and industry taking the major share of resources and of policy-makers’ attention – and that domestic
drinking water is only a small share of drinking water demands, the major share being taken by
institutions and by industries: domestic sanitation, too, is only a small part of the urban waste
management sector. This analysis, however, is restricted to domestic drinking water and domestic
sanitation. Third, this work is focused on gender and social inclusion issues, predominantly faced by
the urban poor, which form a small segment of urban consumers of domestic water supply and
domestic sanitation services.3 Fourth, the analysis does not cover in detail health impacts of poor
water supply and sanitation, a large and important subject on its own, and beyond the scope of this
study.

2.2 URBAN GROWTH AND WSS
GLOBAL TRENDS

The WSS-related MDG is to halve the proportion of population without sustainable access to safe
drinking water and basic sanitation by 2015. The Joint Monitoring Program (JMP) of WHO and
UNICEF, which tracks the progress towards achieving this MDG, released a report in 2011 marking
the improvements in access to water supply and sanitation. Globally, the world is on track to meet
the targets for drinking water, and access to water supply is better in urban areas as compared to
rural areas. However, at this time, at least 35% of the world’s urban residents do not have access to
piped water supply. The JMP report also notes that, between 1990 and 2008, ‘[t]he growth of
informal settlements and poor environmental sanitation has hindered efforts to increase access to
safe drinking water’ (ibid, p. 14). 4
The sanitation situation is worse. The world is off-track to meet the sanitation related target, and the
largest number of people without access to basic sanitation is in South Asia. As with water supply,
the situation in urban areas is better than in rural areas, however, the number of people without
access to improved sanitation in cities and towns has increased in many developing countries. As
shown in Table 2.1, and the number of people using unimproved sanitation sources in South Asia
and Sub Saharan Africa have increased between 2000 and 2010. . Within urban areas too, the poor



3
  Typically, around 2/3 of urban consumers of government water supply are industries and institutions, only
1/3 are domestic consumers. (Personal communication, Managing Director, Hyderabad Metrowater, 2003).
4
  ‘Of the 949 million urban dwellers that gained access since 1990, three out of four people gained access to a
piped supply on premises’ (WHO/Unicef, 2011, p. 24). Also, by 2008, 94% of the urban population of
developing regions used improved sources, but only 76% of rural populations (WHO/Unicef, 2010, p. 18).


                                                                                                                  9
and in particular women and socially excluded groups, bear a disproportionate burden of this
mismatch between WSS service provision and increasing populations.
                         Table 2.1: Access to Water Supply and Sanitation Services

                                                          Water                            Sanitation
                                                          Urban                              Urban
               Country            Year     Improved           Unimproved         Improved           Unimproved
                                         Total Improved     Total Unimproved   Total Improved Total Unimproved
                                             (x1000)             (x1000)           (x1000)            (x1000)
                                  2010      713,133               11,231          548,650             175,715
Eastern Asia
                                  2000      501,787               12,348          328,454             185,682
                                  2010      452,935               12,310          401,375              63,867
Latin America and the Caribbean
                                  2000      376,970               16,653          328,964              64,654
                                  2010        86,831              4,301             85,997             5,133
Northern Africa
                                  2000        68,678              4,446             68,246             4,879
                                  2010      522,149               27,195          351,611             197,731
South Asia
                                  2000      390,131               32,911          253,363             169,678
                                  2010      246,511               15,019          210,049              51,483
South-east Asia
                                  2000      184,374               15,803          148,899              51,284
                                  2010      258,764               50,756          131,549             177,970
Sub-Saharan Africa
                                  2000      178,408               36,870            92,262            123,018
                                  2010      133,817               5,738           133,632              5,923
Western Asia
                                  2000        98,266              4,558             96,543             6,279


Other global trends also impact access to water supply and sanitation in urban areas of the
developing world:
        Rising coverage under threat: Although urban areas are better served than rural areas, and
         the overall coverage figures are quite high, rapid population growth, unplanned and fast-
         growing urbanization and in particular the growth of informal settlements, poor
         environmental sanitation, decreasing international aid for water supply and sanitation and
         the potential impacts of climate change are major threats to increasing the coverage of
         sanitation and water supply services (WHO/Unicef, 2010, p. 17; WHO/Unicef, 2011, p. 14).
        Access for the poor: Improved access does not necessarily mean that the poor have
         adequate water supply and sanitation services. The JMP report (2011) notes that ‘in all
         developing regions, access to improved drinking water sources increases with wealth and
         access to piped water on premises is much higher among the richest quintiles’ and that ‘in
         all countries, the poorest have the lowest level of service’ (pp.26-27).
        Huge unserved populations even after MDGs are met: Even if the substantial effort is made
         to meet the MDGs on sanitation, there will be 2.7 billion people without access to sanitation
         by 2015. And even after the world meets the MDG targets for water, there will be 672
         million people without access to improved drinking water sources by 2015 (WHO/Unicef,
         2011).
        JMP numbers are under-estimates: The numbers of people with access may be exaggerated
         by the fact that the current JMP defines and measures access only as ‘access to water
         infrastructure’, an indicator that ‘does not provide information on the quality of the water
         used, the reliability of water services, or whether people’s sustained access to them is
         hampered for economic, financial, social or environmental reasons’ (ibid, p. 57).




                                                                                                           10
Thus, while the JMP data provides useful information to better understand the macro picture
around water supply and sanitation across all regions of the world, there continue to be limitations.
The JMP categorizes users on the basis of their ‘access to infrastructure’ and does not specify the
nature of service received from the infrastructure (Table 2.2). In the case of water, for instance, they
acknowledge that while the MDG is defined in terms of ‘sustainable access to safe water supply’, the
JMP approach only measures the proxy indicator ‘use of improved sources of drinking water’ –
which does not provide any information on ‘the quality of the water used, the reliability of water
services, or whether people’s sustained access to them is hampered for economic, financial, social or
environmental reasons’ (WHO/Unicef, 2011, p. 57).
A similar concern underlies the use of sanitation infrastructure as the proxy indicator for sustainable
access to safe sanitation services: there is no indication of whether the toilet is properly constructed,
and that no waste from the toilet contaminates nearby water sources (including groundwater), that
there is sufficient water for flushing, that there are functioning doors and lights in shared public
toilets.
The JMP definition of the problems (as all those using unimproved water sources or sanitation
facilities), thus, is only a description of the physical infrastructure and not of the quality of service
provided. This is well accepted by the JMP team who acknowledge that this ‘limitation’ needs to be
overcome ‘at global, regional and national levels in the post-2015 period’ (ibid.).
As it stands, however, the use of the JMP definition identifies the problem as a lack of access to
improved infrastructure – and simultaneously identifies the ‘target group’ as all those who do not
use improved infrastructure. This, they acknowledge, will always underestimate the true target
group, as defined by the MDG – all those who do not have sustainable access to safe water supply
and sanitation services. Thus, it is necessary to look at access figures from a perspective of service
delivery, and not simply access to infrastructure.

SERVICE DELIVERY

The basic idea behind ‘service delivery’ is that what matters most is the quality of service delivered
by the infrastructure is important and not the infrastructure itself. The term ‘service’ refers to
‘provision of a public benefit through a continuous and permanent flow of activities and resources; a
concept applied in many other sectors, such as health, education, electricity, telephone and water’
(Lockwood and Smits, 2011, pp. 18-19). A water supply service thus consists of ‘access to a flow of
water with certain characteristics (such as quantity, quality and continuity)’ (ibid, p. 19).
‘Service levels’ describe and differentiate between quality of a service. In the case of water supply,
common indicators to measure service level include the quantity of water (measured as liters per
capita per day), the quality of water (comprising both chemical and biological quality), distance to
the water source, the number of users using a source (e.g., a public stand post or hand pump) and
the reliability of service (the proportion of time it works as designed) (Moriarty et al., 2011, p. 3).
One of the early measures of access to water services used five levels: coverage, continuity,
quantity, cost and quality (Lloyd and Bartram, 1991, quoted in Moriarty et al., 2011, p. 3). Service
levels are also specified with indicators that can be measured and arranged in the form of a ‘service
delivery ladder’ (Table 2.3)




                                                                                                         11
                    Table 2.2: IRC Suggested service delivery ladder for water supply
                      Quantity           Quality          Accessibility             Reliability
Service level                                                                                          Status (JMP
                 Litres/person/day     Qualitative     Minutes/person/day           Qualitative
High                    >=60              Good                <10                  Very reliable        Improved
Intermediate             >40           Acceptable             <30                 Reliable/secure
Basic                    >20           Acceptable             <30                 Reliable/secure
Sub-                      >5           Problematic            <60                  Problematic         Unimproved
standard
No service               <5           Unacceptable             >60             Unreliable/insecure
                                       Source: Moriarty et al., 2011, p. 12

Each level in the service delivery ladder is described more fully in Table 2.3.

                Table 2.3: Descriptions of the IRC Service delivery ladder for water supply
Service level                     Description                                     Refers usually to
High             People access a minimum of 60 lpcd of          A modern utility service involving taps in the
                 high quality water on demand                   homestead
Intermediate     People access a minimum of 40 lpcd of          A mix of basic and high levels of service, typically
                 acceptable quality water from an               from small piped networks in small towns and
                 improved source, spending no more than peri-urban areas
                 30 minutes per day
Basic            People access a minimum of 20 lpcd of          Most rural water supply schemes, some informal
                 acceptable quality water from an               schemes in peri-urban areas, and emergency
                 improved source, spending no more than situations – often provided by point sources such
                 30 minutes per day                             as bore holes, wells and springs
Sub-             People access a service that is an             Services suffering endemic problems or context-
standard         improvement on having no service at all,       specific issues, which makes it impossible to meet
                 but that fails to meet the basic standard      all service delivery parameters
                 on one or more criteria
No service       People access water from insecure or           Less than 5 lpcd of water from an unimproved
                 unimproved sources that are too distant, source, or water of unacceptable quality or where
                 too time-consuming or are of poor              it takes more than 1 hour per day to collect
                 quality
                                        Source: Moriarty et al., 2011, p. 14.

A service ladder thus depicts ‘incremental progression between service levels of different quality,
starting at the bottom rung and climbing to the top’ (Moriarty et a., 2011, p. 6). The norm, in this
case, is specified as the ‘basic level of service’ with the understanding that there can be better
service levels above this level (i.e., ‘intermediate’ and ‘high’). Similar service delivery ladders have
also been developed for sanitation, most recently as a part of the WASHCost Project (Table 2.4).




                                                                                                                 12
                        Table 2.4: WASH Cost Sanitation Service Delivery Ladder
                                                                                           Environmental
 Service           Accessibility                Use              Reliability (O&M)     protection (pollution &
  level                                                                                       density)

Improved      Each family dwelling     Facilities used by all   Regular or routine     Non problematic
              has one or more          members of the           O&M (inc. Pit          environmental impact
              toilets in the           household                emptying) requiring    disposal and re-use of
              compound                                          minimal user effort    safe by-products
Basic         Latrine with             Facilities used by       Unreliable O&M (inc.   Non problematic
              impermeable slab         some members of          pit emptying) and      environmental impact
              (household               the household            requiring high user    and safe disposal
              or shared) at national                            effort
              norm distance from
              household

Limited       Platform without         No use/Insufficient      No O&M (pit            Significant
service       (impermeable) slab       use                      emptying) taking       environmental
              separated faeces from                             place and the          pollution, heightening
              Users                                             presence of            with increased
                                                                extremely dirty        population density
                                                                toilets
No service    No separation            No use/Insufficient      No O&M (pit            Significant
              between user and         use                      emptying) taking       environmental
              faeces, e.g. open                                 place and the          pollution, heightening
              defecation                                        presence of            with increased
                                                                extremely dirty        population density
                                                                toilets
                                          Source: Potter et al., (2011)


The WASHCost service delivery ladder broadens the criteria beyond the quality of immediate service
to wider environmental considerations and also holds that the norm is the highest level of service,
i.e., ‘Improved’ service.
The discussion of the concepts of social exclusion and service delivery in the context of the ladders
presented above highlights three key issues:

         The ‘No Service’ level includes the socially excluded: The worst case in both ladders is ‘No
          service’ – which includes cases of ‘social exclusion’, that are defined as systematic
          discrimination in service provision, where users are denied access to existing facilities and
          forced to go elsewhere.
         Self-provisioning by households is treated differently in water supply and in sanitation:
          The JMP does not recognize ‘safe self-provisioning’ of drinking water, e.g., protected
          domestic urban wells containing unpolluted water or the use of treated water from such
          sources or even the use of bottled water. This is especially true in urban areas. Therefore,
          the ‘No service’ category in the Water Supply Service Delivery ladder really means lack of
          access to government-provided urban water supply. In the case of sanitation, however, ‘self-
          provisioning’ is not a problem and there is no distinction between household toilets


                                                                                                                13
        constructed (and paid for) by individuals from their own money or those paid for, at least
        partly, by government subsidy. In other words, ‘government-provision’ of sanitation services
        includes publicly shared toilets and government-subsidies for individual household toilets.5
       ‘Poor service’: While the ‘No Service’ level is clear, service delivery levels between ‘No
        service’ and the ‘norm’ constitute ‘Poor Service’. In the case of water, this would exemplify
        instances when government-provided public stand posts or hand pumps temporarily run dry
        or are under repair and thus fail to provide water. In the case of sanitation, this ‘poor
        service’ is when government-provided public toilets are temporarily out of order, for a
        variety of reasons (doors or locks broken, no lights, not cleaned, blocked drains, etc.). Such
        poor access can result in certain groups of people being ‘unserved’ temporarily. Although
        problems of ‘poor service’ can affect households with piped water on their premises and
        also those with toilets inside their homes, these are more difficult to identify and classify. In
        other words, those with household provision of water supply and sanitation facilities are
        assumed to be ‘covered’. Only a detailed household survey of service levels can identify
        problems of ‘poor service’.

RE-DEFINING THE PROBLEM

These service levels suggest a useful re-definition of the problem into two separate issues,
combining the infrastructure and service delivery aspects:
       The Problem of No Service which affect all those who are forced to defecate in the open (in
        the case of sanitation) and to use unimproved or unsafe sources of water or walk far to
        access water (in the case of drinking water supply). (In this report, this is referred to as the
        problem of ‘the unserved’ and of no access to water supply and sanitation infrastructure)
       The Problem of the Poorly Served which affect those who have access to water supply and
        sanitation infrastructure, but face problems due to poor infrastructure and poor service
        delivery. (This is also referred to throughout this report as the problem of poor access or
        poor service).
In the following section, relevant development trends in India are analyzed and, using the
categorization of poor and no service, the current WSS access in the country is also evaluated.

2.3 TRENDS IN URBAN INDIA
RAPID URBANIZATION
Despite relatively slow growth rates till 2000, in the last decade India’s urban population and the
urban poor have grown exponentially. In 2001, 42 million people, 15% of India’s total urban
population, were living in slums (2001, Census of India). Also, nearly 35% of the populations of
Mumbai, Kolkata, Delhi and Chennai lived in slums (Planning Commission, 2011, p. 7). In 2010,
India’s urban population was 377 million (TCPO, 2012). This marks the highest ever urban population
in India (TCPO, 2012, p. 4). In 2010, 31% of India’s 1.21 billion people were living in urban areas. This
urban population is distributed among 7,935 cities and towns, an increase of over 50% from the



5
 The Integrated Low Cost Sanitation scheme of the Government of India provides subsidies to the poor to
construct individual household toilets, while public toilets are constructed under the VAMBAY scheme.


                                                                                                          14
5131 towns and cities listed in the 2001 Census. Of these 7,935 cities and towns, 468 have a
population of more than 100,000 (Class I Cities), including 53 cities with more 1 million inhabitants.

The distribution of urban population in India is skewed towards a few cities and towns in select
states and union territories. The 2011 Census of India estimates that around 70% of India’s urban
population resides in 468 Class I Cities and 42% in the 53 Million-Plus Cities (TCPO, 2012, p. 3). Also,
a few small states and UTs are highly urbanized while two-thirds have low levels of urbanization.
Further, ‘highly urbanized’ states and union territories are all geographically small (e.g., NCT,
Chandigarh, Lakshwadeep Daman & Diu, Puducherry, Goa and Mizoram). And in 23 out of 35 states
and union territories in India, less than 40% of the total population lives in urban areas (17 out of
these have only 10 - 30%).

POOR SERVICES FOR THE URBAN POOR

With growth in urban population, urban poverty is also increasing. In 2004-5, the number of people
living Below Poverty Line (BPL) in Indian cities was estimated to be 80 million. The proportion of the
total population living below the poverty line has also increased from 19% in 1973 to 27% in 2005
(Planning Commission, 2011). If the 40-45 million of those ‘on the border line of poverty’ are added,
the poor constituted nearly 40% of the total urban population in 2004-5 (ibid. p. 3). Much of this
poor population is living in slums. These slums are generally located on hazardous sites, have poor
health conditions and inadequate access to basic services such as health, education, water supply
and sanitation. The Planning Commission Report of 2011 noted that service deprivation was ‘higher
in slums and squatter settlements’ and that the majority of the urban poor used shared facilities
(Planning Commission, 2011, p. 8). The National Sample Survey (NSS) clearly shows that ‘households
in the lowest [Monthly Per Capita Expenditure] quintile classes are more likely to be without a
latrine facility than households in higher quintile classes and may practice open defecation’ (GOI,
2010a, p. 26). The National Family Health Survey of 2004-5 found that 24% of urban Indian
households were sharing toilets and, more worryingly, 5% of households were depositing untreated
faecal matter into the environment despite having toilets (quoted in GOI, 2011, p. 40).
Even within slums, services vary according to legal status, and are markedly worse in non-notified
slums6 (GOI, 2010). The Planning Commission (2011, p. 8) noted that even where these facilities
exist, the urban poor ‘face barriers when attempting to access basic civic and social services at
[urban local body] level’ (p. 12). And GOI admitted that ‘The Urban Local Bodies (ULB) and Municipal
Corporation [which] are primarily responsible for providing minimum basic services to the
inhabitants … are unable to cope up with the increasing demand of providing quality urban services
in towns and cities due to lack of resources’ (GOI, 2009, p. 3).
Thus, at this time, 18% of urban households are defecating in the open and the 4% are using
unimproved water supply facilities (Table 1.1 supra). This household level data hides the available
access to adequate WSS services at work places, schools, and other public areas. Lack of these
services often serves as a reason for exclusion of many people, especially women and girls, from
employment, education and leisure activities.


6
  A notified slum is one that is ‘notified as slums by respective municipalities, corporations, local bodies or
development authorities’, and which then is statutorily to receive basic civic services, while a non -notified
slum does not have this legal status and is merely ‘a compact urban area with a collection of poorly built
tenements, mostly of temporary nature, crowded together usually with inadequate sanitary and drinking
water facilities in unhygienic conditions’ (GOI, 2010)


                                                                                                                  15
While water supply and sanitation in urban India have improved significantly in the past decade,
two-thirds of the households still lack access to treated tap water.

Even where the urban poor have access to infrastructure they had issues receiving services from it:
‘Despite expansion, those who have access to water supply and sanitation infrastructure do not
necessarily get adequate services and the poor continue to rely on alternative sources that are often
very costly to the consumer and incur hidden costs to society’ (WSP, 2009a, p. 6). McKenzie and Ray
(2009) have also found a strong relationship between asset ownership and access to piped water in
Indian cities, indicating that poor households had the lowest access to piped water. Since the poor
bear the brunt of any lack in delivery of basic public services like water supply and sanitation, there
is an urgent need to continue on-going efforts to improve urban infrastructure – not only by
increased investments, but by ensuring that these investments target the poor and the marginalized.
It is also important to note that poverty is not monolithic and often, within poor communities,
women and socially excluded groups bear a larger share of the WSS issues. Across urban areas,
15.9% households within the lowest asset decile had access to piped water, and 12.3% had access in
secondary cities and towns. 36% households still have to fetch water from a source located within
500 meters in rural areas and 100 meters in urban areas. While the average distance of public
standpoints is less in urban areas as compared to rural areas (Birch, 2011), there is an increased risk
of contaminated water and issues of safety, adding to women’s water related burden in urban areas.
In this way, the increasing WSS coverage numbers for urban India present an incomplete picture of
the situation on the ground.

GENDERED ECONOMICS OF INADEQUATE WSS

The World Bank reported that women tend to be disproportionately represented among the poor,
and the poorer the family the more likely it is to be headed by a women (World Bank, 1989, 1996).
This trend is reflected in India. The percentage of females living in poor households in urban areas
was 34% in 1994, compared to the 32% for males. In 2000, 25% of women were living in poverty in
urban areas compared to the 23% for men. A larger proportion of female-headed households, as
compared to male-headed households, live in one room or no exclusive room dwellings, indicating
greater poverty. The proportion of female-headed households that possess assets is also lower than
male-headed households (World Bank, 2008), and in the last decade, the number of female-headed
households in urban areas has increased by approximately 1%, compared to the 0.5% increase
across the country. Urban poor women, not only deal with social, health, and safety issues due to
inadequate WSS, they also deal with a larger share of the economic consequences.

India loses US$ 54 billion annually due to inadequate WSS. Of this, at least 71.7% of the losses are
related to health and 20% to access time. These economic losses are borne disproportionately by the
poor and the poorest 20% households loose over $4.85 billion per year due to inadequate water and
sanitation. In urban areas INR 337 billion is lost to inadequate water supply and sanitation, with the
poorest households losing approximately INR 16 billion ($0.35 billion). Urban households in the
poorest quintile also bear the highest per capita economic losses due to inadequate water and
sanitation, specifically 37.5 – 1.75 times the national average of $21. A study done in Mumbai found
that at 35-45% of families in slums have at least one member always suffering from some kind of
disease. Among short duration diseases, water and sanitation related illnesses represented 26-32%
of all cases. Annual diarrheal cases were around 300 per thousand people in slums (Karn and
Harada, 2002). These trends are observed in other cities as well and, overall, India loses more than
$29,000 million in premature mortality, $4,787 million and $4,677 million in productivity losses and


                                                                                                    16
health care, respectively (WSP, 2011).

Although there is a dearth of large-scale survey data from India showing the gender division and
time spent in household tasks such as collecting water and cleaning toilets, some small-sample data
is available and shows that women were the major users of water for cooking and cleaning and
‘played a major role in controlling the use of water’ and sanitation for the household (UN Habitat,
2005, p. 53). This can have implications for the type of work available to women. The UN Habitat
study found that at least 50% of the 400 women included in the survey were employed (ibid, p. 34)
and approximately 96% of these women were working in the unorganized sector (MWCD, 2007, p.
21). These women were also considered a part of the ‘working poor’ (MLE, 2010, p. 16).This also
implies that the economic impacts of inadequate water supply and sanitation disproportionately
affect women. The findings from this study indicate that time costs and opportunity costs of
inadequate WSS would be the highest for women. WSP’s on the economics of inadequate WSS has
also revealed similar trends. WSP reported that in 75% of India’s urban households, fetching water
and managing sanitation facilities is a woman’s responsibility, indicating that economic losses are
more severe for women. Each year, women and girls miss 94 million work-days and 74 million
school-days due to water and sanitation related issues. In urban areas, this amounts to over INR 3.5
billion in annual costs (WSP, 2011). These economic losses further impact women’s limited social
and political agency in Indian cities.
Looking at the data from India, it is clear that (i) The number of urban poor and the total slum
population in Indian cities are increasing; (ii) the proportion of urban poor that are female is
increasing; and (iii) the number female-headed households, which represent some of the poorest
and most vulnerable persons, are increasing at a faster rate in urban areas as compared to the rest
of the country. These findings pose distinct developmental challenges that are masked by the high
coverage numbers.



HIGH AND GROWING URBAN COVERAGE

The JMP notes that in 2008, 88% of India’s population of 1.2 billion used drinking-water from safe
sources, as compared to 72% in 1990. Between 1990 and 2008, the proportion of the population
using improved sanitation facilities in India rose from 18% to 31% (WHO/Unicef, 2010), and the
coverage in urban India is generally better than that in rural India (Table 2.7).
             Table 2.5: Access to improved water and sanitation facilities, India, 1990 – 2008
                                               URBAN INDIA (‘000)             RURAL POPULATION (‘000)

                                            1990       2000       2008        1990       2000      2008

Population
                                          2,24,162   2,91,925   3,42,609    6,38,000   7,50,665   8,38,803




                                                                                                          17
Urban Sanitation: % population using

                      Improved facilities         49%        52%         54%           7         14          21
                   Unimproved facilities          51%        48%         46%         93%        86%         79%
                  defecating in the open          28%        22%         18%         90%        79%         69%
         using shared sanitation facilities       19%        20%         21%          1%         3%          4%
   using unimproved sanitation facilities7         4%         6%          7%          2%         4%          6%
Urban Water Supply: % population using

                      Improved facilities        90%       93%         96%           66%        76%         84%
                       Piped on premises         52%       50%         48%            8%         9%         11%
                 Other improved facilities       38%       43%         48%           58%        67%         73%
                   Unimproved facilities         10%        7%          4%           34%        24%         16%
                                        Source: WHO/Unicef, 2010, p. 43
This macro-picture shows that nearly half of urban India did not have access to improved sanitation
facilities. The seemingly good coverage related to urban water supply also hides wide variations on
the ground, especially for the urban poor.8 In 2005, the Government of India (GOI) acknowledged
that the available urban infrastructure may not be sufficient for providing basic urban services such
as water supply and sanitation (MoUD, 2009, p. 3):
         ‘Massive urban growth has led to complex problems of ina dequacy of basic urban services. About
         21% of urban population is living in squatter settlements where access to the basic services is very
         poor or very substandard. About 80% of population leaving in urban areas though has access to safe
         drinking water but there are severe deficiencies in regard to equitable distribution of water. As per
         estimates about 46% of households have water borne toilets while only 36% are connected with
         public sewerage system. Almost half of the solid waste generated in towns & cities remains
         uncollected … The infrastructure development could not keep pace with rate of urbanization’.

The 54th National Sample Survey also noted that there was ‘tremendous pressure on civic
infrastructure systems like water supply, sewerage and drainage, solid waste management, etc.’
Thus, it is important to look critically at the numbers and at the problems beyond these numbers to
better understand the current status of access to WSS services in urban India.

THE PROBLEM IN TERMS OF NUMBERS

Even though the JMP and NSSO data together provides valuable macro information on country-level
poverty and WSS status, it does not provide the complete picture. The NSSO figures appear to be an
underestimate of the true population – with 2012 estimates of 44 million slums in the country being
21 million less than the Census 2011 estimates of 65 million, largely due to problems in interpreting
the definition of slums9. Due to the fact that both the JMP and the NSS have used only ‘access to
physical infrastructure’ to measure coverage of water supply and sanitation services means that
these numbers are over-estimates and the problem is larger than the numbers suggest. The focus on

7
  The JMP defines ‘unimproved sanitation facilities’ as those that ‘do not ensure hygienic separation of human
excreta from human contact; include pit latrines without a slab or platform, hanging latrines and bucket
latrines’ (WHO/Unicef, 2010, p. 12). Users of such toilets are grouped with those practising open defecat ion
and sharing toilets, as the population not using ‘improved sanitation facilities’. Improved facilities ‘ensure
hygienic separation of human excreta from human contact’ and are - flush to piped sewer system or septic
tank or pit latrine; ventilated improved pit latrine; pit latrine with slab; and composting toilet (ibid, p. 12).
8
  See for instance the detailed analysis of water supply and sanitation in 71 cities across the country carried
out in 2005-6, by the Centre for Science and Environment (CSE, 2012a and 2012b).
9
  Times of India (2014).


                                                                                                               18
the poor in WSS policies, programs and performance assessments tends to hide problems faced by
specific groups within the urban poor – including women, children, the differently-abled, the elderly,
migrant populations, and people living with HIV and AIDS (PLWHA). While the second gap is
addressed in the next section, the extent to which JMP figures may under-estimate the problem is
discussed below.




Urban Water Supply Services

       No service: 14 million (JMP in 2011): According to the latest JMP Report, in 2008 around 4% -
        or around 14 million - of India’s urban population uses ‘unimproved water sources’
        (WHO/Unicef, 2010, p.6). These ‘unimproved’ sources include ‘unprotected dug well;
        unprotected spring, cart with small tank/drum, surface water (river, dam, lake, pond,
        stream, canal, irrigation channels) and bottled water’ (ibid, p. 12-13).
       Poor service: 329 million (JMP in 2011): This figure includes urban citizens who access shared
        water sources, including piped water supply. Around half of these consumers (165 million)
        had piped water supplies while the other half accessed public taps. Since the JMP definition
        only considers ‘access to infrastructure’ and not actual service delivery, all those with
        household piped connections may suffer from poor service (intermittent supply, poor
        pressure, contaminated water, etc.).
        However, even when analyzing this data from the perspective of access to infrastructure, at
        least 165 million urban citizens in India are sharing taps (based on the JMP estimates for
        2008). Since WSS ‘service deprivation is higher in slum and squatter settlements’ (Planning
        Commission, 2011), it can be inferred that the 165 million people with limited access to
        infrastructure are currently living in spaces of poverty.
That water access figures may hide poor service delivery was argued by Zerah (2000), who found
that for water, despite the increasing coverage, the number of household water connections in most
cities is very low. Zerah (2000) also argued that JMP statistics only look at optimal water production
figures and do not include water losses. Similar trends are also visible for sanitation access figures.
Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) reports that in 50% of urban India lacks sanitation coverage.
Even in areas where service is available, the toilets are often not connected to underground
sewerage networks

Urban Sanitation Services

       No Service: 51 million (JMP in 2011): This figure represents urban Indian residents without
        access to any toilet facilities, that are forced to defecate in the open., According to the latest
        JMP Report, 18% of urban Indians in 2008 were defecating in the open. The NSS estimated
        that in 2008-9, 11% of urban households did not have access to toilets, down from 26%
        recorded in 2004-5 (GOI, 2010b).
       Poor Service: 100 million (JMP in 2011): The JMP Report estimates that 21% of the urban
        population in 2008 was using shared sanitation facilities. Although this includes toilets
        shared between a small numbers of households, the overwhelming majority of shared


                                                                                                       19
        toilets are community or public toilets. The NSS estimated that 24% of the urban population
        was using shared toilets in 2004-5, but as with the JMP data, these estimates are based on
        access to physical infrastructure and are silent on the level of service delivered by public
        toilets. This represents an increasingly serious problem as the number of urban Indian
        residents using unimproved sanitation facilities has increased in the last decade due to the
        mismatch between provision of services and the increasing urban population.
These aggregate numbers not only mask service levels, they also render invisible inter-city variations
in WSS access. For example, at least 40% of Indian’s total sewerage treatment capacity is
concentrated in Delhi and Mumbai, and only 160 of 8,000 smaller cities and towns have both
sewerage systems and treatment plants (Elledge and McClatchey, 2013). Mahadevia and Sarkar
(2012) found that non-metro cities house more than double the number of households without
access to drinking water and sanitation as compared to metro cities (Table 2.8).

            Table 2.6: Access to drinking water and sanitary toilets: Metros and non-metro cities
                Percentage of households …                      Non-Metro          Metro          All Urban
Without access to drinking water                                 26.80%            12.30%            23%
Using tap water                                                  70.70%            84.50%          74.30%
Without access to sanitary toilets                                14.4%             2.5%           11.3%
With access to individual toilets                                 67.8%             59.5%          65.5%


When combined with the fact that cities are set to witness unprecedented growth in the near future,
and, within cities, slums and other low-income areas have the lowest access to WSS, the true
dimensions of the UWSS problem begin to emerge.

2.4 CONSEQUENCES OF NO SERVICE AND POOR SERVICE
Statistics not only mask difference in WSS access for communities and groups and between cities,
they also hide the very tangible problem faced by millions of men and women in India due to poor
water supply and sanitation, which lead to economic, social and physical consequences. This section
aims to highlight the problems faced by those without access and those who are ‘covered’ as per the
JMP definition of ‘access to physical infrastructure’.
For the purpose of this report, the consequences are discussed for women, children and other
special groups such as the elderly, the disabled, people living with HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) and the
chronically ill.10


URBAN WATER SUPPLY SERVICES

The consequences discussed below affect those with no access to government-provided water the
most; however similar problems, though to a lesser extent, are experienced by those with access to
poor service. Consequences of No or Poor Water Supply

10
  The problems discussed in this section are not confined to the poor or the special groups of the socially
excluded or even those who live in poverty-pockets or low-income settlements. These problems affect all
those who have to use public facilities in urban areas. Poor quality of public toilets in streets, government
offices, hospitals and restaurants affect not just the working poor (both men and women) but also affect the
‘so-called’ middle classes, though not as severely.


                                                                                                                20
      Less time for work, loss of livelihood: Due to Inadequate pressure at water points people
       have to spend more time filling vessels, which in turn implies longer lines and more time
       loss. This situation is made worse when water is supplied during office hours. A UN Habitat
       study (2005) looked at the time of day water was supplied to low income neighborhoods in
       Madhya Pradesh. Women from one low income community of Indore indicated that water
       was always supplied in their neighborhood from 9 am to 11 am and women from another
       neighborhood of the same city reported that water was supplied from 8.30 am to11 am. The
       time of supply in both neighborhoods renders it difficult for household members who are
       responsible for collecting water to work during regular office hours. This exemplifies how
       not having an assured or reliable source of water can affect the ability to work and
       consequently the earning capacity of the poor.
      Having to ‘search’ for water: If supply is inadequate at the nearest water point, or if the line
       is too long, users have to search for alternate, and often more distant, water points, which
       can add to time loss and health issues from carrying heavy containers over long distances
       (UN Habitat, 2005, p. 68).
      Conflicts at the water point: When water supply is inadequate, users often have to form
       long lines and wait for water- which becomes a "source of tension and can precipitate fights"
       (UN Habitat, 2003, p. 71). Women respondent from the UN Habitat study (2005) also noted
       that conflicts arise when communities ‘capture’ water points for their exclusive use of when
       water is supplied through tankers and the quantity is limited.
      Health impacts: Poor water quality of intermittent supply available at the public taps leads
       to diseases such as typhoid, dysentery, cholera and other water borne illnesses. Stagnant
       water near houses, especially during the rainy season and storage tanks (both on roof-tops
       and inside homes) and containers provides breeding grounds for mosquitoes which, in turn,
       cause diseases such as malaria that are “among the main causes of illness and death among
       children and adults in many urban areas” (UN Habitat, 2003, p. 59). In addition to diseases,
       carrying heavy containers of water also has health consequences, such as back pain and risk
       of injury.
      Safety: One key consequence of having to fetch water from public points is lack of safety. As
       women and girls walk to and from water points, they face harassment and other physical
       risks.
      Other social costs: The loss of human dignity in having to ask neighbors, particularly those
       from nearby higher income neighborhoods, for drinking water has also been noted. During
       the UN Habitat study (2005), women reported that “we have to plead for water from
       adjoining bungalows” (UN Habitat, 2005, p. 70).
In addition to these problems, the elderly, the disabled and chronically ill and people living with
HIV/AIDS (PLWHA) face special problems. Often, due to limited mobility, the elderly that have no or
limited access to piped water supply within their homes, have to depend on others to fetch water
for them from public stand posts or tankers. They are therefore vulnerable to being denied adequate
water supply. The situation for PLWHA is even more striking, as the recent joint initiative by
WaterAid India and the Government of Uttar Pradesh brought out (WAI, 2010) found, “Where
people living with HIV/AIDS have to walk a long way to collect water, studies have shown they will
simply use less than they should, and without latrines close to home they will resort to open
defecation. Even in communities that have water and sanitation facilities the lack of knowledge


                                                                                                     21
about HIV/AIDS and fear of the illness means people are prevented from using them. The stigma
forces some ... to leave their homes and family.” These problems in collecting water are
compounded by problems faced due to a lack of (or ‘deficient’ and poor) sanitation services.




URBAN SANITATION SERVICES
Without access to a household toilet or a public toilet, the urban poor have no option but to
defecate in the open. Even those with access to pay-and-use public toilets may be forced to defecate
in the open if they have insufficient funds (UN Habitat, 2003, p. 67) or if the public toilets are
unusable due to multiple reasons, such as cleanliness, lack of water, and safety risks. However, it is
important to distinguish between those individuals who are forced to defecate in the open due to
unavailable or poor services and those within available, usable household toilets that are not used
for a range of behavioral reasons. This marks the difference between delivery of sanitation services
and individual behavior patterns that in part determine the use of available facilities. The next
section discusses the consequences of forced open defecation. .
Consequences of forced open defecation
The major consequences of open defecation, particularly for women, as noted in the literature are
discussed below:
       Inconvenience of having to defecate at night: Women from the 20 slums surveyed in
        Madhya Pradesh reported that they were ‘afraid to go in the open’ and that they therefore
        ‘have to go early in the morning’ or ‘in the dark as during day men go in the area’ (UN
        Habitat, 2005, p. 73). They also reported that they had to ‘accompany young girls during
        early morning hours’. (ibid, p. 78).
       Fear of men: Women who are forced to defecate in the open often fear being harassed,
        molested and even raped by men (WaterAID, 2013). Women from a Bhopal slum said that
        they ‘avoid going after 8 pm because of men loitering in the area’. Women also claimed to
        worry about the safety of young girls who were forced to defecate in the open late in the
        night (UN Habitat, 2005, p. 73).
       Health impacts of forcibly controlling defecation and urination: Women suffer from
        abdominal pain, fissures, infections, and other health problems because they drink less
        water, eat less food, and forcibly stop themselves from defecating during the day.
       Fear of snake, scorpion and insect bites: Women face the risk of being bitten by snakes,
        scorpion and other insects (UN Habitat, 2005; UN, 2007).
       Embarrassment and loss of dignity: When women defecate in the open, during the day,
        they have to stand ‘whenever a man comes nearby’ and, if there are no shrubs nearby, they
        ‘have to stand up often while defecating’ (UN Habitat, 2005, p. 73). Women are also forced
        to encounter voyeurism that adds to embarrassment (UN, 2007).
Other issues include challenges such as young girls being forced to drop out of school on reaching
puberty due to lack of usable sanitation facilities. Even in cases where public toilets are available,
women faced specific challenges during menstruation and pregnancy. Similarly, children, elderly,


                                                                                                         22
people with disabilities, the chronically ill and PLWHA also face special problems. Time of the year
also impacts the problems faced by women, girls, people with disabilities, and other socially
excluded groups, and often, the situation worsens during the rainy season.
Consequences of Poor Sanitation Services
Poor men and women who have access to public toilets - which, in the Indian context, are either
public toilet complexes (public toilets) or community toilet complexes (CTCs) - in theory, have access
to sanitation infrastructure. However, the situation on the ground is different and, as women and
other socially excluded groups are forced to defecate in the open, they face severe consequences:


         High costs of using pay-and-use public toilets regularly: Even at the nominal price of Re 1
          per use, public toilets are expensive for the urban poor, particularly for daily use of the
          entire family (UN Habitat, 2003 and 2005). Although there are successful cases of pay-and-
          use community toilets (e.g., organized by Gramalaya in Tiruchirapalli in Tamil Nadu;
          Gramalaya and WAI, 2006) and of public toilets (e.g., organized by Sulabh International
          across several states of India; see Chary et al, 2003), these still pose problems for poor in
          urban areas.11
        Queues in front of public toilets: Even if the public toilet is free for use, long lines can affect
         access and service. The time cost of standing in these lines can lead to economic losses.
         Women living in low-income settlements in Pune reported that there is often a queue of 10
         or 20 women. Sometimes, a woman would even defecate on the steps if the wait was too
         long (UN Habitat, 2003, p. 87).
        Fear of being molested: In walking to distant public toilets, women face the risk of f being
         molested, harassed, or even raped. The dangers worsen at night, especially if there is poor
         lighting in and around the public toilets.
        Fear of insects: Women in slums have complained about insects crawling up their legs as
         they use public toilets. (UN Habitat, 2003, p. 86).
        Difficult to approach public toilets: Garbage, stagnant water, and children defecating near
         the toilets often make it difficult for users to approach the facilities. (UN Habitat, 2003, p.
         85).
        Blocked toilets: Public toilets are often not maintained adequately leading to blockages and
         overflow. While in some cases, toilets are dirty due to lack of caretakers, in other cases, it is
         because the appointed cleaner does not come regularly (UN Habitat, 2003.).
        Having to use dirty toilets: Women from slums have reported problems associated with
         using poorly maintained toilets. Women have reported that toilets often have ‘no water or
         electricity and are not clean’. Women also claimed that ‘rags and cloths accumulate in stalls
         and there is a lot of dirty graffiti on the wall. The filth brings insects, mosquitoes, and other
         animals, further adding to the lack of cleanliness’ (UN Habitat, 2003, p. 85).
        Lack of privacy: Public toilets offer minimum privacy for users because the doors to stalls are
         broken or missing, cannot be locked, or simply do not close properly. This often is more
         problematic for female users, adding to their safety risks.

11
   Three categories of poor have distinguished, for instance by the Rapid Gender Assessments by UN Habitat in
cities in Madhya Pradesh, the lowest being the ultra poor (UN Habitat, 2006a).


                                                                                                          23
       Gas and the danger of explosions: Women from low-income settlements in Pune recounted
        that although each settlement had toilets, they were not clean. ‘It is so dirty and there is no
        [ventilation to allow] the foul air to go out, leading to explosions’. (UN Habitat 2003, p. 90).
These problems are worse for children, elderly, people with disabilities, the chronically-ill and the
PLWHA. These consequences, often ignored in favor of access numbers, are not a part of decision
making on UWSS issues. Thus, even as GoI designs and implements policies and programs that
attempt to address UWSS issues, there remain key gaps particularly related to gender-differentiated
needs of the urban poor. The next section discusses some key GoI programs that address WSS
issues, and highlights gender and social inclusion related gaps.

2.5 POLICY AND PROGRAMME INITIATIVES

NATIONAL URBAN INITIATIVES

Water and sanitation are state subjects under the Constitution of India and individual state
governments and ULBs are responsible for WSS services. Given the deteriorating UWSS situation and
the ‘very limited’ impact of existing national programs to support UWSS (GOI, 2011, p. 40), GoI
launched a series of policy initiatives and programs to redress this situation - (1) The Jawaharlal
Nehru Urban Renewal Mission (JNNURM), which includes two streams - one for 63 selected towns
and cities that aimed to prepare detailed City Development Plans (CDPs), and another for the
remaining towns (called Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns),
(2) the 2006 National Service-Level Benchmarking (SLB) Exercise (3) the2008 National Urban
Sanitation Policy (NUSP), which details the formulation of City Sanitation Plans (CSPs).

       The Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission

This ‘comprehensive program of urban renewal and expansion of social housing in towns and cities,
paying attention to the needs of slum dwellers’ was launched in 2005 in 63 selected cities across the
country for a period of seven years. JNNURM was launched in recognition of the fact that ‘physical
infrastructure assets created in urban areas have generally been languishing due to inadequate
attention and/or improper [Operation & Maintenance]’ (GOI, 2011b, p. 4). With around Rs. 100,000
crores as ear-marked funding, this major initiative to improve urban infrastructure aimed to ‘enable
cities to become effective engines of growth’ and to achieve the MDGs for the country as a whole
(ibid, p. 5; and MoUD, 2009, p. 2).
The JNNURM has two Sub Missions: (1) The Sub Mission for Urban Infrastructure and Governance
(UIG), administered by the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) that focuses on ‘infrastructure
projects relating to water supply and sanitation, sewerage, solid waste management, road network,
urban transport and redevelopment of old city areas with a view to upgrade infrastructure therein,
shifting industrial and commercial establishments to conforming areas, etc.’ and (2) the Sub Mission
for Basic Services for the Urban Poor (BSUP) that focuses on the ‘integrated development of slums
through projects for providing shelter, basic services and other related civic amenities with a view to
providing utilities to the urban poor (ibid, pp. 5-6). While the JNNURM provided funding to 63
selected cities, another program called the Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and




                                                                                                      24
Medium Towns (UIDSSMT) was created to provide funding for the remaining towns and cities as per
the Census of 2001 (MoUD, 2009, p. 3).12

             National service level benchmarking

The MoUD started an exercise in 2006 to develop standardized service level benchmarks for basic
municipal services, and in a national workshop in 2008, benchmarks for water supply, sewerage,
solid waste management and storm water drainage were adopted (MoUD, 2009, p. Preface). The
MoUD published a Handbook in 2009 detailing these indicators and their benchmark values (Table
2.7).13
                Table 2.7: Urban Service Level Benchmarks, Ministry of Urban Development, GOI

               Sector                                       Indicator                              Benchmark
     1       Water             1.1   Coverage of water supply connections                          100%
             Supply
                               1.2   Per capita supply of water                                    135 lpcd
             Services          1.3   Extent of metering of water connections                       100%
                               1.4   Extent of non-revenue water (NRW)                             20%
                               1.5   Continuity of water supply                                    24 hours
                               1.6   Quality of water supplied                                     100%
                               1.7   Efficiency in redress of customer complaints                  80%
                               1.8   Cost recovery in water supply services                        100%
                               1.9   Efficiency in collecting water supply-related charges         90%
     2       Sewage            2.1   Coverage of toilets                                           100%
             management        2.2   Coverage of sewage network services                           100%
                               2.3   Collection efficiency of the sewage network                   100%
             (Sewerage         2.4   Adequacy of sewage treatment capacity                         100%
                               2.5   Quality of sewage treatment                                   100%
             and sanitation)   2.6   Extent of reuse and recycling of sewage                       20%
                               2.7   Efficiency in redress of customer complaints                  80%
                               2.8   Extent of cost recovery in sewage management                  100%
                               2.9   Efficiency in collection of sewage charges                    90%
     3       Solid             3.1   Household-level coverage of solid waste management services   100%
             Waste             3.2   Efficiency of collection of municipal solid waste             100%
                               3.3   Extent of segregation of municipal solid waste                100%
             Management        3.4   Extent of municipal solid waste recovered                     80%
                               3.5   Extent of scientific disposal of municipal solid waste        100%
                               3.6   Efficiency in redress of customer complaints                  80%
                               3.7   Extent of cost recovery in solid waste management services    100%
                               3.8   Efficiency in collection of solid waste management charges    90%
     4       Storm water       4.1   Coverage of storm water drainage network                      100%
             Drainage          4.2   Incidence of water logging/flooding                           0

                                 Source: MoUD, 2009, Benchmarks at a Glance, p. 1
Although not necessary, the idea was that performance data on these SLBs ‘should be included in
the set of information disseminated under public disclosure, as required by the reforms mandate of
the JNNURM’ (MoUD, 2009., p. 7). In 2009, the SLBs were piloted in 28 cities and the findings of the

12
   The UIDSSMT combined earlier schemes known as the Integrated Development of Small and Medium Towns
(IDSMT) and Accelerated Urban Water Supply Programme (AUWSP).
13
   The Handbook also defined each indicator, specified the data needed for calculating the indicator, detailed
the rationale for the indicator and described the reliability of different measurement methods.


                                                                                                               25
pilot assessments are publicly available (MoUD, 2010 and MoUD, 2012). The Report of the
Thirteenth Finance Commission submitted in 2010 urged that ‘State Governments must put in place
standards for delivery of essential services provided by local bodies in the form of indicators
mentioned in the Handbook of Service Level Benchmarks’ (NIUA, 2010, p. 1).

       National Urban Sanitation Policy (2008)

The National Urban Sanitation Policy (NUSP) adopted in 2008 was a landmark document, articulating
for the first time a vision for urban sanitation in India (MoUD, 2008a, p. 7): ‘All Indian cities and
towns should become totally sanitized, healthy and liveable and ensure and sustain good public
health and environmental outcomes for all their citizens with a special focus on hygienic and
affordable sanitation facilities for the urban poor and women. ‘The policy document identified key
bottlenecks in the way of realizing this vision (Box 2.2) and defined a policy goal of transforming
urban India into ‘community-driven, totally sanitized, healthy and liveable cities and towns’ (ibid.).
Key sanitation policy issues to be addressed by the NUSP were the following (MoUD, 2008a, p. 7):
       Poor Awareness: Sanitation has been accorded low priority and there is poor awareness
        about its inherent linkages with public health.
       Social and Occupational aspects of Sanitation: Despite the appropriate legal framework,
        progress towards the elimination of manual scavenging has shown limited success, Little or
        no attention has been paid towards the occupational hazard faced by sanitation workers
        daily.
       Fragmented Institutional Roles and Responsibilities: There are considerable gaps and
        overlaps in institutional roles and responsibilities at the national, state, and city levels.
       Lack of an Integrated City-wide Approach: Sanitation investments are currently planned in a
        piece-meal manner and do not take into account the full cycle of safe confinement,
        treatment and safe disposal.
       Limited Technology Choices: Technologies have been focused on limited options that have
        not been cost-effective, and sustainability of investments has been in question.
       Reaching the Un-served and Poor: Urban poor communities as well other residents of
        informal settlements have been constrained by lack of tenure, space or economic
        constraints, in obtaining affordable access to safe sanitation. In this context, the issues of
        whether services to the poor should be individualized and whether community services
        should be provided in non-notified slums should be addressed. However provision of
        individual toilets should be prioritized. In relation to “Pay and Use” toilets, the issue of
        subsidies inadvertently reaching the non-poor should be addressed by identifying different
        categories of urban poor.
       Lack of Demand Responsiveness: Sanitation has been provided by public agencies in a
        supply-driven manner, with little regard for demands and preferences of households as
        customers of sanitation service
Specific goals of the NUSP are (A) Awareness generation and behavior change; (B) Open defecation
free cities and (C) Integrated city-wide sanitation (Table 2.8)




                                                                                                        26
                  Table 2.8: Detailed Goals of the National Urban Sanitation Policy, 2008
         Goal                                                     Details

A   Awareness          Generating awareness about sanitation and its linkages with public and environmental
    generation         health amongst communities and institutions;
                       Promoting mechanisms to bring about and sustain behavioural changes aimed at
     and
                       adoption of healthy sanitation practices;
    behaviour
    change

B   Open               All urban dwellers will have access to and use safe and hygienic sanitation facilities and
    defecation         arrangements so that no one defecates in the open. In order to achieve this goal, the
                       following activities shall be undertaken:
    free cities        a. Promoting access to households with safe sanitation facilities (including proper
                       disposal arrangements);
                       b. Promoting community-planned and managed toilets wherever necessary, for groups
                       of households who have constraints of space, tenure or economic constraints in gaining
                       access to individual facilities;
                       c. Adequate availability and 100 % upkeep and management of Public Sanitation
                       facilities in all Urban Areas, to rid them of open defecation and environmental hazards;
C   Integrated         Re-Orienting Institutions and Mainstreaming Sanitation
    City-wide          a. Mainstream thinking, planning and implementing measures related to sanitation in all
                       sectors and departmental domains as a cross-cutting issue, especially in all urban
    Sanitation
                       management endeavours;
                       b. Strengthening national, state, city and local institutions (public, private and
                       community) to accord priority to sanitation provision, including planning,
                       implementation and O&M management;
                       c. Extending access to proper sanitation facilities for poor communities and other
                       unserved settlements;
                       Sanitary and Safe Disposal
                       100 % of human excreta and liquid wastes from all sanitation facilities including toilets
                       must be disposed of safely. In order to achieve this goal, the following activities shall be
                       undertaken:
                       a. Promoting proper functioning of network-based sewerage systems and ensuring
                       connections of households to them wherever possible;
                       b. Promoting recycle and reuse of treated waste water for non-potable applications
                       wherever possible will be encouraged.
                       Promoting proper disposal and treatment of sludge from on-site installations (septic
                       tanks, pit latrines, etc.);
                       d. Ensuring that all the human wastes are collected safely confined and disposed of after
                       treatment so as not to cause any hazard to public health or the environment.
                       Proper Operation & Maintenance of all Sanitary Installations:
                       a. Promoting proper usage, regular upkeep and maintenance of household, community
                       and public sanitation facilities;
                       b. Strengthening ULBs to provide or cause to provide, sustainable sanitation services
                       delivery




                                                                                                                 27
                                     Source: MoUD, 2008, pp. 8-9.
A key provision of this policy is the City Sanitation Plan (CSP), which is envisioned as ‘a
comprehensive document which details out the short, medium and long term plans for the issues
related to governance, technical, financial, capacity building, awareness and pro-poor interventions
to ensure 100% access to safe sanitation’ and also identifies ‘key areas where further detailed
studies (detailed project reports) are required’ (GTZ, 2010, p. 3). In coordination with MoUD, a total
of 120 CSPs are being implemented across the country with support from the major External
Support Agencies (ESAs). These CSPs are meant to focus on long term, comprehensive, integrated,
and hybrid solutions for the entire city. At the city level, the urban local bodies charged with
providing water supply and sanitation services to all residents play a critical role in the
implementation of each of these schemes.




URBAN LOCAL BODIES

As has been discussed earlier in this report, India is facing rapid urbanization. There is an urgent
need to improve governance and service delivery in order to meet the needs of the growing urban
population. In response to this, the Government of India created the 74th Amendment Act, which
states that ‘ULBs should be self-sustaining bodies that are able to effectively govern the areas under
their jurisdiction’. Prior to this act, ULBs did not play a very critical role in the delivery of
infrastructure services due to lack of financial, institutional, and political capacity. Even now, despite
additional powers and increased focus on improving ULB capacity, the growth of these local bodies
has been skewed – some states are performing better than others on devolving powers, and larger
ULBs are more effective at managing service delivery programs (IDF, 2010). This is clearly
exemplified in the delivery of water supply and sanitation services.

Even though consequences of inadequate water supply and sanitation services have been
recognized as ‘local issues that require local solutions’ (GoI, 2006), many ULBs, particularly in small
cities, lack the capacity to meet the increasing needs of all residents. The water delivery and
sewerage systems in large cities are generally in a better condition than in small and medium cities,
and these smaller ULBs often lack the capacity to effectively manage large WSS programs (IDF,
2012). Small and medium sized ULBs also lack appropriate institutional frameworks to achieve good
service delivery. They lack staff and technical capacity because they are unable to attract qualified
people. The lack exposure to good practices, training programs, cross-learning opportunities,
financial and commercial management skills compounds the inability of these ULBs to meet the
needs of all residents, particularly the poor (MoUD, 2012). These challenges further add to gender
burdens associated with providing and accessing WSS in small and medium sized cities.

There is between 33 to 50 percent reservation for women in urban local bodies, which is expected to
ensure their increased representation and participation, and also mainstream gender concerns in
governance and decision-making, particularly in the water supply, sanitation, solid waste
management, health and education sectors (ToI, 2012). Despite these provisions, given the overall
lack of capacity, women working in small ULBs are unable to clearly articulate their need for training
and operation support (MoUD, 2012). In the WSS sector, this implies men and women who are a



                                                                                                       28
part of small and medium sized ULBs are unable to make any significant advances in identifying and
meeting gender specific WSS needs. The quota-based representation of women also fails to address
concerns of gender mainstreaming in WSS related decision-making. The lack of available finances for
small and medium sized ULBs implies that even if women and men are able to identify specific WSS
needs, they may not be able to design and run effective programs. In rare cases where any such
programs are instituted, the men and women comprising the ULB lack the capacity, training, and
knowledge to be able to effectively operate and maintain them. In this way, a viscous chain is
created where small and medium sized ULBs lack the capacity to meet WSS needs of residents,
which has acute impacts on urban poor women and socially excluded groups, further adding to the
inefficiencies of the delivery systems and to the challenges faced by the local bodies. These gaps are
exacerbated by the lack of specific gender objectives in national policies and programs.

Clearly, therefore, the size of problems is large and growing. But these problems cannot just be
judged in terms of numbers. Who suffers these problems also matters. The problems faced by the
urban poor and, within this group, by women and other socially-excluded groups, are of primary
concern. Given the Government of India’s emphasis on improving access to water and sanitation
(GoI, 2002, Section 6.1) it is imperative to find policy solutions and operational answers to the water
supply and sanitation issues for the urban poor women and socially excluded groups. In responding
to these challenges, it is also important to acknowledge that this problem disproportionately affects
urban poor women. Water and sanitation issues are not simply problems of access; they are deeply
linked to gender development. WSS issues are underpinned by an imbalance in access to
information, physical work, contribution in time and money, decision-making and access to and
control of resources and benefits. In order to design and implement effective urban water supply
and sanitation programs, looking at gender-differentiated needs and issues of social exclusion is
imperative.

GENDER AND SOCIAL INLCUSION GAPS IN POLICIES AND PROGRAMS

There is no clear engagement with gender issues in WSS related policies. Even though women are
often considered the main beneficiaries of WSS programs, their role in designing, planning,
implementing and managing WSS schemes is limited. This chronic underrepresentation of women in
decision-making bodies indicates that the national, regional and local policies are unable target
gender differentiated needs in the WSS sector. Through benchmarking of WSS utilities several key
ways to improve performance and service delivery were identified, including improved data
management, better metering, and improved monitoring of network performance. Representatives
of JNNURM and MoUD decided that during the next revision of the city development plans, cities
can be asked to assess their water and sanitation systems using benchmarking indicators (WSP,
2010). While benchmarking of WSS utilities provides an important tool for improving service
delivery, there is no clear gender-related performance indicator within this exercise. Technical and
financial considerations, while important to improve ULB performance, also serve to hide the socio-
political complexities of gender-differentiated WSS needs as discussed earlier in this report.

India’s largest urban development program, the JNNURM, exemplifies this lack of awareness around
gender in development schemes. Gender, it is argued, remains a key area of exclusion within
JNNURM (UN WOMEN, 2012). Independent reviews have revealed that the consultations for the
CDPs were organized in a way that made the participation of the poor and of the illiterate extremely
difficult. Groups representing women were also not included as stakeholders in the consultative



                                                                                                     29
process (Khosla, 2009). The implementation also assumed that male-headed households are the
norm and that infrastructure is equally accessible to men and women and to rich and poor, which
creates a gender- blind development policy, rendering the program incapable of meeting the needs
of particularly vulnerable groups.

One of the key components of JNNURM’s - Basic Services for Urban Poor – focuses on developing
new housing units, without an equal emphasis on improving services for poor residents without
secure land tenure. These housing units, often a replacement of existing slums, are located further
and further from city center, exacerbating women’s economic and social vulnerability. Despite the
increasing number of female-headed households in urban areas, there has been no gender analysis
of housing schemes and upgrading programs. Because there is a lack of focus on gender-
differentiated needs, local municipal staff lacks the motivation and the capacity to address gender
concerns.

Another key aspect of this is accessing adequate water supply and sanitation services. In attempting
to do so, women, and particularly poor women, face challenges due to an absence of norms in
services (hours of supply, time of supply etc.), which results in high opportunity costs. There
continues to be a lack of clarity of roles and responsibilities of duty bearers. Within the JNNURM
context, then, poor women are often caught in a double bind – they are not involved in the
consultative process in order to better influence the design of schemes and also bear a
disproportionate share of consequences of the inequitable design and implementation. This ‘gender
imbalance’ translates from the national level policy programs to the local UWSS service delivery.

The NUSP attempts to address some of these issues. The NUSP acknowledges that sanitation policies
and interventions need to address the needs of women and of the poor, however, there is limited
engagement on how ULBs, especially small and medium sized utilities can effectively meet these
specific needs given their capacity limitations. Thus, even though there is an interest in engaging
with GSI issues the way forward is not clearly defined and there are no tools to measure gender
outcomes. The systemic gaps for engaging with GSI issues in UWSS are clearly indicated – national
level policies are not providing a definite way forward, and ULBs, particularly small and medium
utilities, lack the capacity to implement, operate and maintain any ongoing GSI-focused UWSS
programs.

In response to these gaps, development partners such as WSP have suggested a path for reforming
WSS institutions. These reforms, which include removing legal and administrative barriers that can
prevent urban poor from accessing services, strengthening service providers, employing a cost
recovery and subsidy policies, removing physical and technical barriers to infrastructure, and
addressing macro-level policy gaps (WSP, 2009), provide very critical interventions that will help
improve men and women’s access to WSS services in urban areas. However, even within these
reforms, GSI issues are not the focus. Technical, financial, and legal issues and not GSI concerns
remain at the center of this reform agenda. Gender awareness, then, is both critically important and
relatively absent from India’s water supply and sanitation sector. Gender-differentiated needs and
priorities are neither a part of national, regional & local policies, nor of program design,
implementation and management. Women, especially poor women, and socially excluded groups
become spectators of water and sanitation related decision-making processes and bear the highest
share of the consequences of poor or no services. The challenge that remains is to reorient the
thinking within this sector, by understanding and addressing gender differentiated needs at the level
of policy, institutions and the community, creating meaningful partnerships between policy makers,


                                                                                                  30
development partners, ULBs, NGOs, and community residents.




2.6 KEY FINDINGS
The literature review highlights several key findings on gender and social exclusion issues faced by
the urban poor in accessing water supply and sanitation services in India.
       Urban water supply and sanitation problems for the poor are large and growing: Globally
        and within India, the urban poor - and within this larger group, women, children, the elderly,
        the disabled and PLWHA - face critical problems in accessing water supply and sanitation
        services in cities – even if they have access to the physical infrastructure. These problems are
        likely under-estimated by the methods used by international measurement surveys like the
        JMP and national surveys like the NSS due to their continued focus on physical infrastructure
        rather than on service delivery.
       Relatively limited literature: Despite the scale of WSS problem in urban areas, the literature
        has a rural bias. Existing literature that focuses on urban areas is skewed towards large cities
        such as Delhi, Mumbai or Bangalore. There is very limited information on medium-sized
        cities and smaller towns even though these are rapidly increasing in number across India
        (and elsewhere). The available literature is either in the form of large country-level studies
        (e.g., the National Sample Survey on water supply and sanitation facilities in slums) or
        anecdotal evidence based on a relatively small sample of slums (e.g., from 20 slums in
        Bhopal, Indore, Gwalior and Jabalpur).
       Gender-blind policies: The steps taken by the GOI to promote ‘urban renewal’ focus largely
        on framing policy guidelines (e.g., the NUSP), providing funds to urban local bodies (ULBs)
        and utilities (e.g., JNNURM and UIDSSMT), earmarking funds for pro-poor development (e.g.,
        Basic Services for the Urban Poor) and subjecting them to regular comparative assessments
        (Service Level Benchmarking). These strong pro-poor policies, however, ignore differences
        between the WSS needs of men and women, the rich and poor, and different social groups.
       Women bear a disproportionate share of problem related to accessing public water taps
        and public toilets: Women are primarily responsible for water collection and use in urban
        households. Even well-functioning public taps that are delivering high quality services can
        pose health and safety problems for women who have to make several trips to collect and
        carry water. Further, well-functioning public taps do not ensure access for groups and
        individuals that are excluded from accessing public infrastructure for social reasons. Poor
        quality service poses additional problems for women and children (e.g., time wasted in
        waiting for water or going to alternate sources, getting late for paid work, house work, or
        school). These problems are worse for pregnant, disabled, chronically ill and elderly men and
        women.
       Options for addressing gender and social exclusion: Two broad set of options to address
        social inclusion in water supply and sanitation are to (i) provide piped water supplies directly
        to households and support households in building household toilets – which will have a
        beneficial effect across different categories of the socially excluded; and (ii) raise provision



                                                                                                       31
    to an intermediate level e.g., hand pumps and piped water schemes, supplying good quality
    water within a short distance of houses and, in the case of sanitation, providing well-
    functioning community toilets and public toilets, again within a short distance of homes. The
    second option requires involving women and men in all major decisions (e.g., siting of the
    public stand posts; hours of supply; maintenance arrangements, etc.) in order to ensure that
    specific issues of socially excluded groups (e.g., women, elderly, children, disabled) are taken
    into account.
   Household-level service best addresses social inclusion: If the urban poor were provided
    good quality piped water supply in their houses and had functioning household toilets,
    gender and social inclusion problems would be addressed satisfactorily. There have been
    significant policy changes since 2005 which have improved the capacity of cities and their
    local institutions to provide household-level piped water supplies to all residents, including
    those living in slums and other poverty pockets (MoUD 2008, 2009).
   ‘Intermediate’ service levels are more realistic in the short run: It is also clear that the
    massive problem of water supply and sanitation in all 7,935 Indian towns and cities will not
    be addressed with just one intervention. Thus, providing well-functioning public toilets and
    water points is essential to improving access for the urban poor, even as we aim for
    providing household level service in the future. It is important to note that women will
    continue to face harassment on the streets as they go to collect water or use public toilets.
    And, without maintenance of infrastructure, they may still face other health and safety risks.
   The poor are willing to pay for improved service delivery: Poor urban customers have
    demonstrated that they are willing and able to pay for good quality services, and have been
    paying more, particularly for water supply, as compared to what higher income residential
    consumers pay for piped water.
   Gender mainstreaming: Efforts to include women in water supply have centered on
    ‘mainstreaming gender’ into planning, implementation and evaluation of both government
    programs and donor-funded pilot projects (e.g., UNDP, 2003, SDC, 2005; AusAid, 2005).
    Although this literature does not explicitly demarcate between rural and urban water
    supply, the underlying context for the majority appears to be rural, and only some of this
    literature focuses on urban women (e.g., UN Habitat, 2003, 2005 and 2006). The message,
    however, is the same: to give women a greater voice in planning, implementation and
    evaluation of water supply programs and projects, of governments or donors. Women’s role
    in service delivery appears to be conspicuously absent. Also, it fails to address a vital gender
    issue in urban water supply and sanitation - working poor women do not have time to
    participate in all decision-making processes, or attend meetings, workshops and trainings
    that are a necessary part of project activities. However, there are a growing number of
    initiative where SHGs are running community or public toilets: early examples (1998 – 2003)
    include Mumbai, Pune, Kanpur, Bangalore and Hyderabad (Burra et al., 2003, Baken, 2010),
    and more recently, Tiruchirapalli, Gwalior and Kolkata.
   Utilities vary widely across India in their capacity and service delivery: Larger cities seem
    to have more human and financial resources to provide better quality of water supply and
    sanitation services, as compared to smaller cities. Given that smaller cities are growing
    rapidly, extra efforts are needed to improve their capacity to provide good quality water
    supply and sanitation services, especially to the urban poor.



                                                                                                 32
        Need city-specific surveys of GSI in UWSS among the urban poor: A better understanding
         about the nature of the gender and social exclusion problems faced by the urban poor is a
         vital first step towards improving their access to adequate water supply and sanitation
         services. Equally important is to analyze innovative UWSS initiatives that address GSI
         concerns in order to highlight the lessons they offer.



    3.      FIELD STUDY



3.1 FIELD WORK BACKGROUND
OBJECTIVES


The literature survey suggested three key gender and social inclusion issues in urban water supply
and sanitation. First, women are still primarily responsible for water collection and use in urban
households. Second, even well- functioning public taps delivering ‘high quality’ services (e.g., 24
hours of good-quality water at good pressure, from a large network of well-maintained taps) can
pose health and safety problems for women who have to make several trips to collect water. Third,
these problems are worse for pregnant, disabled, chronically ill and elderly women. Some groups
and individuals may not be able to access these services due to social reasons. Poor quality service,
then, poses far greater challenges for women and socially excluded groups. Women and girls spend
time waiting for water or searching for alternate water sources, which excludes them from
academic, economic and leisure activities.

While household level water supply can address many of gender and social exclusion related issues
associated with public water supply, merely providing taps is not enough. It is necessary to look at
quality of service (e.g., water quality and the adequacy, predictability and reliability of supply),
current status of infrastructure, bill payment mechanisms in place, and level of customer service, all
of which could pose problems for women and socially–excluded groups.

The field study, therefore, assesses the quality of service delivered by public and household-level
water taps and toilets, and analyzes the consequences of poor service delivery for women and
socially-excluded groups.

Initial findings from the literature review and from preliminary fieldwork suggested that the existing
institutional arrangements in urban WSS sector were very limited. Based on this information, this
field study assesses (i) the WSS problems faced by women and socially excluded groups across a
large sample of slums, and (ii) the relative success of different approaches to address GSI problems,
including analyzing alternate technical and institutional arrangements, and looking at the impact of
household piped water supply and household toilet facilities in these slums.

FIELD WORK LOCATIONS
The literature review revealed that there were 53 Million-Plus cities in India, 468 Class I Cities (with a
population of over 100,000) and 738 cities and towns (Census of India, 2011). The total slum



                                                                                                       33
population across all urban areas is about 115 million (extrapolating from the 42 million identified in
the 2001 Census), and ‘80% of the urban poor reside in cities with populations less than one million’
(Cities Alliance, 2011). Since these numbers indicated that the ‘universe’ to sample from is large, a
diagnostic dipstick survey was conducted. While this survey was not statistically representative, it
provided critical information for site selection. Based on this survey, it was decided that the field
study would cover a large sample of slums (100 slums) across two cities, one representing large
cities (>1 million) and another representing smaller cities (<1 million). In order to select the two
cities, a list of 19 potential sites was drawn up. Only cities not covered in the case study analysis
were included and the criterion for selection was the use of innovative approaches to UWSS service
delivery (Table 3.1).
From the list, Gwalior was selected to represent smaller cities (with population of 100,000 or less.
The public toilets in Gwalior include incinerators for better menstrual hygiene and are more
accessible for users with disabilities. The management of these innovatively designed toilets has
been handed over to a local NGO. Gwalior was also a part of a small UN-HABITAT initiative that
looked at gender mainstreaming, which was later carried forward in ADB and DFID-funded UWSS
projects.
Pune was the second city selected for this study. It represents cities with a population of over one
million residents. The operations and maintenance of public toilets in Pune is typically handed over
to the slum communities. NGOs in Pune have also completed detailed digital mapping of slums,
providing valuable data for this work.




                                                                                                       34
Table 3.1: List of potential cities for field study, with innovative approaches to UWSS
                                                    Slum                                                                                                                         Covered
                                    Population                 % Slum to     Population            Innovations in                               Innovations in
       City              State                    Population                                                                                                                      in case
                                      2001                       total         2011               water supply to                                  sanitation
                                                    2001                                                                                                                          study?
                                     (Million)                 population     (Million)           the urban poor                              for the urban poor
                                                   (Million)
1    Belgaum          Karnataka         0.46         0.06         12%           0.49      24x7 water supply to slums                                                             Yes
     Hubli-
2                     Karnataka         0.79         0.18         23%           0.95      24x7 water supply to slums                                                             Yes
     Dharwad
3    Gulbarga         Karnataka         0.43                                    0.53      24x7 water supply to slums                                                             Yes
4    Jamshedpur       Jharkhand         1.13         0.06          5%           0.63      Good quality & reliable supply
5    Bangalore        Karnataka         4.29         0.35          8%           8.49      Improved quality, reliable supply                                                      Yes
     Kulgaon-
6                     Maharashtra       0.10                                    0.18      24x7 water supply to slums
     Badlapur
7    Nagpur           Maharashtra       2.05         0.73         36%           2.40      24x7 water supply to slums
                      Andhra
8    Kadapa                             0.33                                    0.34      Citizen's Service center
                      Pradesh
                      Andhra
9    Vijayawada                         1.04         0.03          3%           1.05      Water connections in 24 hours       New public toilets built & run by Sulabh
                      Pradesh
                      Andhra
10   Hyderabad                          3.45         0.60         17%           6.81                                          New public toilets built & run by Sulabh
                      Pradesh
11   Kolkata          West Bengal       4.58         1.49         33%           4.49                                          Public toilets rehabilitated by MC & run by SHGs
14   Kalyani          West Bengal      0.08                                    0.10                                           Pay-and-use toilets in 44 ODF slums; New public    Yes
12   Mumbai           Maharashtra      11.90         5.80         49%          18.41                                          toilets with new design run by community           Yes
                                                                                                                              100% sewerage in slums + 100% waste water
13   Navi Mumbai      Maharashtra                                               0.10                                                                                             Yes
                                                                                                                              treatment & selling recycled water
15   Alandur          Tamil Nadu        0.15         0.03         23%           0.16                                          All households connected to u/ground sewerage
16   Tiruchirapalli   Tamil Nadu        0.75         0.17         23%           1.02                                          Community toilet operated by SHGs                  Yes
                      UT of
17   Chandigarh                         0.81         0.11         13%           0.96                                          New Public toilets built by MC & run by Sulabh
                      Chandigarh
                                                                                                                              203 household toilets + 1 community toilet with
                      Madhya                                                              Gender Mainstreaming
18   Gwalior                                                                    1.05                                          incinerator & disabled/elderly access;
                      Pradesh                                                             Action Plan
                                                                                                                              Community toilets refurbished & handed to NGO
                                                                                                                              Child-friendly toilet blocks built with people's
19   Pune             Maharashtra       2.54         0.53         21%           3.11                                          Contribution; 200+ public toilets built & handed
                                                                                                                              to the community by SPAARC & Shelter Associates
Sources: GOI (2011c); GOI (2011d); Govt of Jharkhand (n.d); ASCI (2011, 2012); WaterAid and Gramalaya (2008); WSP (2009a)



                                                                                                                                                                                       35
3.2 SAMPLING AND METHODOLOGY
One objective of the field study was to cover 100 slums in each of the two cities. It was decided that
a large sample size would provide robust data to support policy dialogue and ongoing government
initiatives in this sector. In Pune, this sample includes 28% of the 341 notified slums for which
complete secondary information was available and for Gwalior, it includes 44% of all 229 identified
slums. A two stage-sampling was carried out first to identify the slums and next to identify the
households for interviews within each slum. In each of the 200 slums, household interviews and
group discussions were held to collect a mix of qualitative and quantitative information using both
open-ended and close-ended questions (See field formats in Volume 2 of this Report). Some of the
qualitative issues discussed in groups, especially those pertaining to user satisfaction and service
delivery from public and household infrastructure, were probed using the Quantified Participatory
Assessment (QPA), which is discussed later in this section.14

SAMPLE SELECTION

PUNE

Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) area includes 564 slums, out of which 357 are notified.15 As
secondary data on the other slums was not available, the study was limited to 357 notified slums. Of
these, PMC has detailed secondary data for 341 slums, including population information, date of
notification and total area. A sample of 100 slums was selected from this universe. For the purpose
of sampling, three parameters were chosen, including population, age of the community and the
geographic location of the site.
Population: At least 50% of all slums in Pune house less than 500 people and 6% have a population
of more than 5,000 persons. There are ten slums with a population over 10,000, and two with a
population over 25,000. The population distribution indicated that the top decile will include slums
with more than 3,490 residents and the last decile (ignoring slums for which data are not available)
will include settlements with less than 120 inhabitants. Based on the total population, Pune slums
were categorized into five groups. Since a proportional sampling would have caused the sample, and
thus the study findings, to be dominated by small slums, more weight was given to large slums by
selecting 35% of slums from the top three categories (large slums) and the remaining 65% from the
two smallest categories (Table 3.2).




14
  See Appendix 1 for an overview of the Quantified Participatory Assessment.
15
  Other slums are considered by PMC to be “recognised slums” and the PMC extends its schemes, subsidies
and support to all these 564 slums but perhaps not to the same extent as it does to notified slums (Personal
communication, Mahesh Pathak, Municipal Commissioner, PMC, 16 January 2013).


                                                                                                               36
                             Table 3.2: Sampling categories based on slum size
                                  Sampling universe                                    Sample
          Category
                       Population    Number of Slums         % to total   % to total    Number of slums
             1       More than 5000         23                   7%          15%               3
             2       3001-5000              20                   6%          20%               4
             3       1001-3000              73                  21%          25%               18
             4       401-1000               82                  24%          30%               25
             5       400 or below          143                  42%          35%               50
          TOTAL                            341                 100%          15%              100


Age of the slum: The age of slum was also taken into account mainly because it was expected that
the service delivery levels in the older (or established) slums would be better than those in the more
recently settled slums. The age of the slum is also important because it is indicative of Pune’s
population growth trends. The city saw two growth stages, one in early eighties (around 1982) and
another in the late nineties (after 1995). The growth in number of slums was the largest during this
earlier period - accounting for 77% of total slums in the PMC area. Based on this, slums were
categorized into three groups - those established more than 30 years ago, between 15-30 years ago,
and during the last 15 years.16 The sample includes one-third of the slums from each category (Table
3.3).17
                                  Table 3.3: Sampling as per age of slums

                                               Number              Number                       Number
                                      Number                               Number
                                               of slums Number of of slums                      of slums
                              Total of slums                               of slums
            Administrative                       to be  slums 16 -  to be                         to be
                             Number less than                                more
               Ward                            selected 30 years selected                       selected
                             of slums 15 years                              than 30
                                                 in the    old      in the                        in the
                                        old                                years old
                                                sample             sample                        sample
     1    Aundh                 28          0                     23           9          5
     2    Bhawani Peth          51          3          1          40          13          8
     3    Bibwewadi             18          9          3           9           2          0
     4    Dhankavdi              4          0                      4           1          0
     5    Dhole Patil Road      44          3          1          34           8          7         1
     6    Ghole Road            28          2          2          21           6          5         2
     7    Hadapsar              34          4          2          26           4          4         2
     8    Karve Road            43          5          2          34           4          4         1
     9    Kasba Peth            22          1                     19           7          2
     10   Sahakar Nagar         32          6                     22           7          4         2
     11   Sangamwadi            24          1                     23           9          0
     12   Tilak Road            14          2          1           8           4          4         1
     13   Warje Karvenagar       2          0                      2                      0
     14   Yerawada              13          1                     10           3          2         2
          Total                357         37         12         275          77         45        11




16
   As per date of official notification of the slum.
17The  actual sample size for the oldest slums (age>30 years) had to be restricted to 24% for practical reasons:
many of the older slums had turned into permanent tenements over the years. It was therefore decided to
limit the study to those slums, which have not been taken up under PMC’s slum resettlement sc hemes.


                                                                                                               37
Geographic distribution: This parameter was used to ensure that all 14 administrative wards of PMC
were represented in the final sample.18
Final sample in Pune: From the strata created using the three criteria discussed above, a final
sample of 100 slums was selected using random sampling. However, because the sampling was done
on a priori basis using secondary data from PMC that had been compiled 3 to 4 years ago, some
slums selected in the final sample have since been converted into permanent settlements under
resettlement or renovation schemes. Such slums were finally excluded from the study. These were
replaced by slums from the same ward that were also of comparable age and size. A supplementary
list of 30 slums was prepared from which replacement slums were randomly selected. The final
sample represents 28% of all notified slums in PMC areas and 18% of all slums in Pune city (Table
3.4; full slum list in Appendix 2).
                    Table 3.4: Final sample of 100-slums for the Pune slum survey
                                         Total number         Number of slums         % of sample
              Administrative Ward
                                        of notified slums      in the sample            to total
         1   Aundh                              28                    9                   32%
         2   Bhawani Peth                       51                   14                   27%
         3   Bibwewadi                          18                    5                   28%
         4   Dhankavdi                           4                    1                   25%
         5   Dhole Patil Road                   44                   10                   23%
         6   Ghole Road                         28                   10                   36%
         7   Hadapsar                           34                    8                   24%
         8   Karve Road                         43                    7                   16%
         9   Kasba Peth                         22                    7                   32%
        10   Sahakar Nagar                      32                    9                   28%
        11   Sangamwadi                         24                    9                   38%
        12   Tilak Road                         14                    6                   43%
        13   Warje Karvenagar                    2                    0                    0%
        14   Yerawada                           13                    5                   38%
             Total                             357                  100                   28%



GWALIOR

The sampling method for Gwalior was similar to that used for Pune. Three key modifications were
made - (i) the list of slums available with the Gwalior Municipal Corporation (GMC) included both
officially-listed slums and squatter settlements (collectively termed ‘poverty pockets’) which had
been identified during a Poverty Mapping exercise by an NGO, Sambhav, and WaterAid India in
2005. This was for UN HABITAT and GMC’s Slum Environmental Sanitation Initiative (SESI) (UN
HABITAT, 2006)); (ii) the age parameter had to be dropped, because GMC’s official list did not
include information on the date of notification of the slum;19 and (iii), based on available data,
number of households was used to represent the size of slums instead of the population. In order to
reduce the potential bias of having the sample dominated by small slums, 10 out of the 11 large
slums (defined as those having more than 700 households) were included in the sampling plan and


18
  The Warje-Karvenagar Ward could not be covered because there were only two notified slums and both had
been taken up under PMC’s resettlement scheme.
19The official slum list with the GMC was adopted from the list prepared by the NGO, Sambhav, as a part of

their study on identification of urban poverty pockets supported by WaterAid India. This list has subsequently
used even in academic studies, e.g., Kumar and Aggarwal, (2008).


                                                                                                           38
the proportion of middle-sized slums (of 101-300 households) was reduced from 49% to 40% (Table
3.5).
                      Table 3.5: Sampling categories based on slum size: Gwalior
                                  Sampling universe                                  Sample
         Category
                      Households    Number of slums        % to total   % to total    Number of slums
            1        More than 700          11                 5%          91%               10
            2        301-700                51                22%          66%               34
            3        101-300               113                49%          40%               45
            4        100 or below           54                24%          20%               11
         TOTAL                             229               100%         100%              100

Geographic spread: This parameter was applied to ensure that all 20 administrative wards of GMC
were represented in the final sample.20
Final sample of slums in Gwalior: The final sample of 100 slums represents 45% of all 229 slums in
Gwalior (Table 3.6; full slum list in Appendix 2).
                    Table 3.6: Final sample of 100-slums for the Gwalior slum survey
                  Administrative Ward     Total number    Number of slums       % of sample
                       Number               of slums       in the sample       to total slums
                           1                    21                9                 43%
                           2                    24               10                 42%
                           3                    14                8                 57%
                           4                    5                 3                 60%
                           5                    11                3                 27%
                           6                    4                 1                 25%
                           7                    12                4                 33%
                           8                    4                 2                 50%
                           9                    23                7                 30%
                          10                    4                 2                 50%
                          11                    4                 2                 50%
                          12                    5                 2                 40%
                          13                    18                6                 33%
                          14                    1                 1                100%
                          15                    12                3                 25%
                          16                    18               11                 61%
                          17                    3                 3                100%
                          18                    11                3                 27%
                          19                    22                9                 41%
                          20                    13               11                 85%
                         Total                 229              100                 44%




METHODOLOGY
FIELDWORK DESIGN



20
  Note that a group of electoral wards is known as an ‘administrative ward’ in Pune and a ‘zone’ in Gwalior. To
avoid confusion, however, the term ‘administrative ward’ is used in both cases in this report.


                                                                                                            39
A mix of qualitative and quantitative data was collected in both cities using both open-ended and
close-ended questions. Questionnaire-based interviews were conducted with families that had taps
and toilets in their houses, and with families that had at least one member with special needs
(elderly, differently-abled, chronically ill and those living with HIV/AIDS). Different types of group
discussions were held, including males only, females only, and male and female spot discussions at
public water taps and toilets.
Developing a sampling plan for the household survey and group discussion posed several challenges.
The standard methods use to arrive at a representative sample for household interviews were not
easy to apply for this study, due to the scale of the survey and the lack of secondary information on
slum households. If reliable secondary information had been available, it would have been relatively
straightforward to stratify the respondents and to sample randomly from the population. Field
(2005), for instance, used a national register of property owners living in Peruvian slums to draw a
random sample of 2,750 households to study the effects of changes in tenure security on investment
in residential houses. Medical and epidemiological studies usually use lists of patients living in the
slums near health centres to identify the sampling population. For instance, Ackumey et al. (2012),
investigating local meanings and experiences of burulic ulcers in two municipalities in the outskirts
of Ghana, used the list of endemic communities from the local Municipal Health Directorates and
then had community-based surveillance volunteers to trace and register all affected persons and
draw a sample of 181 respondents. It would also have been possible to do a census for a smaller
number of slums as demonstrated by Anand et al (2007) while studying the risk factors for non-
communicable diseases across all 2,564 men and women living in four slums located within the
Ballabgarh block of Faridabad district in Haryana. However, the scope of this work required a
variation of the standard slum survey sampling method.
Another key challenge for Pune was that the atmosphere in the slums had been vitiated by previous
surveys, especially one in March 2011 (a year and a half before the present survey) by an NGO called
Mashal (Maharashtra Social Housing and Action League) to produce a Slum Atlas for Pune city. This
atlas was later used by the PMC to guide its slum demolition and rehabilitation program. Local slum
dwellers felt they had been misled by field surveyors and have become hostile to all subsequent
surveys (10-14 August 2012).21
Prior discussions with persons knowledgeable about the ground realities in both Pune and Gwalior
had revealed that the water and sanitation situation in the slums of the two cities was quite
different: Pune had very few public water points and a large number of public toilets, while Gwalior
had more public hand pumps and water taps and few functioning public toilets.22
Based on these challenges, a practical fieldwork design had to be developed that suited both
contexts. Using field visits and pilot tests, a methodology for household surveys was first developed
in Pune and then replicated in Gwalior. This is discussed in a subsequent section on Fieldwork
Processes.
Transect walk

Two members of the field team walked around different parts of each selected slum, taking note of
all public water points (taps connected to piped water supply schemes or hand pumps) and all public

21
   Ms. Pratima Joshi of Shelter Associates and Dr. Ashok Dayalchand of the Institute of Health Management
Pachod (IHMP). Personal communication. August 2012.
22
   This is based on discussions with NGOs and government officials in Pune and Gwalior. In Pune, we spoke to
Ms. Pratima Joshi and Dr. Ashok Dayalchand and, in Gwalior we spoke to Dr. SK Singh.


                                                                                                           40
toilet blocks. The team also prepared a rough sketch of the slum, indicating the location of all WSS
infrastructure. During these walks, the field team asked local residents questions regarding number
of users per facility. They also asked questions regarding the number and location of households that
had their own taps connection and private toilets. During the walk, the field team also identified
people from different parts of the slum for an ‘introductory meeting’.
Introductory meeting

The field staff held an introductory meeting at a community area, such as school or anganwadi
centre.23 The purpose of the meeting was for the staff to introduce themselves to community
residents, provide a brief description of their agency and the purpose of their visit. The field staff
was aware that they had to provide a factual account of the purpose of their work in order to avoid
raising false expectation.24
Following a general discussion on available WSS infrastructure, the field team gathered detailed
information on public water points and public toilets in the slum as well as on number of households
with individual water taps and individual toilets in their houses. They also asked about households
that had members with special needs (chronically-ill, elderly or differently-abled). This information
was later used to set up household level interviews.
Towards the end of the meeting, the field team informed the group about the next steps including
separate group discussions with men and women, visits to public taps and public toilets, and
household visits. The best times to hold each of these were also discussed. In some cases, the group
discussions were held immediately after the introductory meeting.

GROUP DISCUSSIONS

Group discussions with men and women: Separate discussions were held with men and women. At
the start of the meeting, the field staff used the sketch prepared during the transect walk to ensure
that representatives from all parts of the community were present. The field team also ensured that
users of all public water points (PWP) and public toilet was represented within the group. In large
slums (with a population greater than 1000), two group discussions each were held with men and
women.
Group discussions at public water points: The field team inspected the PWPs to ensure that they
were working properly. They, then, gathered male and female users of functional PWPs and held
semi-structured group discussions25. Based on the information gathered during exploratory work, it
was discovered that Gwalior has more PWPs than Pune. As a result, it was decided that group
discussions would be held at a maximum of five PWPs in each slum, producing a maximum sample of
1000 across both cities.
Group discussions at public toilets: The field team visited the functioning public toilets in the slums,
visually inspected them and then held semi-structured discussions with the users present at the
time. Based on prior information that Pune had a large number of functioning public toilets in each


23
   Temples or mosques were avoided since not all people were allowed to enter these places
24
   Residents were told that, while the data gathered during this study would be useful to better understand the
WSS needs of women and socially excluded groups, the municipal corporation may not act upon the findings
of the study. The field staff also mentioned the larger goal of this work was to inform government policies in
the sector.
25
   The format for these discussions has been included in the annex.


                                                                                                            41
slum while Gwalior had relatively few, it was decided that group discussions would be held at a
maximum of two public toilets in each slum, giving a maximum sample of 400 public toilets across
both cities.
The field teams were asked to carefully record their own observations to ensure the reliability of the
participants’ responses.

Some of the qualitative issues discussed in groups, especially those pertaining to user satisfaction
and service delivery from public and household infrastructure, were probed using the Quantified
Participatory Assessment (QPA), which is described in the next section.



HOUSEHOLD SURVEYS

Given time and budget constraints, the sample size for the household survey was fixed at 15
households per slum. This included five households each with taps, and with toilets. Five households
that had members with a range of special needs26 were also selected. The total sample size was
1500 households each in Pune and Gwalior.

Houses with taps and toilets

    For large slums where households with taps or toilets were dispersed throughout the
     community, field staff used an informal plan of the neighbourhood to randomly select one
     household from each lane. Using this method, a total of five households with private water taps
     and five with private toilets were selected.
    In large slums where households with private water taps or toilets were concentrated in one
     location, field staff made an approximate list of households in the area and identified five
     households from each category using simple randomisation.
    In slums with fewer than 15 households with water taps or toilets, every third house was
     sampled.

Households with members that have special needs

The field team selected these households purposively, based on information
gathered during the transect walk and introductory meeting. All household survey
questions were addressed to the head of the household or the spouse.
A total of 443 group discussions with men and women, 283 group discussions with users of public
water points and public toilets, and 2,344 household interviews were carried out as part of the field
study (Table 3.12).
                Table 3.12: Participants and respondents during fieldwork: Gwalior and Pune
         City                            Group discussions                      Households surveyed with



26
  For the purpose of this work, households with members having different special needs were included in the
survey. At least one household each with a visually challenged member, a mobility challenged member, an
elderly member, a chronically ill member and a member with HIV/AIDS was selected,


                                                                                                         42
                                                                       At Public   Own      Own      Special
                                                    At Public Water
                         With Women     With Men         Points
                                                                        Toilets    Taps    toilets   needs

     Gwalior                103           103             105             36       482      475        249

     Pune                   115           115              26            115       427      351        360
     TOTAL                  225           218             131            151       909      826        609
     Group Discussions            443

     Spot surveys                                               283

     Household interviews                                                                    2344

Even though the total number of group discussion held was higher, data from some was excluded for
quality reasons. For Gwalior, the data from 100 discussions with men and from 97 with women was
used for analysis. For Pune, data from 111 discussions with men and 120 discussions with women
was used.



QUANTIFIED PARTICIPATORY ASSESSMENT
METHOD
For group discussions, Quantified Participatory Assessment (QPA) methodology was used to gather
qualitative and quantitative information. QPA was first developed using the Methodology for
Participatory Assessment (MPA) and is one of many methods that allows for the quantification of
qualitative information in large-sample assessments.27
         QPA uses semi-structured group discussions to elicit community responses to a particular
          question and then allows for the conversion of these responses into numbers using an
          ordinal scale. Responses are assumed to range from the worst (score of 0, with a detailed
          description of this score) to the best case scenario (score of 100, again with a description),
          with an optional ‘benchmark’ score of 50.Scores above 50 are generally considered
          ‘satisfactory’, while those below 50 are considered ‘not satisfactory’. The semi-structured
          group discussions are usually conducted by trained facilitators. Each issue is discussed until a
          consensus is reached. The reason for the response from each group is recorded and, based
          on this reason, the facilitators assigns a score on a 0-100 scale.28 For this study, QPA was
          used because of two critical reasons: QPA surveys groups of participants, just as household
          questionnaires survey individual respondents. Findings reported are therefore a proportion
          of the total number of groups that gave a particular (qualitative) response (i.e., reason for

27
   QPA evolved from the MPA developed by Christine van Wijk (van Wijk, 2003) for the Participatory Learning
and Action (PLA) project of the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP), which was a multi-disciplinary and multi-
country assessment exercise looking at the factors underlying the sustainability of water supply and sanitation
projects (Dayal et al., 1999, Gross et al., 2001). The QPA was developed by AJ James who did the statistical
analysis of the MPA data for the initial PLA study coordinated by Rekha Dayal of the Water and Sanitation
Program. See also, James (2002, 2003b, 2003c, 2003d), James and Kaushik (2002), James et al., (2002), James
and Snehalata (2002a and 2002b). For more details, see the Note on the QPA in Annexure 1.
28
   Different options for scoring have been tried in earlier applications of the method (e.g., Pragmatix 2007),
including scoring by participants using flash cards (with and without scores), and recording the consensual
responses from the group and then scoring by the facilitators has been found to be most effective and least
biased. Participant scoring introduced the strategic bias of trying to get ‘benchmark’ or ‘passing marks’.


                                                                                                               43
         score), which is converted into a number (‘score’). As a part of this study, more than 400
         group discussions were held. The QPA methodology allowed for a broad analysis of the
         issues and trends across the city and also provided detailed information of the WSS services
         within the slums.
        The QPA methodology records the reason for the score. For our work, this qualitative
         information allowed for a deep analysis of the problem.
The QPA methodology also allowed for the integration of the qualitative and quantitative
information – as opposed to the mixed methods approach that uses disparate, and often
disconnected, methods to collect both types of data. 29 For the purpose of this work, the scores
from the group discussions were used for statistical analysis (including testing the significance of
differences, e.g., between men and women, between the two cities, and also across summer and
non-summer months). The qualitative data was used to better understand the context and the
underlying factors that affect access to water supply and sanitation service in gathered during the
discussions gave some indication of the ‘reason for scores’ as well as factors underlying the situation
reported.



SERVICE DELIVERY

WATER SUPPLY

Parameters for service delivery

Service delivery was measured by scoring user perceptions across five parameters. For each
parameter, the QPA scores range from 0-100:
        Adequacy: Whether or not adequate water for drinking and domestic purposes is available
         QPA scores range from 0 to 100
        Pressure: The time taken to fill a 10-litre bucket is used as a proxy for water pressure.
        Quality: Whether or not water supply is considered fit for human consumption in terms of
         taste, smell and appearance (e.g., muddy or having a foul smell).
        Predictability: Whether or not water is supplied at scheduled timings and for scheduled
         durations.
        Reliability: The time taken to fix breakdowns in service and if alternate arrangements are
         made during breakdowns – on the basis that the faster breakdowns are fixed the more
         reliable the supply
Based on QPA questions that probed each of these parameters, a water supply service delivery
ladder was constructed (Table 3.7).30 Combined QPA categories were used, such that, scores ranging
from 0 to 24 represented ‘no service’, scores ranging from 25 to 49 represented ‘sub-standard

29
  Prof. Mitchell Weiss. Personal communication. 24 January 2014.
30
  Based on Moriarty et al., (2011). See Tables 2.3 and 2.4 on pp 6-7 in Section 2.2 of this Report. The field
formats are annexed to Volume II of this Report. Note also that the last parameter in the Service Delivery
Levels table of Moriarty et al., i.e., ‘improved or unimproved source’, is as per the JMP but this parameter not
applicable in the present case because only improved sources (public water points and house taps using piped
water supply systems) were assessed during the field study.


                                                                                                              44
service’ from 50 to 74 was basic service, 75-99 was intermediate service and a score of 100
represented high service. For water quality, only four levels were used - 0, 25, 50 and 100 – because
the descriptions are discrete and not continuous.




                                                                                                   45
                                                            Table 3.7: Service delivery ladders: urban water supply

  Service                        Quantity                           Pressure                 Quality                   Predictability                   Reliability

   Level                                                          QPA Scores:
                         QPA Scores: Description                                    QPA Scores: Description       QPA Scores: Description        QPA Scores: Description
                                                                  Description
No service     0 – 24: No water from the tap for the past       0-24: Takes         0: Water is unfit for      0-24: No scheduled times        0-24: Breakdowns take more
               year                                             more than 5         drinking by humans         and duration of water           than 7 days to fix; no
                                                                minutes to fill a                              supply; water comes at          arrangements made for
                                                                10 litre bucket                                different times and for         alternative supply
                                                                                                               different durations
Sub-           25-49: For ALL users of the water point,         25-49: Takes 2 -    25: Water is used for      25-49: Supply has scheduled     25-49: Breakdowns take 2 – 7
standard       quantity is inadequate for even drinking -       5 minutes to fill   drinking by humans         times and duration, but         days to fix; no arrangements
               less than 1 bucket of 10 litres for a person     a 10 litre bucket   despite bad smell, bad     water comes at different        made for alternative supply
               per day (e.g., because the water point is                            taste or colour or         times than scheduled and
               not functional for substantial parts of the                          appearance (e.g.,          for less duration than
               year) [<10 litres per person per day]                                muddiness)                 scheduled
Basic          50-74: For ALL users of the water point,         50-74: Takes        50: No complaints by       50-74: Supply is for 6 hours    50-74: Breakdowns are fixed
               quantity is adequate for ALL drinking uses       around 2            users (not even            daily, at scheduled times       within 24 - 48 hours but no
               but not for ALL domestic uses (e.g.,             minutes to fill a   muddiness) but water       and duration except during      alternative arrangements are
               cooking, washing, bathing). [40 litres per       10-litre bucket     has not been tested        breakdowns                      made for supply during such
               person per day]                                                                                                                 breakdowns
Intermediate   75-99: For ALL users of the water point,         75-99: Takes 1-2    50: No complaints by       75-99: Supply is daily for >6   75-99: Breakdowns are fixed
               quantity is adequate for ALL domestic uses       minutes to fill a   users (not even            hours (but not 24), at          within 24 hours but no
               (drinking, cooking, washing) but not for         10-litre bucket     muddiness) but water       convenient and agreed           alternative arrangements are
               additional uses (such as livestock, kitchen                          has not been tested        times and duration, except      made for supply during such
               gardens, micro-enterprises, etc.) [40 to 70                                                     during breakdowns               breakdowns
               litres per person per day]
High           100: In addition to Intermediate service,        100: Takes less     100: No complaints by      100: Water is supplied 24x7,    100: Breakdowns are fixed
               there is adequate water for ALL users for        than 1 minute to    users; water has been      except during breakdowns        within 24 hours and
               ALL domestic as well as additional uses).        fill a 10-litre     tested using a water                                       alternative arrangements are
               [>70 litres per person per day]                  bucket              quality testing kit and                                    made for supply during such
                                                                                    found to be of good                                        breakdowns (e.g., tankers)
                                                                                    quality




                                                                                                                                                                           46
Calculating service levels of water points

For each water point, whether a PWP or a house tap, the QPA scores across five parameters were
assessed and then aggregated to derive the level of service being provided. The lowest service level
on each of the five parameters was taken as the service level of that water point – even if it achieved
higher levels on one or more individual parameters (Table 3.8).
                       Table 3.8: Examples of service delivery levels for PWPs in Gwalior
         Slum          PWP                              QPA scores for                                Service

         name          type    Quantity     Pressure      Quality   Predictability   Reliability   Delivery Level

Chandra Nagar
                        HP                                                                               1
                                      75          100           0             100            0
Engle Ki Goth           PT            75           75          50               0           50           1
Badee Mareaya           HP           100           25          50             100           25           2
Mevati Mohalla          PT           100           75          25             100           50           2
Sunaran Gali            HP           100           75          50             100           75           3
New Colony No. 1        PT            75           75          50              50           50           3
Vicky Factory           PT            75          100         100              75          100           4


SANITATION

A similar methodology was used to derive service levels for toilets

Service delivery was measured by scoring user perceptions across four parameters. For each
parameter the QPA scores range from 0-100:
         Cleanliness: Whether or not floors, walls and pans are clean and if there is water for flushing
          the toilet. Convenience: Whether or not toilets have adequate ventilation, lighting and
          provisions for water and soap for washing hands.
         Privacy and safety: Whether or not the toilets have doors that close properly and can be
          locked from the inside. This also reflects if users feel safe while using the facilities. Reliability:
          Whether or not blockages and other problems with the toilet are resolved quickly.
A sanitation service delivery ladder was constructed on the basis of QPA (Table 3.9).31




31
  Based on Moriarty et al., (2011). See Tables 2.3 and 2.4 on pp 6-7 in Section 2.2 of this Report. The field
formats are annexed to Volume II of this Report. Note also that the last parameter in the Service Delivery
Levels table of Moriarty et al., i.e., ‘improved or unimproved source’, is as per the JMP but this parameter not
applicable in the present case because only improved sources (public water points and house taps using piped
water supply systems or public hand pumps) were assessed during the field study.


                                                                                                                47
Table 3.9: Service delivery ladders: urban sanitation

   Service                 Cleanliness                                 Convenience                                   Privacy and Safety                    Reliability

    Level
                    QPA Scores: Description                       QPA Scores: Description                         QPA Scores: Description           QPA Scores: Description

No service      0 – 24: The floors, walls and pan   0-24: There is no ventilation or lighting in the       0-24: No door for the toilet, but may    0-24: Blocks and other
                are dirty; there is no water        toilet and no provision for washing hands or soap      some cloth curtains put up for privacy   problems with the toilet
                available inside the toilet         OR they exist but do not work                                                                   take more than 7 days to
                                                                                                                                                    be resolved
Sub-            25-49: The floors, walls and pan    25-49: There is poor ventilation in the toilet (very   25-49: There are doors but they may      25-49: Blocks and other
standard        are dirty; but there is water       high; blocked by netting), no or poor light (e.g.,     be broken or not function properly;      problems with the toilet
                available inside the toilet for     candle or dim light); and no provision for washing     locks may exist but do not work          take 2 – 7 days to be
                flushing and washing                hands or soap OR they exist but do not work                                                     resolved
Basic           50-74: The pan is clean, even if    50-74: There is basic ventilation (at least one        50-74: There are doors that close        50-74: Blocks and other
                the floors and walls are not;       opening) and lighting (working light) in the toilet,   properly; with locks that function       problems with the toilet
                there is water available inside     and functioning provision for washing hands but                                                 are resolved within 2
                the toilet for flushing and         no soap                                                                                         days
                washing
Intermediate    75-99: The pan, floors and walls    75-99: There is adequate ventilation (e.g., cross      75-90: There are doors that close        75-99: Blocks and other
                are clean; there is water           ventilation with mosquito netting) and adequate        properly; with locks that function;      problems with the toilet
                available inside the toilet for     lighting in the toilet (so it is well-lit), AND        there is safety while using the toilet   are resolved within 24 –
                flushing and washing                functioning provision for washing hands and soap                                                48 hours
                                                    (not always replaced)
High            100: The pan, floors and walls      100: There is good ventilation; good lighting AND      100: There are doors that close          100: Blocks and other
                are clean; there is water           functioning provision for washing hands and soap       properly; with bolts/hooks that          problems with the toilet
                available inside the toilet for     (which is always replaced)                             function; there is safety while using    are resolved within 24
                flushing and washing. There is                                                             the toilet and in the surroundings of    hours
                no smell.                                                                                  the toilet




                                                                                                                                                                          48
3.3 FIELDWORK PROCESS
PUNE
Field team: In October 2012, an 11-member team (5 women and 6 men) was selected and trained
for this work. They carried out the first phase of field study, however, 5 members of the team
left and were quickly replaced, and after completing training, the new members were
able to conduct the second phase of the work.


The field team was involved in the development, testing and translation of the group discussion
questionnaires. This allowed them to become more familiar with the approach, the questionnaires
and the methods. The final formats for the group discussions were translated into the local
language.

GWALIOR
Field team: A 20 person team, including 11 men and 8 women carried out the field study. The
field team was trained in the use of the group discussion formats. As in Pune, the team was also
involved in the development, field testing, and translation of the formats. In October 2012, the team
translated the final formats into Hindi (Table 3.11).


                                 Table 3.11: Field work process in Pune
             Date                                       Particulars
       13-14 Sep 12     Orientation workshop for key team members
       24-27 Sep 12     Orientation workshop for key team members and pilot testing of field formats
       22-23 Oct 12     Field Format translation workshop
       25 Oct – 1 Dec 12 Field work




DATA ENTRY AND QUALITY CONTROL
Data entry and analysis: Data from all filled-in and verified field formats was digitized by
operators. Qualitative information written in Hindi was simply re-written in English, in order to
minimize translation errors. The data was also cleaned and cross-checked, and finally the paper
formats were submitted to the World Bank office in New Delhi. All data analysis was done using MS
EXCEL.
Quality control: Three steps were taken to minimize errors. First, the field team was asked to
identify and fill any gaps in information at the end of the data collection process. Second, a
customized MS ACCESS software package was designed and used for data entry, with data entry
sheets resembling the paper formats to minimize any errors. Third, workshops were held with the
field teams in both Pune and Gwalior to cross-check findings.

SURVEY LIMITATIONS
 India has more than 7,500 urban areas, thus, one possible limitation of this study is the relatively
small sample size of two cities. The study, however, did not aim to represent the entire urban sector
in India, but rather to further investigate issues of gender and social exclusion identified during the



                                                                                                       49
literature review. Combining in-depth city-level information with national statistics and anecdotal
data allows for a better and deeper understanding of GSI issues.
Another limitation is that the survey is restricted to notified slums. This was done to better
understand the role of public agencies in providing water supply and sanitation services to low-
income neighborhoods and the impact of such intervention on GSI issues. A final limitation is that
there are few urban slum surveys in India and internationally that could inform the probes for group
discussion and the questionnaires. This study, however, is also attempting to address this lack.

3.4 FINDINGS: PUBLIC WATER POINTS AND HOUSE TAPS
HOUSEHOLDS AND POPULATION
The average slum size in Pune was approximately 4,000-5,000 people compared to about 2,500
people in Gwalior (Table 3.13). The range in slum size for both cities was equally wide, with Pune
slums housing approximately 60,000 to 70,000 people compared to 150 to 25,000 people in Gwalior
slums.
                     Table 3.13: Populations of slums surveyed in Gwalior and Pune
                                                              Slum Population
            City      Group Discussion with
                                                                       Maximum      Minimum
                                                  Total       Average
           Gwalior    Women                        2,59,397    2,518      25,000       150
                      Men                          2,61,959    2,543      16,000       150
           Pune       Women                        5,16,025    4,230      70,000        60
                      Men                          5,72,265    4,976      70,000        60

During group discussion in both Pune and Gwalior, men estimated larger slum populations and more
households in each community as compared to the estimates provided by women (Table 3.14).
           Table 3.14: Number of households in the slums surveyed in Gwalior and Pune
                                                              Slum Households
               City      Group Discussion with
                                                                       Maximum     Minimum
                                                  Total     Average
             Gwalior     Women                    41,083      399        2700        22
                         Men                      46,425      451        2700        22
             Pune        Women                   1,00,763     826       15000        15
                         Men                     1,05,856     920       15000        15


SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
Users reported that they were generally satisfied with the public water supply. A large proportion of
slum-dwellers in both Pune and Gwalior had individual house taps and those using public stand posts
also reported that adequate water was available. During the course of the field work, users revealed
that they continued to deal with problems related to low water pressure, uncertain supply timings,
poor quality, service and infrastructure breakdowns without alternative supply arrangements, poor
environmental sanitation (e.g., blocked and overflowing drains) and no provisions for users with
special needs.
In addition, women reported that even when supply was available, they suffered from aches and
pains from carrying water from PWPs. Women also had to deal with harassment even though they



                                                                                                      50
were reluctant to report such incidents due to fear of social repercussions. There is little social
discrimination at public water points (hand pumps and tap stands) in general but such problems
were reported to occur when water is not supplied at scheduled times. Group discussion
participants also reported that in inadequate and unreliable water supply sometimes causes adults,
and particularly women, to be late for work. It was also mentioned that sometimes children were
late to school due to inadequate and unreliable water supply.

MAIN FINDING 1: Water supply in slums has improved however water insecurity persists.
   Relatively few public taps and more house taps
Although this sample-based survey did not ask households if they taps, several findings suggest that
there are a fairly high number of taps in both Gwalior and Pune - (i) Group discussions revealed that
there were some house taps in all of the surveyed slums in Pune and in at least 83% of those in
Gwalior; (ii) There were 26 working PWPs in 19 of the slums surveyed in Pune and 105 PWPs in 58 of
all slums surveyed in Gwalior (Table 3.15).
                           Table 3.15: PWPs and House taps in slums surveyed
                    Number of Slums      Number of functioning     Average PWPs         % of slums
            City
                      With PWPs          PWPs in surveyed slums        per slum       with house taps

          Pune                                                                            100%
                           19                      26                   1.38
          Gwalior          58                     105                   1.81               83%

(iii) In Pune, 360 households that had members with special needs were surveyed. Of these, at least
96% had house taps. In Gwalior, 89% of the 249 households that had members with special needs
had house taps. In the case of Gwalior, this can in part be explained by two donor-funded initiatives
that focused on improving water supply infrastructure and providing credit to households for
individual house connections.32

        Despite improvement in water supply, people continue to seek alternate water sources.
         During group discussions, people reported that PWPs were used when there were problems
         with house taps. In both Gwalior and Pune, the large of users per PWP indicated that people
         continue to use alternate water supply source, despite house taps (Table 3.16).
                                 Table 3.16: Number of water points and users
                                    Number of    Number of users reported per PWP
                          City
                                       PWPs      Average    Maximum        Minimum

                        Gwalior         105
                                                    63           600              2
                        Pune            26          124          400           10
In Gwalior, where 72% of the PWPs were hand pumps, and user groups at all locations explained
that these hand pumps were a part of the reason why they had ‘adequate water’.



32
  The ADB-funded Urban Water Supply and Environmental Improvement Project in Madhya Pradesh (also
called ‘Project Uday’) and the DFID-funded Madhya Pradesh Urban Support Program (MP USP). Details are in
the case study on Gwalior in the next chapter.


                                                                                                        51
       Water supplied daily at fixed timings and generally regular, however problems worsened
        during summer.

Group discussions at PWPs revealed that the daily supply at each point had fixed timings, although
supply was uncertain in Gwalior during summer months (Table 3.17).




                   Table 3.17: Water supply timings at PWPs: Pune and Gwalior
                                               PWPs in Gwalior (105)     PWPs in Pune (26)
             Nature of supply from PWPs
                                                             Summer                  Summer
                                               Non-summer              Non-summer
          Daily supply                                                   100%         100%
                                                  93%          87%
          Supply at fixed times                   85%          85%       100%         100%
          Supply for 24 hours a day               84%          84%        19%          19%
          Supply for 6-23 hours a day             3%            3%         4%           4%
          Supply for less than 6 hours a day      18%          18%        78%          78%

During summer months, pumping water took although it took longer to pump the water during the
dry season. Daily public tap supply was generally for 6 hours in Gwalior slums and for 3-4 hours in
Pune slums.
Only in small proportion of slums reported problems, with the large number of users per PWP and
low pressure being the most commonly reported issues. There was a range of supply timings and
hours reported across the two cities, with some users indicating that water was supplied in adequate
quantity and at convenient times, and others indicating that water was available for 2 hours a day
during office hours. People mentioned that they had adjusted their schedules to ensure that they
would be able to collect water and had gotten used to the timings.


       General satisfaction with public water supply
During group discussions 78% of men and women reported above average satisfaction with their
water supply, while 14 % of men and women reported dissatisfaction (Figures 3.4 and 3.5).
        Figure 3.4: User satisfaction with PWP service delivery in Gwalior slums: men and women




                                                                                                     52
                   Scores from 0 to 24                              5%                               % of women only groups
       WORST CASES: Very unsatisfied; they have major
               issues with service delivery                         5%                               % of men only groups

                    Scores from 25 to 49                                 9%
       BELOW BENCHMARK: Unsatisfied but managing:
       they have some issues but still forced to manage                  9%

                    Scores from 50 to 74                               8%
          BENCHMARK: Satisfied: they have occasional
             problems, but are satisfied generally                     8%

             Scores from 75 to 99                                                       22%
  ABOVE BENCHMARK: Quite satisfied: Problems are
                  very rare]                                                             23%

                    Scores of 100                                                                                                 56%
IDEAL: Very satisfied: Problems are very rare and are
                     fixed quickly                                                                                                55%


        Note: Data from 105 groups of male users and 104 groups of female users of PWPs in Gwalior slums
           Figure 3.5: User satisfaction with PWP service delivery in Pune and Gwalior: men and women

  Gwalior Public Water Points: Women        5%     9%        8%          22%                               56%

        Gwalior Public Water Points: Men    5%     9%        8%          22%                               55%

       Pune Public Water Points: Women       11%        7%               32%                                    50%

          Pune Public Water Points: Men        14%                     36%                                      50%

         Very unsatisfied      Unsatisfied but managing           Satisfied generally         Quite satisfied         Very satisfied

  Note: Data from discussions with groups of male and female users at 26 PWPs in Pune and 105 in Gwalior

Improvements in water supply to slums in both Gwalior and Pune may explain the high user
satisfaction levels. While piecing together water from multiple sources, including hand pumps, house
taps and public taps provides adequate supply; these also indicate other issues such as coping costs
associated with collecting and storing water. High user satisfaction indicates improved water supply,
however, the large number of PWP users in both Gwalior and Pune also indicate gaps in service.

MAIN FINDING 2: Women reported more health and safety risks due to problems with
water supply.
    Aches and pains from carrying water

Respondents in nearly half the groups in Gwalior (and more women-only groups) reported pains in
the neck, backaches, and pain in the limbs from carrying water (Table 3.34).




                             Table 3.34: Health problems from carrying water, Gwalior and Pune

                                                             Groups in slums that said that...
City            Group
                                 Yes,                             Because of carrying water they suffer ...



                                                                                                                                       53
            Discussions     we have
                                                                      Pain in     Injuries from falling
                             health                      Pain in                                             Other
                                                                        the       down while carrying
               with                        Backaches        the                                            problems
                           problems                       limbs        neck              water

Gwalior     Women             50%            12%              9%         25%                3%                1%
            Men               46%            6%              14%         20%                2%                4%
Pune        Women             15%            6%               0%         8%                 1%                0%
            Men               16%            8%               2%         6%                 0%                0%

In Pune, the taps were located on the street outside each household, and more women than men
reported injuries and other health problems as they carried buckets of water into their homes.

          Women were harassed at PWPs, however, they frequently chose not to report such
           incidents due to social pressure

Only a small number of groups mentioned that women faced harassment while collecting water
(Table 3.35).




                   Table 3.35: Harassment faced while accessing public water points, Gwalior and Pune

                              Groups where at least one member said there was at least one incident of ...
              Group
                                                                                       Pulling
City        Discussions               Name          Throwing       Whistling or       clothes,
                          Harass                                                                   Physical
                                    calling or     stones and      passing lewd     pinching or               Others
                          -mint                                                                     abuse
               with                   verbal         pebbles        comments         fondling
                                     teasing                                            skin

Gwalior     Women           7%          2%              1%               1%               3%          0%       0%
            Men             9%          7%              0%               2%               0%          0%       0%
Pune        Women           2%          2%              0%               0%               0%          0%       0%
            Men             3%          2%              0%               1%               0%          0%       0%


Only 1% of respondents in Gwalior and 2% in Pune reported incidents every day, with a similar
proportion saying once a month and rarely (Table 3.36).
                   Table 3.36: Incidents of violence against women and girls, Gwalior and Pune
                                                 Groups where at least one member said ...
            Group
                              Yes, there                           women and girls are harassed ...
            Discussions       are more
City
                              incidents                                            Once a         Once a
            with                                 Every         2-3 days per                                   Rarely
                                                  day             week             week           month
                                 now

Gwalior     Women                  2%              1%               0%               0%             1%         0%
            Men                    5%              1%               0%               0%             2%         2%



                                                                                                                   54
Pune           Women               3%               2%              0%              0%             2%        0%
               Men                 6%               2%              1%              1%             2%        1%


Discussions revealed that, harassment is generally not reported for fear that this would adversely
affect the reputation of the girls and women involved. This indicates that the data may
underestimate the problem.



             Users with special needs faced additional problems in accessing water

Group discussions in Gwalior indicated that users with special needs, for example, pregnant women,
users with disabilities, and elderly men and women, faced additional problems in accessing PWPs.
(Table 3.37). These issues were less pronounced in Pune because most households had private taps.
However, even with house taps, getting water from the street-level tap into homes was difficult for
people with disabilities and for the elderly.
                Table 3.37: Problems faced at public water points by special groups, Gwalior and Pune
                                                         Groups in slums that said that...
                     Group
                                      Yes, these special groups face problems at public water points:
       City       Discussions
                                                      Disabled Adolescent Adolescent           Old    Old
                                Pregnant Disabled
                      with      Women       women
                                                         Men         Girls        Boys       women Men

       Gwalior    Women            18%        14%          14%           20%           14%         23%   17%
                  Men              16%        21%          17%           17%           11%         16%   16%
       Pune       Women             7%         6%          4%             0%            1%          3%    3%
                  Men               6%         7%          4%             1%            2%          5%    4%




MAIN FINDING 3: Very few incidents of social discrimination reported at water points
Group discussions revealed that there were very few instances of social discrimination at PWPs and
more such cases were reported in Gwalior than in Pune. More male (Table 3.38) and lower caste33
residents (Table 3.38) reported social discrimination.
                      Table 3.38: Social discrimination at public water points, Gwalior and Pune
                                               Proportion of slums where respondents said ...
               Responses
                                                We face the different types of discrimination at water points ...
                 From                                                     Have to give      Have to     Have to
                                               Physically                  priority to     collect on
     City        Group                                                                                   collect
                              Yes, there is    prevented     Punished
                                                                             others        behalf of     water
               Discussion         social         from             if
                             discrimination                  collecting     whenever         some         only
                                               collecting
                  with                           Water         water      some others        other      when no
                                                                              come          persons     one else


33
  The group discussions in the slums also covered discrimination against specific social groups – tribals,
widows, physically challenged, prostitutes, witches, menstruating women, eunuchs and homosexuals – but no
discrimination was reported against any of these groups of users.


                                                                                                               55
                                                                                                    is around

Gwalior   Women               4%               3%             0%            0%            1%            0%
          Men                 7%               1%             0%            1%            5%            0%
Pune      Women               2%               1%             0%            1%            0%            0%
          Men                 1%               0%             0%            1%            0%            0%

                       Table 3.39: Targets of social discrimination, Gwalior and Pune
                                             Yes, there is           Who are discriminated against?
          City      Group Discussion with
                                             social discrimination                             Others
                                                                     Muslims     Low Castes
          Gwalior   Women                    4%                      0%          3%            1%
                    Men                      7%                      1%          6%            0%
          Pune      Women                    2%                      1%          0%            1%
                    Men                      1%                      0%          1%            0%

One possible reason for the general lack of discrimination is that lower caste and minority groups
tend to congregate in certain slums. Each slum, then, is further organized based on social categories,
and people of the same caste, tribe, religion and community tend to live together. Each section of
the slum tends to have its own PWPs. A slum-wise analysis showed this trend in both Pune and
Gwalior (Table 3.40).
                      Table 3.40: Slums with majority communities: Pune and Gwalior
                               Gwalior                                       Pune
                 Majority community Number of slums          Majority community Number of slums
           1     Muslim                  18                              Boudha              31
           2     Koli                     8                             Muslims              30
           3     Kushwaha                 7                             Maratha              24
           4     Jatav                    7                                 Teli              7
           5     Harijan + SC             7                               Kunbi               7
           6     Pandit                   5                             Marwadi               2
           7     Thakur                   2                              Matang               2
           8     Valmiki                  2
           9     Bhagel                   2
          10     BC and OBC               1
          11     Kumhar                   1
          12     Manjhi                   1
          13     Brahman                  1
          14     Sharma                   1


Such social stratification is also apparent in the names given to the slums in Gwalior34 although not
in Pune. The only case of discrimination reported was in a Gwalior slum, where lower caste residents
were forced to wait until other more politically powerful groups had collected water from the PWPs.
In another Gwalior slum, a feud between two communities led to issues in water supply. However,
most communities in both Pune and Gwalior did not report any social discrimination at PWPs.

34
   In Gwalior, some slums, for example Jatavpura, Harijan Basti, Karigari Mohalla, Rassiwala Mohalla, and
Machchi Addi, have been named based on the majority community. Harijan Basti implies that the majority of
the residents are scheduled caste and tribes; Karigari Mohalla indicates that most residents are karigars or
artisans; Rassiwala mohalla implies the community of rope makers and Machchi Addi is the community of
fishermen.


                                                                                                             56
MAIN FINDING 3: Users report good quality service from PSPs
Group discussions at PWPs were used to assess user-perceived service delivery in terms of quantity
(adequacy), pressure, quality, predictability and reliability, using the QPA. Findings on each of these
are presented first followed by the service delivery levels for each PWP.
          Quantity: Users reported adequate water supply from PWPs in both Pune and Gwalior
Users at most PWPs in Gwalior felt that there was adequate water available for drinking and
domestic uses: QPA scores showed that 90% of PWPs provided basic or better service (59% provided
High Service) in both summer and non-summer months, (Figure 3.6).
Figure 3.6: Adequacy of water from PWPs in Gwalior: Non-summer and summer

                                                                                                                   Non-
                                                                                     9%
                                                                                                                   summer
           0-24: No service: No water from the tap for the past year
                                                                                                                   Summer
                                                                                     9%

    25-49: Sub-standard service: For ALL users of the water point,
                                                                           0%
    quantity is inadequate for even drinking - less than 1 bucket of
    10 litres for a person per day (e.g., because the water point is
      not functional for substantial parts of the year) [<10 lpcd]         0%


          50-74: Basic: For ALL users of the water point, quantity is           4%
        adequate for ALL drinking uses but not for ALL domestic uses
                  (e.g., cooking, washing, bathing) [40 lpcd]                   6%

    75-99: Intermediate service: For ALL users of the water point,
                                                                                              27%
    quantity is adequate for ALL domestic uses (drinking, cooking,
    washing) but not for additional uses (such as livestock, kitchen
            gardens, micro-enterprises, etc.) [40 - 70 lpcd]                                 26%


                                                                                                                  59%
     100: High service: In addition, there is adequate water for ALL
      users for ALL domestic as well as additional uses) [>70 lpcd]
                                                                                                                  59%



                      Note: Data from group discussions with users at 105 PWPs in Gwalior slums
More users reported that water supply during summer months was inadequate. Nearly 60% of PWPs
in Gwalior were reported as having ’high service levels’ compared to none in Pune (Figure 3.7). One
reason for this difference is that most PWPs in Gwalior were high-capacity public hand pumps, while
all Pune PWPs were public taps supplied by municipal piped water.
     Figure 3.7: Adequacy of water supplied from PWPs in summer and non-summer, Gwalior and Pune

   Gwalior public taps:
                                9%      6%               26%                                             59%
        Summer

   Gwalior public taps:
                                  9%     4%             27%                                              59%
     Non-summer
                             1%
     Pune public taps:
                              4%                      43%                                                  54%
        Summer

     Pune public taps:
                                              36%                                                   64%
       Non-summer
                 Lowest                Sub-standard                     Basic             Intermediate           High
  Note: Data from discussions with groups of male and female users at 26 PWPs in Pune and 105 in Gwalior

Discussions with users clearly indicated that the quantity of water is not a major concern in Gwalior.
The perception of adequacy was frequently based on the availability of hand pumps as an


                                                                                                                            57
emergency/security measure. In Pune slums public tap users felt that the quantity of water, the
pressure and the hours of availability worsened in the summer. There were also a few PWPs,
including hand pumps, where there were considerable problems with water supply in the summer.
However, despite these issues, the difference in user perceptions related to adequacy of service was
not significant across seasons. The difference between Pune and Gwalior was also not significant.35

             Water pressure: Users reported good water pressure from most PWPs in Gwalior and Pune

Using the time taken to fill a 10-liter bucket as a proxy, users were asked to assess the water
pressure at PWPs. In 66% of respondents in Gwalior and 68% in Pune reported that in non-summer
months approximately 2 minutes are needed to fill a 10-liter container. In summer months, the
number stayed the same for Gwalior but reduced to 57% in Pune. This seasonal difference in water
pressure for Pune is statistically significant (Figures 3.8 and 3.9).

              Figure 3.8: Pressure of water supplied through PWPs in summer and non-summer: Gwalior slums
                                                                                           9%
      0-24:No service: Takes more than 5 minutes to fill a 10 litre bucket                                                  Non-summer
                                                                                            10%
                                                                                                                            Summer
                                                                                                        20%
           25-49:Sub-standard: Takes 2 - 5 minutes to fill a 10 litre bucket
                                                                                                         21%

                                                                                      4%
              50-74:Basic: Takes around 2 minutes to fill a 10-litre bucket
                                                                                     3%


           75-99:Intermediate service: Takes 1-2 minutes to fill a 10-litre                                                          53%
                                      bucket
                                                                                                                                     53%

                                                                                                  15%
       100:High service: Takes less than 1 minute to fill a 10-litre bucket
                                                                                                13%




                                 Note: Data from group discussions at 105 PWPs in Gwalior slums


 Figure 3.9: Pressure of water supplied through PWPs in summer and non-summer: Gwalior and Pune slums

 Gwalior Public Water
                                   9%              20%            4%                              53%                          15%
 Points: Non-summer

 Gwalior Public Water
                                    9%               22%            3%                             53%                         13%
   Points: Summer

      Pune Public Water
                                                            54%                                                46%
     Points: Non-summer

       Pune public water
                                4% 7%                                          61%                                     29%
        points: Summer
                    Lowest                  Sub-standard                  Basic                 Intermediate         High

     Note: Data from discussions with groups of male and female users at 26 PWPs in Pune and 105 in Gwalior

35
  Using the Wilcoxon Rank Sum test for large samples, where the z-statistic can be calculated and used to test
the null hypothesis that both samples of observations (QPA consensual group scores for adequacy of water
supply in summer and non-summer) came from the same population.


                                                                                                                                     58
In Pune slums, group discussions confirmed that the water pressure from the public taps in slums
was markedly worse in summer months due to general water scarcity.
Quality: While government reports on water quality were not available, users reported adequate
quality
 Government agencies have tested the water quality at very few PWPs in both Pune (7%) and
Gwalior (1%) and the results of these tests were not shared with users. However, users did not
complain about the color, taste and appearance of the water from PWPs (Table 3.18).
   Figure 3.18: Quality of water supplied from PWPs, summer and non-summer, Gwalior and Pune slums
                                                        Gwalior (105 PWPs)           Pune (26 PWPs)
                  User perceptions                                                             Summer
                                                   Non-Summer          Summer     Non-Summer
     Water is fit for drinking by humans                                              93%            96%
                                                          87%            87%
     Water is being used for drinking by humans           87%            87%           89%           89%
     Water does not smell bad                             98%            98%           96%           93%
     Water does not taste bad                             97%            97%           96%           96%
     Water does not have a bad colour                     98%            98%          100%           100%
     Water does not appear muddy or dirty                 98%            99%          100%           96%

During discussions at almost all PWPs, the users were unanimous that water had not been tested,
although they also said that there were no obvious problems with quality (i.e., taste, smell or
appearance).

However, there were complaints regarding quality from some PWPs, and the users reported that
they did not use the water for drinking.

Predictability: Users reported predictable water supply from most PWPs

Predictability was assessed on the basis of whether PWPs had regular timings and duration of
supply. Most public taps had scheduled timings although duration of supply varied: while hand
pumps in Gwalior slums delivered water 24 hours a day, most public taps in Pune and Gwalior
supplied water for a maximum of 6 hours a day (Table 3.19).


 Table 3.19: Predictability of water supply from PWPs, summer and non-summer, Gwalior and Pune slums

                                             PWPs in Gwalior (105)             PWPs in Pune (26)
            Hours of supply from PWPs
                                                                Summer                      Summer
                                             Non-summer                   Non-summer
            24-hour supply per day                                              18%          18%
                                                  70%            69%
            6 hours or less supply per day        16%            17%            68%          75%
            Unpredictable supply                  11%            11%            11%           4%

The QPA assessment of predictability showed that PWP supply was more reliable (i.e., water came at
scheduled times and for scheduled duration) during non-summer months in both Gwalior and Pune,
although the difference in Gwalior was not statistically significant (Figures 3.10 and 3.11).
       Figure 3.10: Predictability of water supply from PWPs in Gwalior: Summer and Non-summer



                                                                                                            59
                                                                                7%                                    Non-summer
     0-24: No Service: No scheduled times and duration of water
  supply; water comes at different times and for different durations                                                  Summer
                                                                                 9%

     25-49: Sub-standard service: Supply has scheduled times and                7%
   duration, but water comes at different times than scheduled and
                   for less duration than scheduled                             7%

                                                                                     9%
    50-74: Basic: Supply is for 6 hours daily, at scheduled times and
                  duration except during breakdowns
                                                                                 8%

   75-99: Intermediate: Supply is daily for >6 hours (but not 24), at           5%
   convenient times and duration agreed by the Ward Committee
             and Ward Sabha, except during breakdowns                           7%

                                                                                                                               72%
      100: High: Water is supplied 24X7, except during breakdowns
                                                                                                                            70%

                    Note: Data from group discussions with users at 105 PWPs in Gwalior slums




           Figure 3.11: Predictability of water supply from PWPs in Pune: Summer and Non-summer

  Gwalior public water
                             7%      7%        9%      5%                                       72%
  points: Non-summer

  Gwalior public water
                              9%       7%       8%      7%                                       70%
    points: Summer

   Pune public water
                                               39%                                                 57%                         4%
  points: Non-summer

    Pune public water
                           4%                          46%                                               50%
     points: Summer
               Lowest                 Sub-standard                      Basic             Intermediate         High

  Note: Data from discussions with groups of male and female users at 26 PWPs in Pune and 105 in Gwalior

While 72% of PWPs in Gwalior slums delivered ‘high service levels’ in non-summer months 70%
provided the same level of service in summer months. Only 4% of PWPs in Pune slums delivered
‘high service levels’, with no PWP delivering this level of service in summer months.
During group discussions, particularly in Gwalior, it was clear that hand pumps were considered
more reliable than public taps. Users reported that water was supplied through public taps in
Gwalior and Pune for 6 hours a day, although there were some exceptions. In a few slums, water
was supplied only for 2 hours a day. Users of some PWPs in Gwalior also reported that water was
not always supplied at convenient times or for a long enough duration. The worst cases in Gwalior
were public taps where water was supplied at scheduled times and for specific durations however,
water was only available on alternate days.
In Pune slums, the water was generally supplied at the scheduled time and for the scheduled
duration but at very low water pressure. As a result, only a few users could collect water and each
user spent a longer time on the task.
Reliability: Users reported that most PWP breakdowns were fixed within two days


                                                                                                                                60
The ‘reliability’ of water supplied from PWPs is defined in terms of time taken to fix breakdowns in
service and the alternate arrangements made during breakdowns. Breakdowns in most PWPs (53%)
in Gwalior and in Pune (61%) were reportedly fixed within 48 hours. For 24% of PWPs in Gwalior and
11% in Pune, it took between 2 to 7 days to fix service breakdowns (Table 3.20).
   Table 3.20: Reliability of water supply from PWPs, summer and non-summer, Gwalior and Pune slums
                     Number of             Season            Time to restore supply after breakdowns (summer)
      City
                   water points                            Don’t know   <24 hrs.     24-48 hrs.   2-7 days   >7 days

      Gwalior            105           Non-summer              15%        20%            41%       15%         9%
                                         Summer                15%        19%            42%       15%         9%
      Pune                26           Non-summer               7%        39%            43%       11%         0%
                                         Summer                 7%        29%            54%       11%         0%

The QPA findings indicate that 76% of PWPs in Gwalior achieve ‘basic’ or higher service delivery
levels, with only 16% delivering ‘high service’. These numbers are lower in summer months (Figures
3.12 and 3.13).




Figure 3.12: Reliability of water supply from PWPs in summer and non-summer: Gwalior slums

                                                                                10%                            Non-summer
      0-24: No Service: Breakdowns take more than 7 days to fix; no
                arrangements made for alternative supply                                                       Summer
                                                                                   11%


                                                                                      14%
  25-49: Sub-standard service: Breakdowns take 2 – 7 days to fix; no
              arrangements made for alternative supply
                                                                                      14%


     50-74: Basic: Breakdowns are fixed within 24 - 48 hours but no                                                     44%
       alternative arrangements are made for supply during such
                             breakdowns                                                                                 44%


 75-99: Intermediate: Breakdowns are fixed within 24 hours but no                        16%
     alternative arrangements are made for supply during such
                           breakdowns                                                    16%


   100: High: Breakdowns are fixed within 24 hours and alternative                       16%
   arrangements are made for supply during such breakdowns (e.g.,
      by bringing water from other sources through tankers, etc.)                        16%


                     Note: Data from group discussions with users at 105 PWPs in Gwalior slums


  Figure 3.13: Reliability of water supply from PWPs, summer and non-summer, Gwalior and Pune slums




                                                                                                                         61
    Gwalior public
                        10%         14%                            44%                        16%              16%
    water points:…

    Gwalior public
                           11%       14%                            44%                       16%              16%
    water points:…

 Pune public water
                      4%                         54%                                              43%
   points: Non-…

 Pune public water
                            14%                              57%                                         29%
  points: Summer

             Lowest               Sub-standard             Basic               Intermediate             High
  Note: Data from discussions with groups of male and female users at 26 PWPs in Pune and 105 in Gwalior



There were no statistically significant differences between user-perceived reliability of water supply
in summer and non-summer months.
Discussions with PWP users in Gwalior slums revealed that the government provided tankers only
during summer months and not during service breakdowns. Users perceived hand pumps as an
important ‘back-up’ water source and only resorted to government or private tankers as a last
resort. However, no GMC did not provide water tankers – or even advance warning so that users
could collect and store water – in case of service breakdowns.
The service level at PWPs in Pune is better, with 96% delivering ‘basic’ or higher service levels,
although no PWP achieves the ‘High’ service level of fixing breakdowns within 24 hours and
providing alternate arrangements. PWPs in Pune also performed better in non-summer months than
in summer months (Figure 3.10). Group discussions indicated that either PMC or the local Municipal
Councilors informed slum dwellers in advance about possible disruptions in water supply.
        Users were satisfied with the levels of service delivery from PWPs in Gwalior and Pune
         even though they continued to rely on multiple sources to meet their needs.

Service delivery was assessed using the QPA scores for the five parameters of quantity, pressure,
quality, predictability and reliability and for the five levels of service delivery defined earlier (see
Table 3.7 on p.47) - ‘No Service’, ‘Sub-standard service’, ‘Basic service’, ‘Intermediate service’ and
‘High service’ – and most PWPs in both Pune and Gwalior were found to provide ‘basic’ or better
service – and service delivery was generally better in Pune slums than in Gwalior slums (Figure 3.14).
      Figure 3.14: Service delivery levels of PWPs, summer and non-summer, Gwalior and Pune slums

    Pune Public Water Points: Non-summer                                       81%                             19%


         Pune Public Water Points: Summer                                63%                            37%


 Gwalior Public Water Points: Non-summer                           50%                        34%              14%


      Gwalior Public Water Points: Summer                          50%                        34%              15%

         High Service        Intermediate Service      Basic Service       Sub-standard Service     No service

  Note: Data from discussions with groups of male and female users at 26 PWPs in Pune and 105 in Gwalior



                                                                                                                     62
The service delivery assessment indicates that no PWPs in Pune or Gwalior had ‘high service’ levels
and only 1% of PWPs in Gwalior slums had ‘intermediate’ levels. In Gwalior, almost 50% of the PWPs
had sub-standard or no service. The level of service in Pune worsened during the summer with at
least 37% of the PWPs provided sub-standards service compared to 19% in non-summer months.
The wide seasonal variation in Pune reflects acute deficiencies in the piped water supply systems in
the city, particularly for low income communities. As expected, group discussions revealed that
these seasonal issues lead to consequences such as increased time-loss, more health and safety
concerns and economic losses for residents.

MAIN FINDING 4: Users continue to face some problems in using PWPs, however the
intensity and frequency has decreased over time.
Group discussions revealed that while problems such as long lines to access water from PWPs,
conflicts at PWPs, uncertain supply timings and duration do exist in both Pune and Gwalior, the
intensity and frequency of problems has decreased over time.

       Distances and time taken to collect water are not perceived as major problems

Distances to PWPs seem to be shorter in Pune slums than in Gwalior slums, with most users taking
less than 15 minutes to go to and from the water point (Table 3.21). In Gwalior, 98% of the users
reported that they spent 30 minutes or less on collecting water. In Pune, the time spent on water
collection was even lower, with 98% of the users spending 15 minutes or less on the task.




                  Table 3.21: Distance and time to use public water points, Gwalior and Pune

                       Group                        Groups in slums that said ...

           City      Discussion   Yes, have to    The time taken to and from the water point is ...
                                    walk far
                                                                                    More than 30 min
                        with                     Less than 15 min   15-30 min

         Gwalior     Women            49%              79%             18%                2%
                     Men              47%              82%             16%                2%
         Pune        Women            25%              98%              2%                0%
                     Men              27%              97%              3%                0%

       The surroundings of PWPs are generally clean
    Cleanliness around the PWP was judged based on stagnant water surrounding the water point,
    lack of a platform, no connection to a drain or blockages in the connected drain. In most cases
    (84% in Gwalior and 82% in Pune) the surroundings of the PWP were reported as clean (Table
    3.22).
                            Table 3.22: Environmental cleanliness of PWPs: Pune, Gwalior
                                                        Gwalior                   Pune
                                                 Non-summer Summer         Non-summer Summer
         Surroundings of the PWP are clean          81%         84%           82%       82%
         PWP platform connected to a drain               83%                      50%


                                                                                                       63
                                                       Gwalior                    Pune
                                                Non-summer Summer          Non-summer Summer
           Stagnant water around the PWP            8%         7%             25%       21%
           Blocks in the drain                      3%         3%             21%       18%
           Drain overflows into surroundings        4%         4%             11%       14%


Platforms and stagnant water: A significant proportion of PWPs in Gwalior slums (83%) are
connected to a drain, compared to Pune slums where only 50% have such connections. More PWPs
in Pune (21-25%) had stagnant water, as compared to those in Gwalior (7-8%). This water remained
stagnant around the PWPs for an uncertain number of days, and for at least 25% of PWPs in Pune, it
took over a month to clean the surroundings. The time taken to clean the area around the PWPs
rose marginally during non-summer months for both Pune and Gwalior.
Blocked drains: In Pune, users reported that 18-21% of the PWPs had blockages compared to 3% in
Gwalior, with the problem getting slightly worse in non-summer months. All blockages in Pune slums
are cleared within a week, while in Gwalior, it can take over a month.
Overflows: In Pune, water from 11-14% of the PWPs overflowed into the surrounding areas
compared to from only 4% in Gwalior. In most cases, the water is cleared away quickly; however, in
some instances, water has remained stagnant around the PWP for over a week in Pune and over a
month in Gwalior.




         Breakdowns in water supply are rare

During group discussions, less than 12% of the groups reported that water points went out of order.
More groups in Gwalior reported PWP breakdowns than in Pune (Table 3.23).
                  Table 3.23: Frequency of repairs to public water points, Gwalior and Pune
                                                     Groups in slums that said ...
             Group
                                                          Public water points go out of order ...
 City      Discussions     Yes, water
                                                Very often          Often            Rarely
                             points                                                                  Very
                                                   (> 3              (1-2
              with       go out of order                                                            rarely
                                               times/week)        times/wk)      (<once/month

Gwalior    Women                9%                 0%                 0%                0%           9%
           Men                 12%                 2%                 0%                1%           7%
Pune       Women                1%                 0%                 0%                0%           1%
           Men                  2%                 0%                 0%                1%           1%




                                                                                                          64
In some cases users had to pay to fix PWPs that went out of order. This occurred more frequently in
Gwalior than in Pune (Table 3.24). Payments made towards repair of PWPs were less than Rs. 50 in
Gwalior (although a few cost Rs. 100-500) and less than Rs. 100 in Pune.
                 Table 3.24: Payments made for repairs to public water points, Gwalior and Pune
                                                               Groups in slums that said ...
                    Group
                                  Yes, users paid    Average monthly payment in the last 1 year
   City          Discussions
                                  to fix public
                                                                               Rs. 50–100      Rs. 100-500   >Rs. 500
                    with                             < Rs. 10     Rs. 10–50
                                  water points

   Gwalior       Women                  6%                0%          4%           0%              2%          0%
                 Men                    7%                3%          0%           0%              4%          0%
   Pune          Women                  2%                1%          0%           1%              0%          0%
                 Men                    3%                1%          1%           1%              0%          0%

During group discussions, slum residents revealed that the PWP breakdowns were more frequent in
summer than in non-summer months. Such breakdowns were also more frequent in Gwalior as
compared to Pune (Table 3.25).
                            Table 3.25: Seasonal variations in repairs, Gwalior and Pune
                        Group         Groups in slums that said that breakdowns are more frequent in ...

            City     Discussions
                                                 Summer                              Non-summer
                           with

          Gwalior    Women                          23%                                    19%
                     Men                            22%                                    18%
          Pune       Women                          9%                                      1%
                     Men                            6%                                      0%

Residents in Pune slums were usually informed about any service breakdown at least 24 hours in
advance, and thus collected and stored water. As a result they also spent less money on purchasing
water (Table 3.26). In Gwalior, there was no advance warning system in place and slum residents
reported collecting money and buying a tanker of water during service breakdowns.




                             Table 3.26: Coping with breakdowns of service from PWPs
                                         Groups of users at slum public water point that said that they
                      Number of
                                       Fetched water from another PWP                   Bought water
          City       water points
                                         Groups of         Groups of              Groups of      Groups of
                                         male users      female users             male users
                        visited
                                                                                               female users

          Gwalior           105                                                       3%                3%
                                             17%                    17%




                                                                                                                        65
           Pune           26               32%                 32%              0%                 0%

Group discussions also revealed that during extended breakdowns, the Municipal Corporation
supplied water through tankers. Such alternate arrangements were more common in Pune than in
Gwalior (Table 3.27)
              Table 3.27: Alternate arrangements made during breakdowns of service from PWPs
                                            Groups of users at public water points that said that...
                          Number of
                                            Alternative arrangements                 Tankers
               City       water points
                                           made during breakdowns in               arranged in
                               visited
                                           Summer        Non-summer       Summer          Non-summer

               Gwalior          105                                          10%             8%
                                             18%               16%
               Pune              26          50%               50%           21%             21%

          Few fights and disturbances due to uncertain supply
Group discussions revealed that fights, conflicts and over-crowding at PWPs only took place when
water was not supplied at the stipulated time (Table 3.28). The uncertainty of supply was more in
Gwalior than in Pune.
                  Table 3.28: Uncertain water supply at public water points, Gwalior and Pune
              Group                                   Groups in slums that said that...

City        Discussions                                     The reasons for uncertain supply are ...
                          Yes, supply is
                                               There are no       There are supply timings, but water is   Other
               with       uncertain
                                              supply timings     not released according to those timings
Gwalior     Women                 13%               6%                               6%                     1%
            Men                   18%               7%                               7%                     5%
Pune        Women                  3%               1%                               2%                     0%
            Men                    1%               1%                               0%                     0%



          Uncertain supply caused delays in reporting to work, school and college.
Few groups reported delays due to uncertain supply (Table 3.29).
              Table 3.29: Problems faced due to uncertain public water supply, Gwalior and Pune
                                                      Groups in slums that said that...

              Group              They faced different problems due to uncertain public water supply ...
                                                                 Get late for        Have to       Fights at
City        Discussions     Have to        Have to interrupt    paid work due     wake up at      water tap
                           wait for a     regular housework
                                                                 to having to    night or go at      when
               with        long time       routine & run to
                          for water to collect water when it wait to collect odd hours to            water
                              come              comes                water         fill water        comes

Gwalior     Women                7%                 2%                    1%                 1%            2%
            Men                 12%                 5%                    1%                 0%            1%




                                                                                                                66
Pune       Women                   2%                      1%                    0%                0%              0%
           Men                     1%                      0%                    0%                0%              0%
More men and women in Pune (39-43%) reported being late for work than in Gwalior although the
frequency of such problems was quite low (Table 3.30).
                         Table 3.30: Frequency of adults getting late, Gwalior and Pune
                         Group                               Groups in slums that said that...

        City       Discussions                     The frequency of adults getting late for work was ...

                         with                                               Once a week     Once a month    Rarely
                                       Every day     2-3 days per week

        Gwalior    Women                  2%                  0%                4%               1%          9%
                   Men                    2%                  7%                3%               1%          11%
        Pune       Women                  1%                  0%                2%               2%          1%
                   Men                    1%                  0%                2%               4%          3%


         Very few consequences for adults and children of getting delayed
Very few men and women – and more in Gwalior than Pune – mentioned verbal abuse, loss of pay or
loss of work as consequences of being late due to responsibilities related to water collection (Table
3.31).
                   Table 3.31: Consequences of adults getting late for work, Gwalior and Pune
                                Group                        User groups at PWPs that said ...

                  City          discussions     The consequence of adults getting late for work was ...

                                with                                          Loss of pay    Loss of work
                                                Nothing      Verbal abuse

                  Gwalior       Women               4%             5%             2%              5%
                                Men                 8%             7%             6%              3%
                  Pune          Women               1%             1%             2%              2%
                                Men                 3%             3%             2%              1%

A few respondents, more from Gwalior than Pune, reported that they had less time for household
work due to responsibilities related to water collection (Table 3.32).
               Table 3.32: Frequency of adults having less time for house work, Gwalior and Pune
                         Group                Groups in slums that said that because of water problems...

        City       Discussions                           adults have less time for house work is ...

                         with                                               Once a week     Once a month    Rarely
                                       Every day     2-3 days per week

        Gwalior    Women                  3%                  5%                2%               1%          10%
                   Men                    3%                  6%                3%               0%          11%
        Pune       Women                  0%                  0%                0%               1%          2%
                   Men                    0%                  0%                0%               2%          8%

Only in a few instances, water collection responsibilities were seen as the reason for children being
late for school (Table 3.33). More such cases were reported in Gwalior than Pune.
                            Table 3.33: Children getting late for school, Gwalior and Pune


                                                                                                                        67
                      Group               Groups where at least one member children get late for school ...

        City       Discussions
                                                                                 Once a week      Once a month        Rarely
                       with            Every day      2-3 days per week

        Gwalior    Women                  0%                     1%                    2%                 4%           8%
                   Men                    1%                     4%                    3%                 3%           10%
        Pune       Women                  0%                     1%                    1%                 2%           0%
                   Men                    0%                     1%                    1%                 3%           1%

MAIN FINDING 5: Despite problems, users expressed overall satisfaction with house taps
and PWPs.
         High user satisfaction with house taps
Even though slum residents in Pune paid the municipal corporation connection charges, monthly
bills and were also responsible for repair and maintenance of PWPs, more than 95% of the women
and men surveyed for this study indicated that they were satisfied with their house taps (Figure
3.15). Men and women groups in slums of both Gwalior and Pune expressed similar levels of
satisfaction with the services provided by PWPs and house taps (Figure 3.16 and 3.17).
Figure 3.15: User satisfaction levels with house taps: Pune and Gwalior slums
Gwalior House Taps:
     Women          2% 4%            7%               26%                                           60%


Gwalior House Taps:
       Men          3%4% 7%                           26%                                           60%


   Pune House Taps:
       Women        2% 3%                    28%                                                67%


   Pune House Taps:
                             4%                 32%                                                62%
         Men
                           2%
        Very unsatisfied          Unsatisfied but managing            Satisfied generally     Quite satisfied       Very satisfied
 Note: Data from discussions with men and women user groups at 105 PWPs in Gwalior and 26 PWPs in Pune
                     Figure 3.16: User satisfaction levels, house taps and PWPs: Gwalior slums


        Gwalior Public Water Points:
                                           5%    9%         8%           22%                               56%
                  Women


        Gwalior House Taps: Women          4% 7%                  26%                                     60%
                                          2%

  Gwalior Public Water Points: Men               9%         8%           22%                               55%
                                           5%

           Gwalior House Taps: Men         4% 7%                 26%                                     60%
                                          3%

        Very unsatisfied      Unsatisfied but managing            Satisfied generally       Quite satisfied      Very satisfied

               Note: Data from discussions with men and women user groups at 105 PWPs in Gwalior




                                                                                                                                     68
                      Figure 3.17: User satisfaction levels, house taps and PWPs: Pune slums


 Pune Public Water Points: Women       11%    7%                  32%                                50%


          Pune House Taps: Women      3%           28%                                      67%
                                     2%

    Pune Public Water Points: Men       14%                     36%                                  50%


             Pune House Taps: Men    4%                32%                                    62%
                                    2%

        Very unsatisfied    Unsatisfied but managing         Satisfied generally   Quite satisfied     Very satisfied

                Note: Data from discussions with men and women user groups at 26 PWPs in Pune

Using QPA, ‘user satisfaction’ was scored across both Pune and Gwalior. No significant difference
was found between the scores by male and female groups in either city.


         Gender differences in perceiving advantages of house taps
Despite the lack of statistically significant differences in scores, the qualitative details from the group
discussions showed that men and women saw different advantages of house taps over PWPs. While
men emphasized time savings so that they can reach work on time, women focused on time saved
that could be spent with children or doing housework.
Women’s perceptions
         Major advantages: Women reported that house taps save effort (especially during
          pregnancy and illness) and time (so more time is available for children and housework)
         Other advantages: Women reported that house taps meant that there would be enough
          water to maintain hygiene at home. Women also reported that they felt safer as they
          accessed water. Women also reported that house taps added to their independence, freeing
          them from having to stand in lines, from conflicts at PWPs, and from dependency on others
          to meet their water needs.
Men’s perceptions
         Major advantages: Men reported that house taps save effort and time (so they could reach
          work on time)
Other advantages: Men reported that house taps freed them from having to stand in line for water.




                                                                                                                        69
Few households reported problems in paying bills or in complaining about problems with water
supply. In Pune, the Ward Councilors were extremely helpful and residents called them in order to
get any water supply related problems rectified within 24 hours.

       Similar service delivery from house taps and Public Water Points

Some users with access to house tap reported low pressure (especially in Pune), inadequate supply
hours and uncertain timings of water supply. Overall, users reported that PWPs and house taps
delivered a similar level of service (Figure 3.18).


          Figure 3.18: Service delivery from house taps and PWPs in summer, Pune and Gwalior

                   Pune House Taps: Summer                    55%                   9%               34%         2%


            Pune Public Water Points: Summer                       63%                               37%


                 Gwalior House Taps: Summer      11%         30%                         50%                    9%


         Gwalior Public Water Points: Summer 1%              50%                            34%                15%

          High Service    Intermediate Service     Basic Service     Sub-standard Service         No service

 Note: Data from discussions with users of 105 PWPs and 427 house taps in Gwalior slums and 26 PWPs and
                                       479 house taps in Pune slums

More house taps in Pune deliver ‘Intermediate’ service, compared to PWPs. However, as with PWPs,
at least 36% deliver less than basic levels of service during both summer and non-summer months.
6. In Gwalior, there are fewer house taps delivering above basic levels of service, compared to PWPs.
At least 59% and 49% of the taps in Gwalior are delivering sub-standard or no service in summer and
non-summer months, respectively.

WATER SUPPLY: DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS
This study provides a variety of insights into water supply in low income neighborhoods in large and
medium sized Indian cities. Collecting both quantitative and qualitative gender-disaggregated data
allowed a deeper analysis in to how men and women perceive and use water supply in their
communities. The implications of the findings discussed in the previous section are presented below.

Despite improvements, gender issues are important and often masked within this sector: Group
discussions revealed that even though both men and women were involved in water related tasks,
women face unique challenges. As women leave their homes to collect water, they face harassment
and are also forced to hide such incidences due to social pressures. This places them at even higher
risk of facing repeated harassment and sexual violence. Thus, women in slums are caught in a bind -
even as they continue to be responsible for collecting water, they face both physical and social risks
as they carry out these tasks. Along with safety risks, women also faced more health issues than
men. In both Pune and Gwalior, more women reported aches, pains, and other health issues related
to collecting water. Even in cases where household taps are available at street level, women were
forced to carry containers into their homes, which placed them at risk for water collection related


                                                                                                                     70
injuries. Women were also the ones to miss work in case someone in the household was unwell,
implying gender-specific economic consequences of poor water quality.

Role of Municipal Corporation: There was a marked difference between how service breakdowns
were addressed in Gwalior and Pune. In Pune, users complained about water supply issues to their
ward councilors, rather than through any formal customer grievance redress system. Councilors also
asked PMC to provide an advance warning of any service disruptions (e.g., for routine maintenance
like replacement of pipes or tap stands), giving households time to collect and store water. In
contrast, in Gwalior, where ward councilors did not exert an equal political pressure on the
municipal corporation, responses to service failures were slower and breakdown warning systems
were missing. While interventions by the ward councilors allow improved access in Pune, they also
reinforced a set up where users depend on elected officials for water rather than on existing
institutional arrangements. Such a system also provides no incentive to the public agency to develop
its own customer service system or grievance redress mechanism. This fragmentation of water
governance adds to water insecurity and has gender implications where women (and to a lesser
degree men) are forced to either seek political favor or find alternate water sources.
Low expectations: Respondents in Pune did not perceive water supply as a problem because they
had house taps, albeit at street level, and felt that the 3-6 hours of water supply was adequate. In
Gwalior, group discussions revealed that water supply was adequate, because, if needed, the water
from taps could be supplemented by hand pumps and government-supplied water. This suggests
that users have relatively low expectations from government-provided water supply, and are
satisfied with lower levels of service. The high user satisfaction, then, can be seen as a reaction to
improvements in service rather than as a result of good service.
Insecure water supply: Users in both Pune and Gwalior continue to face water supply issues,
including poor water quality, less time and duration of supply, and low water pressure. As a result,
users require a reliable alternate water source to feel secure about their access. This was particularly
felt in Gwalior where breakdowns in service were not addressed in a timely manner. The persistent
insecurity of access is more disruptive for women than for men. Not only do women spend more
time seeking alternate sources of water, they are also forced to face higher health and safety risks in
the process.

Lack of social discrimination at public water points: Although time did not permit more specialized
and detailed probing into specific instances – e.g., through a special study on intra-slum caste
differences or the situation of minority communities within slums –survey data and group
discussions revealed that there was little to no social discrimination at PWPs. This is not due to lack
of social stratification in the slums, rather it is because communities have organized themselves
based on socio-cultural categories. Each minority community congregates within one part of the
slum and has its own PWP, preventing caste and religion-based conflicts at water points.
 The analysis of water service delivery in the slums of Gwalior and Pune indicates that it is important
to think beyond providing infrastructure (house taps/ hand pumps) to meet the needs of the urban
poor, particularly of women and socially excluded groups. Local government bodies need to improve
all parameters of service delivery, including water quality, pressure, predictability and reliability. As
discussed earlier in this report, women continue to bear a disproportionate burden of insecurities
related to water supply in low income communities. It is necessary to decouple the technocratic,
bureaucratic and political processes related to water governance in order to better address
insecurity of access in the long run. These issues, and their gender implications, become even more


                                                                                                      71
urgent when looking at sanitation issues. The next section of this report highlights the survey and
group discussion findings on access to sanitation in the slums of Pune and Gwalior.

3.5 FINDINGS: PUBLIC AND HOUSEHOLD TOILETS
SUMMARY OF MAIN FINDINGS
The available sanitation facilities in the slums of Pune and Gwalior were different. While there were
more public toilets in Pune, the average number of users per seat was also much higher than in
Gwalior. The condition of toilets in Pune was found to be poor, despite the availability of caretakers
and water supply. The toilets were filthy, had no locks on the doors, and lacked adequate lighting.
The situation in Gwalior was worse and the condition of the facilities was so poor that less people
were using them, choosing instead to defecate in the open. Women, in particular, are affected by
the lack of adequate public toilets. Women, in particular, suggested that the lack of safe, well-
maintained, and easily accessible public toilets is one of the main reasons for why they are forced to
defecate in the open. Open defecation, in turn, exposes them to greater safety and health risks.
Users with special needs (the sick, elderly and disabled) face additional problems. Across both cities,
and across all slums, users stated their preference for household toilets despite the additional cost
and effort required to maintain these. The next section discusses the main findings related to
sanitation from the survey and group discussions.



MAIN FINDING 1: Most public toilets were overcrowded

         Building more toilets without adequate attention to improving service does not address
         the sanitation needs of the poor.

A large number of public toilets have been constructed in Pune slums: However, these toilets are
crowded and dirty. In Gwalior, where fewer toilets are available, the facilities are equally dirty (Table
3.41).
            Table 3.41: Number of public toilets per slum and seats per toilet block, Gwalior, Pune
                    Group       Groups’ perceptions of numbers of public toilets and seats in their slum

         City     discussions   Public toilets per slum    Seats for women             Seats for men

                     with       Ave      Max      Min     Ave    Max      Min     Ave      Max        Min

        Gwalior   Women           0       3        0       4      11       2       4        12         1
                  Men             1       3        0       4      11       2       4        12         1
        Pune      Women           3       9        0       8      30       1       9        30         1
                  Men             2       8        1       9      35       1       9        35         1
High usage per day: There are nearly 10 times as many users per toilet block in Pune than in Gwalior.
The maximum number of users reported per toilet block per day was 2,500 in Pune compared to 150
in Gwalior (Table 3.42). This also implies that there are more than 80 users per seat per day (2500
users/35 seats) in Pune, which is four times the optimum average of 20 users per seat per day.




                                                                                                            72
                          Table 3.42: Average number of users per public toilet, Gwalior and Pune
                  Group                     Groups’ perceptions of how many people use the public toilet daily

  City        discussions            Number of users (Toilet block 1)                      Number of users (Toilet block 2)
                                  Average   Maximum          Minimum                    Average   Maximum          Minimum
                   with

Gwalior       Women                   37               150               5                 33         150            5
              Men                     39               160               3                 36         150            3
Pune          Women                  315              2000              10                326        2000            1
              Men                    321              2000              10                319        2000            1



MAIN FINDING 2: Service delivery from public toilets is perceived as poor
As in the case of water supply, service delivery from public toilets was assessed by defining and using
five different service delivery levels, including worse service, sub-standard service, basic service,
intermediate service and high service. Four parameters were used to measure service levels:
cleanliness, convenience (lighting, ventilation, water and hand washing facilities), privacy and safety,
and reliability (efficiency of repair services in case of blockages and other problems).

         Cleanliness inside and outside public toilets

The QPA assessment of the cleanliness of toilets in both Gwalior and Pune slums revealed that most
public toilets were considered dirty (Figure 3.19).
                                       Figure 3.19: Cleanliness of public toilets: Gwalior


0-24:Lowest: The floors, walls and pan are dirty; there is no water
                                                                                                                         65%
                    available inside the toilet



25-49:Sub-standard: The floors, walls and pan are dirty; and there
                                                                              10%
   is water available inside the toilet for flushing and washing



 50-74:Basic: The pan is clean, even if the floors and walls are not;
                                                                         5%
 there is water available inside the toilet for flushing and washing



 75-99: Intermediate: The pan, floors and walls are clean; there is
                                                                                  13%
     water available inside the toilet for flushing and washing



    100:High service: The pan, floor and walls are clean; water is
   available inside the toilet for flushing and washing. There is no         8%
           smell (due to faulty water seal, vent pipe, etc).



               Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums

Public toilets in Pune slums, in comparison, were perceived as cleaner than those in Gwalior (Figure
3.20).
                               Figure 3.20: Cleanliness of public toilets in Pune and Gwalior



                                                                                                                          73
   Pune Public Toilets      11%           15%                        39%                                  35%

Gwalior Public Toilets                                 65%                                  10%      5%        13%         8%
              Lowest                Sub-standard             Basic               Intermediate             High

 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums and 115 in Pune slums

In Gwalior and Pune, visual inspection of the toilets showed that the pans, floors and walls of most
public toilets were dirty. Group discussions with men and women in the slums revealed that this was
not an isolated incident (e.g., specific to the date of the visit) and that the insides of public toilets
were frequently filthy. Respondents suggested that the toilets often smell bad; the pans are dirty
and full of human waste and flies.
Most public toilets in Pune had cleaners and caretakers: Between 73-80% of public toilets in Pune
slums had caretakers and cleaners, compared to 33-38% in Gwalior. Municipality workers and septic
tank vacuum suction (‘gulper’) trucks cleaned nearly 90% of public toilets in Pune slums compared to
55% in Gwalior (Table 3.43).
                                  Table 3.43: Cleaning of slum toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                   Groups of public toilet users who said ...

               Public                                                  Septic tanks are cleaned by ...
                             Yes,
                            there
   City        toilets                                                                Municipality                   don’t
                                         Yes, there     Private
                             is a       is a cleaner    ‘gulper’     Municipality
               visited                                                                  ‘gulper’      Others         know
                                                                      Workers
                          caretaker                      trucks
                                                                                         trucks                      who

   Gwalior
                 36          33%            38%            0%              40%            15%             5%         40%
   Pune         115          73%            80%            7%              26%            63%             0%          4%

Discussions with users in Gwalior revealed that while most public toilets looked after by Sulabh
International and the Cantonment Board had sweepers and caretakers (chowkidars); however, this
was not always the case in for public toilets managed by the city municipal corporation.
Most public toilets in Pune had water, while most in Gwalior did not: A large proportion of public
toilets visited in Pune and a third in Gwalior had water for flushing and cleaning (Table 3.44)
                         Table 3.40: Water availability in the public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                         Public toilets    Groups of public toilet users that said there was water for
             City
                            visited                    Flushing                          Cleaning

             Gwalior           36
                                                         36%                               32%
             Pune             115                        81%                               86%

The lack of water affected the cleanliness of the public toilets in both Pune and Gwalior. People
reported that due to lack of water the floors, walls and pans were dirty. In some Gwalior slums,
residents had made their own extra-legal arrangements for water to ensure some level of
cleanliness.


                                                                                                                             74
Bad smell inside the toilet: More than half the public toilets in Pune had a bad smell while fewer in
Gwalior had this problem. Slum residents said that public toilets were frequently dirty and smelly
even if there water was available.
Sanitary pads clogging toilets: In both Pune and Gwalior, there were no special arrangements for the
disposal of sanitary pads or cloths. Slum residents said that piles of soiled cloths were dumped in the
public toilets, which was a major reason for blockages. During group discussions, women revealed
that the lack of facilities to dispose off and incinerate sanitary pads was one of the key issues that
impacted the cleanliness and functionality of public toilets.
Cleanliness of area around the public toilet: Another issue discussed with the various groups was
access to public toilet. This was particularly challenging for elderly and users with disabilities. The
QPA-based assessment of this issue showed that nearly half the public toilets visited in Gwalior
slums had poor (less than ‘basic’) external conditions (Figure 3.21).




                          Figure 3.21: Cleanliness of area around public toilets: Gwalior slums


    0-24: Lowest: Stagnant water or excreta around the public toilet
                                                                                                                      30%
       and poor lighting, making it difficult and unsafe to access



  25-49: Sub-standard: Stagnant water or excreta around the public
  toilet but stones or bricks have been placed to help people access
                                                                                          15%
  the toilet; AND lighting is there but inadequate (e.g., too dim; not
                          working all the time)



    50-74: Basic: There is no stagnant water or excreta around the
                                                                                                                28%
   public toilet; lighting is adequate when the street light is working



      75-99: Intermediate: No stagnant water or excreta around the
     public toilet; lighting is adequate and the street light is repaired                       18%
                           within 24 hours if faulty


  100: High: The surroundings of the public toilet are clean and well-
   lit; the lights is repaired within 1 hour if faulty, during which time
                                                                                  10%
  a temporary alternate light source is provided (e.g., by putting up
             a temporary bulb and holder from a neighbouring


                Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums

In contrast, the surroundings of public toilets in Pune was better (Figure 3.22)
                           Figure 3.22: Surroundings of public toilets, Gwalior and Pune slums


   Pune Public Toilets 3%               17%                          32%                          48%



 Gwalior Public Toilets                     30%                       15%        28%                    18%           10%

                Lowest                  Sub-standard                    Basic   Intermediate             High




                                                                                                                        75
 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums and 115 in Pune slums

Discussions with slum residents in Pune showed that even though water was available, it was
inadequate to keep the toilet clean. Cleanliness outside public toilets is frequently neglected, even
when management strategies are planned. This serves as an important deterrent to usage,
particularly for some users. . Broadening the ambit of discussion on maintenance to include the area
around public toilets could help increase usage and reduce open defecation.
           Convenience: lighting, ventilation and water
Even if there are large numbers of well-designed toilets, poor lighting, ventilation and lack of water
supply can decrease the level of service delivered to users. Lighting, in particular, affects the safety
of girls and women, while poor ventilation affects the health of both male and female users. Public
toilets lack convenient facilities for washing hands after defecation, i.e., water and soap, which
affects hygiene and can increase incidences of diseases. In Gwalior, nearly two-thirds of public toilets
visited provided poor service in terms of ‘convenience’, which includes provision of adequate
lighting, ventilation, water supply, and soap (Figure 3.23).
                                      Figure 3.23: Convenience of public toilets: Gwalior


0-24:Lowest: There is no ventilation or lighting in the toilet and no
   provision for washing hands or soap OR they exist but do not                                                 38%
                               work



  25-49: Sub-standard: There is poor ventilation in the toilet (very
    high; blocked by netting), no or poor light (e.g., candle or dim
                                                                                                          30%
  light); and no provision for washing hands or soap OR they exist
                           but do not work



 50-74:Basic: There is basic ventilation (at least one opening) and
lighting (working light) in the toilet, and functioning provision for                       23%
                    washing hands but no soap



    75-99:Intermediate: There is adequate ventilation (e.g., cross
   ventilation with mosquito netting) and adequate lighting in the
                                                                             8%
    toilet (so it is well-lit), AND functioning provision for washing
                  hands and soap (not always replaced)



           100:High: There is good ventilation; good lighting AND
         functioning provision for washing hands and soap (which is     3%
                              always replaced)



                 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums
The QPA assessment showed that the convenience of the public toilets in Gwalior slums was much
worse than in Pune slums, although a small proportion of public toilets in Gwalior delivered high
levels of convenience (Figure 3.24). During group discussions, respondents indicated that most
public toilets in Gwalior and at least a third in Pune lacked wash basins, vessels and mugs. Most
public toilets in both Pune and Gwalior lacked adequate lighting.




                                                                                                                 76
                            Figure 3.24: Convenience of public toilets: Pune and Gwalior


 Pune Public Toilets       11%           16%                                     67%                                7%


     Gwalior Public
                                         38%                              30%                      23%            8% 3%
       Toilets
              Lowest               Sub-standard              Basic              Intermediate              High

 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums and 115 in Pune slums



Poor lighting around the public toilets is sometimes deliberate: Lighting in Pune slums was better as
compared to Gwalior however, respondents from both cities, particularly women, indicated that lack
of adequate lighting in and around public toilets was a critical issue (Table 3.45).


                            Table 3.44: Lighting around the public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                                Groups that said ...
                           Group
                                        There is not    Lighting outside public toilets was poor because ...
                       Discussions
           City                           enough
                           With                        Street light does not work      There is no street light
                                           light

         Gwalior       Women               44%                       2%                         42%
                       Men                 50%                       6%                         45%
         Pune          Women               11%                       1%                         10%
                       Men                 10%                       1%                         9%


Women reported instances when local men had deliberately damaged street lights near the toilets in
order to harass female users. In Gwalior, women reported that men had also broken the toilet
window and door locks, in order to look at female users. This was reported as one of the main
reasons women chose to defecate in the open.
Lights inside and outside public toilets are not repaired quickly: Of all the slums surveyed in Gwalior
and Pune, in at least 70% and 30%, respectively, damaged lights both inside and outside public
toilets were not repaired in a timely manner (Table 3.46). This particularly impacted the safety of
women and girls.


                  Table 3.46: Repairing of lights inside and outside public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                              Public               Groups of public toilet users that said...

                    City      toilets
                                              Lights inside public            Lights outside public
                                         toilets are not fixed quickly    toilets are not fixed quickly
                              visited

                  Gwalior
                                  36                   80%                             68%
                  Pune           115                   30%                             20%




                                                                                                                     77
The maintenance of public toilets has important implications for gender and cannot just be related
to ensuring that the toilet is well-designed and supplied with water and materials for hand-washing
(although these are important elements of service delivery). While convenient locations cannot
always be ensured in crowded slums, ensuring that there is adequate lighting both inside and
outside the public toilets – and that these are maintained well – should be essential part of
maintenance, especially from the point of view of safety of women. Keeping a stock of spare bulbs
and ensuring that an electrician is on call every day should thus be mandatory for all those managing
public toilets, whether it is a women’s group, private company or Municipal Corporation.

        Privacy and safety inside the public toilets
Women reported that privacy and safety while using the public toilet is a major issue. In Gwalior,
users reported a lack of safety and privacy in at least 50% of the public toilets (Figure 3.25). In Pune,
users reported that at least 12% of the public toilets had poor privacy and safety conditions (Figure
3.26).


                          Figure 3.25: Privacy and safety inside public toilets: Gwalior slums

   0-24:Lowest: No door for the toilet, but may some cloth curtains
                                                                                                                   23%
                         put up for privacy


    25-49:Sub-standard: There are doors but they may be broken or
                                                                                                                         28%
        not function properly; locks may exist but do not work


   50-74:Basic: There are doors that close properly; with locks that
                                                                                5%
                              function


     75-99:Intermediate: There are doors that close properly; with
                                                                                                      18%
        locks that function; there is safety while using the toilet


    100:High: There are doors that close properly; with bolts/hooks
     that function; there is safety while using the toilet and in the                                                    28%
                       surroundings of the toilet

              Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums


                    Figure 3.26: Privacy and safety inside public toilets: Pune and Gwalior slums


    Pune Public Toilets     4%     8%                        38%                                    50%


 Gwalior Public Toilets               23%                          28%          5%         18%                28%
               Lowest                 Sub-standard                      Basic        Intermediate           High
 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums and 115 in Pune slums

  During group discussions, people from both Gwalior and Pune reported that some toilets had no
  doors, or the doors had been broken and could not be locked. Overall, users from least 50% of all
the public toilets surveyed in Pune indicated they could not keep the door of the facility (Table 3.45).
 The situation in Gwalior was even worse. During group discussions, women said that the inability to
   shut and lock the toilet doors properly was one of the reasons that they feel unsafe while using
     these public facilities. Repairing doors and latches is usually the responsibility of the agency


                                                                                                                         78
    managing the public toilets; however, in both Pune and Gwalior, no steps were being taken to
          address these issues. Table 3.45: Doors and latches in public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                             Groups of public toilet user that said ...
                  Public
                                                                                       There were bolts or      They did not
                                                     There were no bolts
City              toilets
                                There were            or hooks to keep
                                                                                        hooks but these           feel safe
                                 no doors
                  visited
                                                          doors closed
                                                                                          did not work         inside the toilet

Gwalior
                    40              18%                         39%                            42%                     42%
Pune                115              0%                         7%                             25%                     21%



            Reliability of the public toilet

Reliability was assessed in terms of the efficiency of repair services in case of breakdowns, in
particular, the time taken to resolve problems. Reliability was a reported as a major problem in
Gwalior slums (Figure 3.27). Public toilets in Pune, in comparison, were perceived as more reliable
(Figure 3.28)
                                          Figure 3.27: Reliability of public toilets: Gwalior

  0-24:Lowest: Blocks and other problems with the toilet take more
                                                                                                                              53%
                     than 7 days to be resolved



       25-49:Sub-standard: Blocks and other problems with the toilet
                                                                                           15%
                      take 2 – 7 days to be resolved



             50-74:Basic: Blocks and other problems with the toilet are
                                                                                         13%
                               resolved within 2 days



  75-99:Intermediate: Blocks and other problems with the toilet are
                                                                                               18%
                   resolved within 24 – 48 hours



   100:High: Blocks and other problems with the toilet are resolved
                                                                                  3%
                           within 24 hours


                  Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums
                                   Figure 3.28: Reliability of public toilets: Pune and Gwalior


 Pune Public Toilets 2%           9%                      35%                                            53%

           Gwalior Public
                                                       53%                                  15%          13%           18%     3%
             Toilets
                   Lowest                 Sub-standard                    Basic           Intermediate          High
 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums and 115 in Pune slums




                                                                                                                               79
In both Gwalior and Pune, users reported that most of the public toilets were being managed by the
municipal corporation. For some public toilets in Gwalior, users did not know who was responsible
for management (Table 3.46).
                                Table 3.46: Management of slum toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                        Public Toilets    Groups of users that said their public toilets were managed by ...
          City
                           Visited                                   Private Contractor    NGO     No one
                                          Municipality      SHG
          Gwalior            36
                                               75%            3%              3%            3%        18%
          Pune               115               98%            0%              1%            1%        1%

Repairs by the municipal corporation: In both Pune and Gwalior, the municipal corporation was
responsible for major and minor repairs in most of the public toilets looked at for this study. In both
cities, very few private contractors were responsible for repair and maintenance of toilets (Tables
3.47 and 3.48).




                             Table 3.47: Minor repairs to the public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
           Public toilets      Groups of users that said minor problems in their public toilets were handled by ...
City
                 Visited                                           Private Contractor         NGO          No one
                               Municipality           SHG
Gwalior            36
                                         75%             3%                   3%                 3%            18%
Pune              115                    94%             0%                   2%                 0%            4%

                             Table 3.48: Major repairs to the public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
           Public toilets      Groups of users that said major problems in their public toilets were handled by ...
City
                 Visited                                           Private Contractor         NGO          No one
                               Municipality           SHG
Gwalior            36
                                         73%             3%                   3%                 0%            23%
Pune              115                    98%             1%                   1%                 0%            1%
In Gwalior, the services provided by the municipal corporation were poorly perceived. During group
discussions, people suggested that there was little to no maintenance of toilets and their complaints
were often ignored. In some cases, where the toilets were managed by Sulabh International or the
Army Cantonment Board, users claimed that the service was better. However, even under different
management, user complaints were not being addressed in a timely manner.
In sharp contrast there were fewer complaints in Pune slums. Users said that they simply called their
local Ward Councilor’s regarding any service issues, which were then addressed in 1 or 2 days.
However, the quick turnaround was more for major repairs, such as clearing blocked sewer lines or
repairing the electric motor for pumping water to the overhead tank. For smaller repairs, such as
fixing doors, latches and light bulbs, the response time was much longer.




                                                                                                                     80
          Poor service delivery from public toilets in Gwalior

The QPA-based assessment of service delivery from public toilets indicated that service was worse in
Gwalior than in Pune (Figure 3.28). Even though these slums are seen as ‘covered’ by official
statistics, the presence of a poorly maintained and barely functioning public toilet was seen
insufficient by users. However, despite these major gaps in service, users have developed coping
strategies to meet their daily needs.


                          Figure 3.28: Service delivery from public toilets, Gwalior and Pune


          Pune Public Toilets       7%                               65%                                11%           17%




        Gwalior Public Toilets                                      78%                                        11%         8% 3%


             Worst service         Sub-standard Service       Basic Service    Intermediate Service         High Service

 Note: Data from discussions with groups of users of 36 public toilets in Gwalior slums and 115 in Pune slums




MAIN FINDING 3: Users have learned to cope with poor service
   On average, most public toilets are located within 200-500 meters of the users’ homes.
For slums surveyed in Gwalior, most toilets are located within 200m of the users’ households. The
distance between households and toilets ranges from 175 meters to 800 m in Pune and from 75 to
500m (Table 3.48).
                                    Table 3.48: Distance to public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                          Groups of public toilet users that said ...
                                Public toilets
                 City
                                                 Toilets are more than          Distance to toilet (metres)
                                Surveyed
                                                 200m from users’ houses
                                                                                Average       Maximum
                 Gwalior             36                      13%
                                                                                    75                500
                 Pune                115                      9%                    175               800

          Users normally spend around an hour to use public toilets
Time taken to reach toilets: In both Pune and Gwalior, group discussions with men and women
revealed that it takes users less than 15 minutes to go to and from the public toilet (Table 3.49).


                      Table 3.49: Time taken to go to and from the public toilet, Gwalior, Pune
         City           Group        Groups that said the time taken to go to and from the public toilet was ...




                                                                                                                              81
               Discussions
                                                                                      More than 30 minutes
                                 Less than 15 minutes          15 – 30 minutes
                   With

     Gwalior   Women                      58%                        42%                        0%
               Men                        68%                        32%                        0%
     Pune      Women                      89%                        11%                        0%
               Men                        90%                        10%                        0%



Queuing to use toilets: For both cities, group discussions showed that the time spent in lines to use
public toilets was less than 15 minutes (Table 3.50). Time spent in lines was more in Pune than in
Gwalior, even though Pune had more toilets. This can be explained by the large number of users per
seat in Pune. Overall, for both Gwalior and Pune, users spent approximately an hour every day
walking to and from the toilets, standing in line, and using the facilities. During group discussions,
both men and women said that the time taken to use public toilets did not result in them being late
for their jobs or for housework. Users claimed that delays occurred only if the nearest public toilet
was closed for repairs and they had to go find an alternate facility.
                    Table 3.50: Time taken to queue to use public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                   Group        Groups that said the time taken to go to and from the public toilet was ...

     City      Discussions
                                                                                     More than 10 minutes
                                 Less than 5 minutes           5 – 10 minutes
                   with

     Gwalior   Women                     69%                        31%                         0%
               Men                       58%                        42%                         0%
     Pune      Women                     58%                        38%                         4%
               Men                       54%                        39%                         7%




       Public toilets closed frequently for repair

Almost all public toilets in Pune and a large majority of those in Gwalior were regularly closed for
repairs (Table 3.51). In Pune people directed their complaints regarding toilets to local ward
members, and in Gwalior, people preferred to contact local political leaders.


                    Table 3.51: Closure and complaints about slum toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                 Groups of public toilet users that said...
                      Public
                                  Yes, toilets     Complaints about the toilets are directed towards
                                 are regularly
            City      toilets                                  Local
                                                                            Local      Ward      Don’t
                                   closed to        Local      Ward
                      visited                       SHG
                                                                           Leader      Office    Know
                                     users                    Member




                                                                                                              82
               Gwalior
                                40          80%                3%     13%             23%         35%        28%
               Pune             115         97%                2%     31%             7%          60%         1%



         Most problems with public toilets are resolved within 24 hours
Most problems with public toilets in Pune were resolved within 24 hours. The maximum time taken
to address issues was 6 days. In Gwalior, resolution of almost 50% of the complaints took 7 days or
more (Table 3.52).
                      Table 3.52: Time taken to resolve problems with public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                      Public      Groups of users that said that resolving problems with public toilets took ...

        City          toilets                                         1-2            Within             Don’t know/
                                       More than           2-6
                                        7 days            Days
                      visited                                        days        24 hours                 Not aware

        Gwalior         40
                                          43%             15%        25%              3%                    15%
        Pune           115                2%              16%        19%              63%                    1%

         Coping with public toilets being shut for repairs

Users said that if their regular public toilet was closed for repairs, they either used a more distant
public facility or, if available, a neighbor’s private toilet (Table 3.53). In Pune, there were at least one
public toilet for every 20-25 households, and thus, finding an alternate toilet was not considered a
problem. In Gwalior, however, the only alternative to using public toilets was open defecation. More
men than women in Gwalior said they would walk to a distant public toilet. This could, in part, be
due to women’s safety concerns.
                      Table 3.53: Coping with public toilets being shut for repairs: Pune, Gwalior
                                          Groups of users that said that if their usual public toilet was shut they ...
                                Public
                                                                                               Got late            Got late
                                              Used a                  Used a
   City         Users           Toilets
                                            more distant            neighbour’s
                                                                                              for regular         For home
                                Visited
                                               public toilet        private toilet
                                                                                                work                Work

   Gwalior      Women                               8%                   5%                      15%                15%
                                  36
                Men                                13%                   5%                      15%                15%
   Pune         Women                              27%                   4%                      20%                27%
                                 115
                Men                                28%                   3%                      21%                21%
Also, 30% of the users in both Pine and Gwalior said that public toilet closures made them late for
either regular work (e.g., office work, skilled or unskilled labor) and for house work (cooking,
cleaning, getting children ready for school). More women than men reported such delays. These
problems were also reported more in Pune than in Gwalior.
         Consequences of being late are not severe
Not many adults reported being late for work due to time spent using public toilets: Respondents in
only 25% of the group discussions in Pune, and around 7-14% in Gwalior, said that adults were late



                                                                                                                              83
for work because of the time spent using public toilets (Table 3.54). The consequences of such
delays were described as mild – usually verbal reprimands.
                Table 3.54: Adults getting late for work due to using public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                                      Groups that said ...
                                Group
                                               Yes, adults              Adults get late for work ...
               City           Discussions
                                                get late                           Once a Once a
                                                              Every    2-3 days
                                 With                                                                  Rarely
                                                for work       Day     per week
                                                                                    week month

               Gwalior        Women                7%          0%          0%         1%       0%        6%
                              Men                 14%          0%          3%         4%       0%        7%
               Pune           Women               20%          2%          0%         4%      10%        5%
                              Men                 25%          3%          4%         3%      11%        4%
Children getting late for school due to using public toilets: Discussions with slums residents
indicated that only in very few cases did children get late for school because of time spent using
public toilets (Table 3.55). More women than men in Gwalior slums perceived this as a problem. .


              Table 3.55: Children getting late for schools due to using public toilets: Pune, Gwalior

                                                                      Groups that said ...
                               Group
                                              Yes, children             Children get late for school ...
              City        Discussions
                                                get late                            Once a Once a
                                                              Every      2-3 days
                                                                                                         Rarely
                                With                           Day      per week
                                               for school                            week month

              Gwalior     Women                    4%           0%          0%         2%      0%         2%
                          Men                     12%           1%          5%         1%      1%         4%
              Pune        Women                   23%           2%          5%         2%      11%        2%
                          Men                     25%           3%          6%         2%      13%        1%



        Not much difference in time taken for using public toilets and for defecating in the open

Time taken to go to and from the open defecation site: Discussions with slum residents showed that
no one defecates in the open in Pune slums, due to the lack of space and due to the availability of
household and public toilets. In Gwalior, more residents – both men and women - defecate in the
open. Most people who are forced to defecate in the open take approximately 30 minutes to walk to
and from the site. In few instances, people reported taking more than 30 minutes (Table 3.56).
              Table 3.56: Time taken to go to and from the place of open defecation: Pune, Gwalior
                                                                      Groups that said ...
                      Group
                                    Yes, we         To walk to and from the place of open defecation it takes us ...
       City     Discussions
                                    defecate                                                      More than
                                                         Less than             15 – 30
                      With                              15 minutes             Minutes
                                  in the open                                                     30 minutes

   Gwalior      Women                   48%                   26%                    18%                  3%
                Men                     50%                   25%                    23%                  2%




                                                                                                                       84
Adults getting late for work due to time spent on open defecation: Respondents from 20% of slums
surveyed in Gwalior mentioned that adults are late for work due to time spent on open defecation
(Table 3.57). This was not reported as an issue in Pune.


             Table 3.57: Adults getting late for work due to defecating in the open: Pune, Gwalior
                                                      Groups where at least one person said ...
                              Group
                                            Yes, adults                   Adults get late ...
             City         Discussions        get late                           Once a     Once a
                                                           Every    2-3 days
                               With                                                                  Rarely
                                             for work       day     per week
                                                                                 week      month

             Gwalior      Women                 20%         0%         2%         1%            1%     13%
                          Men                   20%         0%         2%         3%            2%     12%

Adults having less time for house work due the time spent on open defecation: Few groups of slum
residents in Gwalior said that adults get less time for house work due to time spent on open
defecation (Table 3.58). A small proportion of women reported that this was a problem they faced
every day, while men did not report this as a major issue. This was not perceived as a problem in
Pune.
             Table 3.58: Adults having less time for house work due to open defecation: Gwalior

                                                      Groups where at least one person said ...
                              Group
                                            Yes, adults            Adults get late for house work...
                City     Discussions        get late for                         Once a    Once a
                                                           Every    2-3 days
                               With                                                                    Rarely
                                           house work       Day     per week
                                                                                 week      month

             Gwalior     Women                  17%         6%         1%          0%           1%       9%
                         Men                    18%         1%         3%          3%           2%      10%

Children getting late for school due to open defecation: A few group said that children get late for
school due to time spent defecating in the open (Table 3.59). The consequences of reaching school
late were described as mild, ranging from a verbal reprimand from the teacher or some form of
punishment.
              Table 3.59: Children getting late for school due to open defecation: Pune, Gwalior
                                                      Groups where at least one person said ...
                       Group
                                      Yes, children   The consequences of children going late to school are ...
      City          Discussions
                                        get late                                              Punishment
                                                                          Scolding
                       With                             Nothing        from teacher
                                       for school                                              by teacher

      Gwalior       Women                 16%              5%                  10%                      1%
                    Men                   18%              4%                  13%                      2%

The main finding is that time taken to use public toilets or defecate in the open is not perceived to
be a major problem by users; largely because they have adjusted their personal schedules to take
into account the time taken, and who are therefore rarely late for house work or paid employment.


                                                                                                                  85
They face problems only when public toilets are out of order. However, even when the toilets are
functioning, certain users face more problems than others, while poorly-functioning toilets force
slum residents to defecate in the option, with its attendant risks and problems.




                                                                                                    86
MAIN FINDING 4: Poorly functioning public toilets disproportionately affect women and
special groups

         Women face a variety of health problems due to poor public toilets

During nearly half of the group discussions in Pune slums, women reported facing health problems
due to suppressing excretion. At least a fifth of the groups in Gwalior, felt that menstruating women
and those with diarrhea faced special problems (Table 3.60).
                Table 3.60: Health and other problems faced by women: Pune, Gwalior
                                                Groups where at least one member said...
             Group
                                                                                              Women have
                            Yes, women have health
                                                                 Menstruating
 City      Discussion            problems from
                                                                   women                  special problems when
                             suppressing excretion               have special
              with                                                                                 having
                                                                  problems
                                 all day till dark
                                                                                                diarrhoea

Gwalior    Women                           9%                          16%                        18%
           Men                            15%                          18%                        20%
Pune       Women                          39%                          7%                         12%
           Men                            41%                          10%                        10%

During group discussions, women revealed that they drink less water through the day in order to
avoid needing to go to the toilet. Women also suggested that the lack of toilets at places of work
was a major problem for them. Women working as maids and cooks in higher income households
are often not allowed to use the owners’ toilets. Women working on construction sites or in market
places also do not have access to adequate facilities. Women reported that this forces them to
suppress excretion till they can use their usual public toilets. This leads to health problems such as
acidity, infections and stomach aches.
         Women face risks when defecating in the open
Fear of harassment: In Gwalior, nearly a third of women groups with whom these issues were
discussed said they feared going to defecate in the open while it was still dark (Table 3.61). However,
very few women in these groups reported any incidences of harassment.
              Table 3.61: Problem faced while going out to defecate in the open: Pune, Gwalior
                                                Groups where at least one member said ...
               Group
                           Yes, we fear     Yes, have to      Yes we         We faced harassment in the last ...
 City        Discussions    going out         get up
                                                               face
                With       in the dark     before sunrise
                                                                                1 month           3 months
                                                            harassment

 Gwalior     Women            37%               37%             5%                 3%                 2%
             Men              36%               34%            14%                 3%                 1%



         Women are harassed but few report harassment



                                                                                                               87
Harassment faced while going to and from public toilets: In both Pune and Gwalior, only in few
groups did the discussants report that they faced harassment while going to and from public toilets
(Table 3.63). More such incidents were reported in Pune than in Gwalior.




             Table 3.63: Harassment faced while going to and from public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                                                 Groups where at least one member said ...
                          Group
                                                                                      Yes, there were
                                                                 Yes, there were
           City       Discussions
                                      Yes, we face harassment    instances in the
                                                                                      instances in the
                                         Especially at night
                          with
                                                                 last one month
                                                                                     last three months

           Gwalior    Women                      1%                       0%                  0%
                      Men                        1%                       1%                  1%

Harassment faced while going out to defecate in the open: In Gwalior, discussants from only 19% of
all the groups said that they faced harassment. More men’s groups than women’s groups reported
such incidences. In 30-40% of the groups, discussants mentioned that people defecating in the open
faced problems of privacy (e.g., having to stand up when people passed by).
 Group discussions also revealed that women were much more frequently harassed while defecating
in the open than the responses suggested. Probing responses during the discussions revealed that
women who defecate in the open are subject to harassment of various kinds –catcalls and whistles,
indecent comments and abuses, and physical intimidation & violence. It was also suggested during
group discussions that harassment is generally not reported because people believe that common
knowledge of such incidences would adversely affect the reputation of the girls and women
involved. During discussion, women also suggested that reporting such incidents of harassment
could lead to domestic abuse and violence from their own families.


               Table 3.64: Problem faced while going out to defecate in the open: Pune, Gwalior
                                                 Groups where at least one person said ...
                  Group
                                                                  Yes we       There were instances in the ...
                             Yes, we fear       Yes, have to
   City        Discussions
                              going out           get up
                                                                   face
                  With
                                 in the dark   before sunrise                  Last 1 month    Last 3 months
                                                                harassment

   Gwalior     Women                37%            37%              5%              3%               2%
               Men                  36%            34%             14%              3%               1%



Risk of being bitten by insects and animals while defecating in the open: Nearly a third of the
discussants from Gwalior said they feared being bitten by insects and animals while defecating in the
open (Table 3.62).
          Table 3.62: Risk of being bitten by insects and animals while out in the open: Pune, Gwalior


                                                                                                                 88
                                     Group                Groups where at least one member said

                            City   Discussions     Yes we face risks       We faced instances in the last ...
                                                    of being bitten
                                      With                                   1 month           3 months

                       Gwalior     Women                  44%                   38%                6%
                                   Men                    41%                   36%                6%

            Additional problems for users with special needs

Problems faced while using public toilets: In more than half of the group discussions in Pune slums, it
was mentioned that pregnant women, and men and women with disabilities, faced unique
challenges while using public toilets. Discussants also mentioned that that elderly men and women
faced special problems (Table 3.65). Visual inspection of toilets revealed the lack of ramps, rails, and
specially-reserved seats for those with physical disabilities. For both cities, even the newly
constructed toilets lack accessibility.
                        Table 3.65: Special problems faced while using public toilets: Pune, Gwalior
                        Group                    Groups that said that special problems are faced by ...

           City      Discussions    Pregnant     Disabled       Disabled     Adolescent     Adolescent      Old      Old
                                    Women        Women
                        With                                     men             girls         Boys       women      Men

       Gwalior       Women            12%           13%           9%              6%            3%          14%      14%
                     Men              14%           14%           14%            11%            5%          15%      13%
       Pune          Women            46%           58%           50%            11%            5%          33%      29%
                     Men              46%           60%           61%            10%            3%          34%      33%

During household interviews, it was found that a large proportion of homes with special needs
members had private toilets. In cases where private facilities were absent, people with special needs
were cared for by family members.
Time taken to accompany elderly and/or sick family members or children to and from the open
defecation site: Participants in a third of the group discussions held in Gwalior said that it took
about 30 minutes to accompany elderly or sick family members or children to defecate in the open
(Table 3.66). Caregivers effectively spend double the time on such tasks as compared to other
residents in the community. Most women than men are caregivers, especially for children, which
indicates that women spend more time than men going to and from toilets or sites of open
defection.
                     Table 3.66: Time taken to accompany the elderly, sick or children: Pune, Gwalior
                    Group           Groups where members said the time taken to accompany the sick, elderly or
                                                     children for open defecation was ...
City              Discussions

                     with                                                                          More than 30 minutes
                                    Less than 15 minutes                15 – 30 minutes

Gwalior           Women                      14%                              19%                               6%
                  Men                        10%                              22%                               4%
Pune              Women                       0%                              0%                                0%
                  Men                         0%                              0%                                0%



                                                                                                                           89
MAIN FINDING 5: Users perceive better services and satisfaction from household toilets

          Users perceive better service delivery from household toilets

Unlike in the case of water supply where level of user satisfaction from public taps and house taps
was relatively similar, service from household toilets was perceived as much better than public
toilets. Service delivery was measured using the same parameters (cleanliness, convenience, privacy
and safety and reliability) for household toilets as well and the findings compared with those from
the public toilets after service delivery levels were assessed. The findings for user satisfaction with
each parameter is presented below (Figures 3.29 – 3.32), followed by satisfaction with overall
service delivery (Figure 3.33)
                    Figure 3.29: Cleanliness of public and household toilets: Gwalior and Pune

 Pune Public Toilets          11%           15%                        39%                                   35%
   Pune Household
                     3%                                                      96%                                        1%
        Toilets
     Gwalior Public
                                                       65%                                      10%     5%      13%    8%
         Toilets
 Gwalior Household
                      4% 4%                      28%                                           64%
      Toilets
                     1%
              Lowest                 Sub-standard              Basic                Intermediate              High

                    Figure 3.30: Convenience of public and household toilets: Gwalior and Pune

 Pune Public Toilets      11%              16%                                       67%                                7%
   Pune Household
                      2% 5%                                                   91%                                       2%
        Toilets
     Gwalior Public
                                            38%                               30%                       23%           8% 3%
         Toilets
 Gwalior Household
                     1%4%                       29%                                         65%
      Toilets
                       1%
              Lowest                 Sub-standard              Basic                Intermediate              High
                 Figure 3.31: Privacy and safety of public and household toilets: Gwalior and Pune


 Pune Public Toilets     4%     8%                     38%                                            50%

   Pune Household
                  1%7%                                                        92%                                       1%
       Toilets

        Gwalior Public
                                    23%                      28%              5%         18%                    28%
          Toilets

 Gwalior Household
                     2% 1%                24%                                            72%
      Toilets
                      1%
              Lowest                 Sub-standard              Basic                Intermediate              High


                     Figure 3.32: Reliability of public and household toilets: Gwalior and Pune




                                                                                                                         90
Pune Public Toilets 2%    9%                     35%                                53%

  Pune Household
                     4% 4%                                     90%                                     2%
      Toilets
    Gwalior Public
                                             53%                      15%           13%          18%   3%
      Toilets
Gwalior Household
                     5%      8%     7%                   45%                              35%
     Toilets

            Lowest                Sub-standard         Basic         Intermediate         High




                                                                                                       91
                Figure 3.33: Service delivery from public and household toilets: Gwalior and Pune


      Pune Household
                            5% 1%                                              94%
          Toilets




   Pune Public Toilets       7%                                         65%                                 11%           17%



  Gwalior Household
                             6%        9%            10%                                   55%
       Toilets




Gwalior Public Toilets                                                  78%                                       11%       8% 3%


              No service        Sub-standard Service           Basic Service   Intermediate Service          High Service




         High user satisfaction from household toilets

Quality of service and consequently user satisfaction levels were much higher with household
toilets, as compared to public facilities (Figures 3.34 to 3.36). There were no statistically significant
differences between the user satisfaction levels of men and women in either Gwalior or Pune.
However, the difference between user satisfaction levels for household toilets and public toilets
were statistically significant, for both men and women across both cities.



                      Figure 3.34: User satisfaction from public and household toilets: Gwalior

  0-24: Lowest: Very unsatisfied; they have major issues with service                                                           33%
                               delivery
                                                                                                                                33%


    25-49: Unsatisfied but managing: they have some issues but still                                                25%
                           forced to manage
                                                                                                                    25%


   50-74: Benchmark: Satisfied: they have occasional problems, but                                          20%
                       are satisfied generally
                                                                                          13%
                                                                                                              Groups of women using
                                                                                  8%                          Gwalior slum public
   75-99: Above benchmark: Quite satisfied: Problems are very rare
                                                                                                              toilets
                                                                                          13%
                                                                                                              Groups of men using
                                                                                                15%           Gwalior slum public
     100: Ideal: Very satisfied: Problems are very rare and are fixed
                                                                                                              toilets
                                   quickly
                                                                                                      18%




                                                                                                                                92
Figure 3.35: User satisfaction from public and household toilets: men and women, Gwalior


    Gwalior Public Toilets:
                                          33%                        25%                      20%           8%      15%
          Women

    Gwalior Public Toilets:
                                          33%                          25%                13%         13%         18%
            Men

Gwalior Household Toilets:
         Women                 1% 9%             24%                                            63%
                              2%
Gwalior Household Toilets:
                               1% 9%             25%                                          64%
          Men
                               1%
       Very Unsatisfied         Unsatisfied but managing         Satisfied         Quite satisfied     Very satisfied

          Figure 3.36: User satisfaction from public and household toilets: men and women, Pune


Pune Public Toilets:
                     2%       16%                          44%                                         39%
     Women

   Pune Household
                  2% 7%                                                      91%
   Toilets: Women

Pune Public Toilets:
                     1%       18%                            48%                                            34%
      Men

   Pune Household
                      2% 9%                                                  90%
     Toilets: Men

       Very Unsatisfied         Unsatisfied but managing         Satisfied         Quite satisfied     Very satisfied




SANITATION: KEY FINDINGS

Using public toilets poses unique problems for women and for users with special needs: Poor
quality public toilets pose problems such as safety risks, loss of dignity and, inconvenience for men
and women. However, women bear a disproportionate burden of these problems, particularly those
related to safety and loss of dignity. Women are exposed to harassment as they walk to and from
public toilets and even as they stand in line to use the facilities. Even more so, surveys and groups
discussion in both Gwalior and Pune revealed that even while accessing public toilets women face
the lack of privacy due to broken doors and windows and poor lighting. Women, who are the
primary caretakers of children, elderly and sick within the households, often, have to take two or
more trips every day to toilets or to sites of open defecation, which impacts their ability to work and
manage their households. These problems are even more severe for women during menstruation.
The public toilets in both Gwalior and Pune lacked the facilities to manage menstrual waste, and
women were forced either to seek other places to dispose off used pads and cloths, or leave them in
toilets where they cause blockages, bad smell and other related problems. Pregnant, women,
chronically ill, and elderly men and women, and users with disabilities face additional problems.
Public toilets lack accessibility features such as ramps and bars, which essentially forces users with
special needs to defecate in the open, exposing them to more safety and health risks.



                                                                                                                          93
Open defecation leads to additional problems: The poor quality of public toilets in Gwalior forces
men and women to defecate in the open, exposing them to risks such as being bitten by insects,
dogs, scorpions and snakes. Women face harassment while defecating in the open and also while
walking to and from the site. In both Pune and Gwalior, and presumably in other similar urban areas,
women cannot find unoccupied spaces for open defecation. In order to have some privacy, women
wake up early or wait until the middle of night to relieve themselves. This suppression causes health
problems including severe infections.
General dissatisfaction with public toilets: Public toilets are the accepted remedy for the problem of
open defecation in most developing countries (e.g., UN HABITAT, 2010). Construction of public
toilets has been supported through government and development partner initiative. While public
toilets are necessary in areas such as market places, bus and train stations, and other commercial
districts, they are also widely prescribed for poor communities in urban areas. This study, perhaps
the first large-sample and detailed documentation of the general dissatisfaction of the urban poor
with the services from public toilets, has confirmed findings from other small-sample surveys. Public
toilets are crowded and dirty, they also lack adequate water supply and soap for hand washing and
cleansing. Women, in particular, are dissatisfied with the safety and privacy afforded by public
toilets. There is also a general lack of proper operation and maintenance of these facilities,
exacerbating the problems, particularly for women and for users with special needs. Thus, public
toilets emerged as resources that are neither properly designed, nor appropriately managed. This
underscores the many and severe issues with sanitation service delivery in urban areas.

Political interest is a critical factor: Local councilors play an active role in ensuring sanitation
services to the urban poor in Pune. Slum residents call their local ward councilors in case of service
breakdowns rather than reporting it directly to the public agency responsible to maintaining the
toilets. On the hand, in Gwalior, a large proportion of the public toilets constructed under several
donor-supported projects have fallen into disuse. Discussions with the community revealed that
certain political interests were deliberately trying to ensure that these toilets are demolished and
the land is made available for other uses. In both cases, the political influence determines the level
of service available in the community. While the municipal corporation is responsible for the
operation and maintenance of most public toilets, users perceive elected officials and political
leaders as the key source of information and assistance in this sector. As with water supply, this not
only creates a ‘middleman’ between the responsible public agency and the consumers, it also de-
incentivizes the utility/local body from developing its own customer service system. Official
statistics may still record high access to public toilets in Pune and Gwalior: Despite all the problems
recorded with public toilets in Gwalior and Pune, they still meet the MDG and NSS definition of
‘access to infrastructure’. Thus, measuring service delivery rather than accessing infrastructure is
necessary. The information from discussions that inform this study clearly indicates that the
dissatisfaction with the current level of service and the consequences of poor service are
significantly worse for urban poor women. Thus, marking these women as ‘covered’ by the existing
poorly built and badly maintained infrastructure masks the urgent need for improvement. This also
highlights the importance of assessing public toilets using the framework of ‘service delivery’, rather
than infrastructure. A service delivery perspective focuses attention on issues normally ignored by a
construction-oriented approach to public toilets, i.e., the management of issues such as cleanliness,
lighting, ventilation, privacy, safety and reliability, all of which have important consequences for
gender and social inclusion. The fact that household toilets provide much better services, based on




                                                                                                    94
these parameters, should be an added incentive to focus on the provision of household toilets for
the urban poor.




                                                                                                    95
    4.      CASES STUDIED



4.1 INTERVENTIONS TO IMPROVE SERVICE DELIVERY
There is a small but growing number of innovative schemes in the UWSS sector that aim to improve
water and sanitation access for poor residents, particularly those who are currently excluded from
supply. In India and elsewhere, most innovations in the sector are isolated examples of programs
and policies implemented through NGO and donor support. This section of the report first presents
both the national and international innovations within the sector, and then provides a detailed
analysis of seven case studies from India. A concluding section presents the lessons learned from
these initiatives that can help address issues of gender and social inclusion in the UWSS sector.

IMPROVING ACCESS TO WATER SUPPLY SERVICES
The literature mentions two types of innovations in this sector – i) provision of piped water supply to
the households and ii) provision of improved shared water services. Of the two, literature clearly
indicates that providing good quality piped water into households is the preferred option, given the
positive impacts of this level of service for women and other socially excluded groups. If women and
children have access to household level water supply, they are able to save time, avoid conflicts at
water points, harassment, anxiety regarding supply, and also reduce risks of injuries and other
health problems.

International experience

There are few examples of initiatives promoting gender and social inclusion in the urban water
supply and sanitation sector. There are general guidelines for utilities to provide pro-poor services.
Rop (2010), for instance, writes that in spite of legal, social, technical, financial and institutional
obstacles that water and sewerage utilities face in reaching the urban poor, ‘utility managers should
recognize that the poor are legitimate and significant stakeholders in the business of water and
sanitation’. And, in order to do so, the utility should:
        ‘Embrace services to the poor informal settlements as a key utility corporate objective and
         articulate this within guidelines, strategies and principles in the provision of services to low
         income areas.
        Establish specialized pro-poor units within the utility. These units should also respond to
         gender-specific issues.
        Target the needs of impoverished men and women by helping to overcome financial
         barriers to access. This can be done by addressing water access through social connection
         policies, flexible connection payment terms, appropriate tariffs and where possible,
         targeted subsidies.
        Ensure that the needs of women and men are differentiated to enable interventions to
         respond to both. The participatory urban appraisals (PUA), adopted from the participatory
         rural appraisal (PRA) is a useful tool in this respect. The PUA differentiates the needs and
         priorities of men and women, the differences in workload for planning project
         implementation, and helps to analyze power differentials within the community.



                                                                                                        96
        Engage in partnerships between the utility and community based organizations and private
         entrepreneurs to penetrate and expand services within the dense, low-income settlements,
         and reduce household reliance on middlemen’ (Rop, 2010, p. 19).’
Apart from such general guidelines for utilities, there are also a few examples of strategies that focus
on gender and social inclusion in the international UWSS context. It is interesting to note that
literature on best practices is skewed towards the rural water supply and sanitation sector:
        Regulated vending: Given the proliferation of private water suppliers as a reality in most
         urban slums today, a recommendation made by analysts is to include them into a regulatory
         mechanism, for instance, by providing them with safe water to vend and monitoring their
         performance (Evans, 2007; WSP, 2009).
        Metered stand posts: A technical innovation from South Africa is the Bambamanzi system
         where users are given a smart card that can be topped up with credit (like a mobile phone
         SIM card) and inserted into public taps and household systems to provide water. When the
         credit is exhausted, customers can recharge them by paying as per their requirements.36

Indian experience

In 2008, the Ministry of Urban Development (MoUD) constituted a High Powered Expert Committee
(HPEC) to look at urban infrastructure and service. The HPEC recommended household-level water
supply for all urban residents, based on MoUD’s service-level benchmarking exercise. The examples
listed below, then, can be considered forerunners to a new national effort to improve urban water
supply services, especially for the poor.

Household-level water services

Some Indian towns and cities are beginning to provide household-level piped water supply to the
poor. Urban poor in these towns and cities have access to metered billing, concessions on user
charges, guaranteed time-frame for connection, improved water quality, and reliable or 24x7 water
supply.37 Some of these initiatives do not overtly address gender and social inclusion issues,
however, this study reinforces that women and socially excluded groups often have the least access
to public water supply. Even in cases where water is available, women and girls in urban areas face
safety and health risks as they attempt to access it. Thus, initiatives that address larger access and
service issues, also address some key gender-related concerns.
            24x7 supply: Selected slums in Nagpur and Kulgaon-Badlapur in Maharashtra and in
             Gulbarga, Hubli-Dharwad and Belgaum in Karnataka have been provided with 24x7
             water supply by the Municipal Corporation or a government parastatal organization
             (Maharashtra Jal Pradikaran in Kulgaon-Badlapur).
            Regular supply: Even if supply is intermittent, providing water at regular times and for
             adequate durations, as is the case in Bangalore slums and in the city of Jamshedpur, is
             important. Through such initiatives both, the Bangalore Water Supply and Sewerage
             Board (BWSSB) and Jamshedpur Utilities and Services Company Ltd. (JUSCO) have

36
   The scheme, however, ran into trouble in a few places where there were protests - because paying for water
violated the free basic water legislated in South Africa, where every citizen was entitled to 25 liters per day
free of cost – and was withdrawn in the early-2000s.
37
   All the cases listed in the Table are detailed in Volume II of this Report.


                                                                                                            97
            managed to considerably reduce the time and the effort spent by poor residents on
            collecting water.
In addition, some ULBs and utilities have introduced (or are planning to introduce) specific pro-poor
measures that also address key gender and social inclusion concerns:
           Fee Concessions: The three municipalities of Gulbarga, Hubli-Dharwad and Belgaum in
            Karnataka also introduced a specific concession for the poor: No deposit for new
            connections for houses less than 600 sq. ft. in area (Case Study 1 in Volume II). In
            addition to this, some public agencies, such as Raipur Municipal Corporation, have
            proposed to simplify the procedures and documentation required to apply for a water
            supply connection (NIUA, 2010, p. 3). This particularly benefits women who often don’t
            own land or housing, or have the necessary identification documents to get water
            connections. Easing the procedures and documentation requirements allows women to
            have water connections in their names, rather than in the names of their husbands,
            fathers, brothers or sons. Many cities, including Gulbarga, Hubli, Dharwad and Belgaum
            in Karnataka, discount the fee for new connections for poor households. Women
            typically earn less than men, and thus, face more financial constraints in accessing legal
            connections that have high initial costs. Discounting the connection fee allows more
            women to access piped water supply.
           Free basic water: Gulbarga, Hubli-Dharwad and Belgaum have also introduced a lifeline
            water supply of 8000 liters per household, on the lines of the Free Basic Water
            mandated by law in South Africa
           Connections in 48-hours: The Municipal Corporation of Vijayawada in Andhra Pradesh
            provides connections within 48 hours of customers paying the fee. This saves customers
            time and effort, and also benefits the urban poor.
           Citizen’s Service Centres: The Municipality of Kadapa introduced a dedicated service
            center to improve the interface between customers and the ULB. This removes the
            ‘middlemen’ – political leaders, councilors, and NGOs – from between the customers
            and the service providers.
In addition to these benefits, the ULBs that have introduced innovative initiatives targeted low-
income customers also reported other general benefits. The public agencies registered an increase in
billing and collections, reduction in non-revenue water (NRW) and fewer illegal connections.
Customers also noted improvements in water quality and a resultant reduction in water-borne
diseases and health-related expenditure.38

Improved access to shared water services

Although providing household level piped water supply is clearly the ideal intervention, improving
access to shared water sources such as hand pumps and public stand posts represents a significant
improvement for users that are currently at ‘no service’ or ‘poor service’ levels. Some examples for
such improvements in water supply are provided below:


38
  Only initiatives that benefit the urban poor, and particularly women and socially excluded groups are
mentioned here. Other improvements/initiatives by utilities that target financial indicators or focus on
increasing water supply have not been discussed. For more information on these see WSP, 2009a and 2009b.


                                                                                                       98
       Shared taps or yard taps: As part of the AusAID-supported Bangalore Water Supply and
        Environmental Management Project, a willingness-to-pay survey was conducted. After
        assessing the findings, BWSSB began a new initiative to provide metered shared taps to
        households. This allowed poor households to share the monthly water charges (BWSSB,
        2012).
       Free water through public kiosks: In Belgaum, Gulbarga and Hubli-Dharwad, through an
        NGO-initiative, water is being supplied free-of-charge through public kiosks.
       Hand pumps connected to underground sumps: The Chandigarh Municipal Corporation
        supplies corporation water underground sumps are supplied with good quality water by the
        Corporation and the hand pumps fitted on these sumps allow the urban poor to have 24x7
        access to good quality water.


IMPROVING ACCESS TO SANITATION SERVICES
International experience

Very few international initiatives have focused on improving women and socially excluded groups’
access to sanitation services. Two noteworthy cases are discussed below:
       Improving access to communal toilets (Nairobi): In Kiambiu, an informal settlement in
        Nairobi, a local NGO, ‘Maji na Ufanisi’ (Water and Development) has been working with a
        CBO to promote the use of communal pay-and-use toilet through several initiatives: (1)
        improved visibility at night by installing solar panels on the roof of the toilet structure; (2)
        increased toilet operating hours for women and children; (3) monthly family cards to provide
        affordable access to all family members for unlimited toilet visits in a day; and (4) arranging
        for teachers in the local primary schools to accompany children to use the toilet at regular
        interval (Rop, 2010, p. 20)
       Increasing awareness about sanitation: The Indonesia Sanitation Sector Development
        Program (ISSDP) promotes gender and social equality in the planning and implementation of
        urban sanitation through (1) awareness campaigns for the official working group on
        sanitation, for city officials and community groups to ensure that women’s voices are heard;
        (2) organizing separate awareness sessions for women, men and mixed groups; (3)
        dissemination of information on technical options and costs as well as hygiene promotion
        and education – all of which have changed the perspectives of participants with regard to
        gender and social equity (Rop, 2010, p. 21).
In addition to these examples, some studies have brought out interesting lessons in relation to
gender and social inclusion in UWSS. A 2008 WSP study in Cambodia shows that in latrine purchase
decisions, men are more interested in the technical aspects while women are more concerned about
convenience and safety. This underscores the importance of encouraging discussions between men
and women in the household concerning investment in toilets. In the case of public toilets, this also
highlights the importance of encouraging discussions between groups of men and women and the
public agency responsible to designing, operating and maintaining toilets. The WSP (2008) study also
found that in Cambodia children bringing messages to their parents from school teachers, who are
considered a credible and important source of information, influenced behavior change within the
household (Rop, 2010, p. 29).




                                                                                                     99
Other important lessons for addressing urban sanitation in a gender responsive way are (Rop, 2010,
p. 21):
       Partnerships between local government, local women’s groups and the private sector should
        be forged to overcome technical and financial barriers to women accessing urban sanitation.
       A sustainability plan can be introduced for the operation and maintenance of public pay-
        and-use facilities, allowing women to play a role in management.
       Access to and from household to public toilets should be planned in way that ensures the
        safety for women and children.
       Decisions around payment schemes should include the opinion of women and other socially
        excluded groups.
       School sanitation and hygiene in should be an area of focus for government schemes and
        programs. This will ensure that girls are not forced to drop out of school due to lack of
        adequate sanitation facilities.
       Practitioners should invest in processes that enable the inputs of men, women, and mixed
        groups. All sections of society can have complementary roles in the planning, decision-
        making and implementation of an optimal urban sanitation environment.’ (Rop, 2010, p.
        21)Hygiene behavior change should also be an area of focus as it is an important adjunct to
        sanitation improvements. In Nepal, for instance, the introduction of soap and hand washing
        in schools led to a 70% reduction in diarrhea. Evidence further shows that women are
        central to maintaining hygiene standards in the home and could play a vital role in reducing
        diarrheal rates by up to 50 percent (Curtis et al., 2003). This has led to the WSP supporting
        projects that promote hand washing in Peru, Senegal, Tanzania and Vietnam (Rop, 2010).

The Indian experience

Two types of actions can be taken to improve access to urban sanitation – i) providing household
level sanitation services; and ii) improved access to shared services. Although shared services do not
classify as ‘improved sanitation’ as defined by the JMP, such facilities are the ‘most commonly used
option’ for densely populated low-income areas where lack of space does not allow for household
level toilets (SIGUS, 2003, quoted in Allen et al., 2010).

Of the two, having functional toilets inside homes (or shared by a small group of households) is a
preferred option, given its impact on problems faced by women and other socially excluded groups
in accessing shared sanitation services. If there is access to household level service, women and
children do not have to walk to public toilets and can avoid associated problems including clogged
and overflowing toilets, non-functional doors, latches and lights, dirty surroundings, and safety risks.
Household level service also improves access for users with special needs, including for people with
disabilities, the chronically ill and PLWHA.

Building a toilet in an existing house is not as easy. It requires willingness to construct a toilet, the
availability of adequate space, connection to the public sewer system or construction of septic tank,
and access to relevant government programs. The examples listed below capture major efforts to
improve access to individual toilets and to good-quality shared sanitation services, especially for the
poor.



                                                                                                      100
Household-level sanitation services

All urban households, and especially the urban poor, need support to build household toilets,
ranging from finance to innovative technologies and models.
        Subsidies for toilet construction: The Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) of the
         Government of India provides subsidies to the urban poor to build household toilets.
         Although this is a nation-wide scheme, the major problem with all such subsidy schemes is
         that funds are released only after completion of construction, which requires poor
         households to first invest their own money and then seek reimbursement. This is especially
         difficult for women who are typically not in charge of family finances.
        Micro-finance for toilet construction: These schemes are almost exclusively NGO initiatives.
         Poor households are loaned money to build toilets. . There are two types of microfinance
         schemes: those that draw funds from the organized financial markets (e.g., banks and other
         financial institutions) and those that provide funds of their own (e.g., SEWA in Gujarat).
         Gramalaya, an NGO in Tiruchirapalli, worked with WaterAid India to organize institutional
         credit access for poor residents to construct household toilets through SHGs (WAI, 2006).
         The Community-led Infrastructure Finance Facility (CLIFF) in India provides funds for
         constructing toilets to urban poor households. CLIFF is funded by DFID and SIDA, managed
         by Homeless International, and administered by Cities Alliance., (Jack and Morris, 2005,
         quoted in Allen et al., 2010). Revolving funds by SHGs and other organizations are also used
         to provide loans to the urban poor for toilet construction.39
        Technical advice on toilet construction: SCOPE, an NGO in Tiruchirapalli focuses on urine
         diverting dehydration toilets (UDDTs) (also known as a composting toilet). These toilets have
         been customized for Indian conditions, and SCOPE has been helping urban households build
         UDDTs in areas with space and water availability constraints.40

Improved access to shared services

 In order to improve operations and maintenance, the management of public and community toilets
is often handed over to the community or to private companies. . Public toilets are either (1) built
and managed by ULBs, (2) built by ULBs but the operation and maintenance (O&M) is leased to
other agencies such as NGOs, SHGs, private contractors or individuals, or (3) funded, constructed,
operated and maintained by NGOs (WSP, 2007).
        Building new public toilets: For public toilets, several successful cases of Build-Operate-
         Transfer (BOT) contracts have been reported in urban India, especially from Delhi, Jaipur
         and Chandigarh. (WSP, 2007).
        Community contribution in building community toilets: SPARC, an NGO from Pune, has
         involved the local community residents, both in terms of knowledge inputs and financial
         contributions, in the design and construction of toilets (e.g., Baken 2010).

39
   The Co-operative Housing Foundation program in Honduras that provides a revolving fund for sanitation
loans, while the group of 22 Water Boards in Ghana that formed into the Association of Water and Sanitation
Development Boards to provide large scale community revolving funds, the revolving latrine fund provided by
Unicef in Lesotho, and the Orangi Pilot Project in Pakistan are further examples of micro-finance for toilets for
the poor (Sijbesma et al., 2010).
40
   M. Subburaman, Director, SCOPE, Tiruchirpalli. Personal communication, November 2011.


                                                                                                              101
        Handing over O&M of public toilets to SHGs: Some Municipal Corporations have been
         persuaded by NGOs to hand over the O&M of public toilets to local communities, creating
         ‘community toilets’. While early examples (1998 – 2003) include Mumbai, Pune, Kanpur,
         Bangalore and Hyderabad (Baken, 2010), more recent examples are in Tiruchirapalli,
         Gwalior and Kolkata (Table 4.2).
        Handing over O&M of public toilets to private companies: After realizing that that the
         private sector is willing to operate and maintain public toilets, more municipalities are
         handing over O&M to agencies such as Sulabh International. In some cases the municipality
         constructs new public toilets and then hands them over to a private agency (e.g.,
         Chandigarh Municipal Corporation: See Table 4.2); and in other cases, the public toilets are
         built and operated by the private agencies (e.g., Sulabh toilets in Hyderabad and Vijayawada
         Municipal Corporations: See Table 4.2).
        Improved design for new toilet blocks: There has been an increased focus on the design of
         toilet blocks. Some innovative design details include bathing cubicles, separate seats for
         men, women and children, and greater attention to social inclusion issues: e.g., special
         child-friendly features and other amenities such as hand rails, ramps, and raised platforms
         for people with disabilities and the elderly (Table 4.2).41
        Toilets for PLWHA: WaterAid India has been partnering the Uttar Pradesh AIDS Control
         Society to implement a project through NGO CREATE, a program that aims to help improve
         the quality of lives of PLWHAs through improved water supply and sanitation access. This
         scheme is providing WSS access at all care and support centres for people living with HIV
         and AIDS.42
In addition to these actions to improve shared sanitation facilities for the socially excluded, there are
other innovative features that have also been added:
        Selling advertising space to generate revenue: Delhi Jal Board (DJB) has initiated an
         innovative scheme as part of its BOT model to encourage private sector involvement. The
         empty space on the outer walls of the toilets is being sold to private companies for
         advertisements. This scheme has become a major source of revenue for the toilets, even
         more so that the user charges (WSP, 2007).
        Open defecation free slums: Another innovative scheme is to combine well- functioning
         public facilities with added support to individuals to build household toilets. Together, these
         strategies are expected to create open-defecation free (ODF) slums. (see cases 8 and 9 in
         Table 4.2)
        Monthly passes: In order to encourage use of community toilets, Sulabh International has
         introduced a system of monthly passes – and hence monthly payment – in Chandigarh (Case
         1 in Table 4.2).
        Child-friendly public toilets: Innovative design features that allow children to use public
         toilets more comfortably have been introduced in Mumbai and Pune (Cases 5 and 6 in Table
         4.2).

41
   Substantial work on designing and constructing toilets for the disabled among the urban poor has also been
done by the NGO Dushtha Shasthya Kendra (DSK) is from Bangladesh which has been working in the Dhaka
slums since the 1990s (see www.dskbangladesh.org).
42
   See http://www.source.irc.nl/page/53176 and WaterAid (2010).


                                                                                                          102
       24 hour water and electricity: The community toilets built by the Mumbai Corporation were
        handed over to the community to manage. However, before that, Mumbai Corporation
        made arrangements to provide 24-hour water and electricity supply to the public toilets
        (Case 6 in Table 4.2). While these are necessary provisions for all users, 24 hour electricity
        added to women’s sense of safety. As a result, more women are using these toilets.
       Incinerators: The Gwalior Municipal Corporation has added incinerators to the new
        community toilet complexes in order to address issues related to menstrual hygiene. (See
        for e.g., Fernandez, 2010).
       Connections to the main sewer line: Alandur Municipal Corporation in Tamil Nadu and the
        Navi Mumbai Corporation in Maharashtra have provided underground sewerage for all
        households in the Municipality, including slum households. As a result, all household toilets
        in the slum and all public toilets are connected to public sewer lines (see cases 9 and 10 in
        Table 4.2).
These are only the reported examples of program-level action to improve access to water supply and
sanitation services. A thorough state-wise review of actions by ULBs, NGOs and external support
agencies (ESAs) as well as documentation of promising cases not written up so far would help to
highlight these successful approaches.


4.2 CASE STUDY SELECTION
OBJECTIVES OF CASE STUDIES
The basic objective of analyzing the innovations in the UWSS sector was to examine their current
status, understand impacts, and evaluate sustainability. The larger aims were to see what roles
government agencies, private enterprises, and community residents can play in the success (and
failure) of such initiatives, and what resources and capacities are necessary to replicate these
strategies elsewhere. It is important to note that gender and social exclusion issues were not major
criteria in the design of the initiatives discussed here. However, even though GSI was not central to
these schemes, more benefits were noted for affected women and socially excluded persons; not
only in terms of access to improved water supply or sanitation, but also economic, health and social
benefits. The case study analysis presented in this section attempts to highlight these advantages,
and also emphasizes the role played by women, girls and socially excluded groups in the design,
implementation, maintenance, and operation of the schemes.

THE SELECTION PROCESS
During the literature survey, 25 cases were selected for further analysis (and summarized in Annex 2
of Volume II). After a quick review of the selected cases, seven initiatives focused on water supply
and 11 on sanitation were shortlisted, primarily for their pro-poor features (Tables 4.1 and 4.2).
Finally, seven cases were chosen for a deeper analysis - Agra, Belgaum, Tiruchirapalli, Pune, Gwalior,
Kalyani and Mumbai (Table 4.1 and 4.2)). The criteria for selection included any documented impacts
on gender and social inclusion issues and geographical diversity. First, the available literature was
analyzed to understand the problem, look at specific features of the strategy/scheme, examine the
implementation process, and study the impacts. Then, a detailed on-site follow-up was conducted to
examine the current status and sustainability of the initiatives.

                     Table 4.1: Choice of cases for further study: urban water supply




                                                                                                  103
     Additional service
                                  Pro-poor features              City             State            Agency
         features

1   24 x 7 supply            No deposit for new             Gulbarga,          Karnataka      KUIDFC &
                             connections for houses less    Belgaum                           Municipal
                             than 600sq.ft in area          Hubli-                            Corporations
                             Minimum supply of 8000         Dharwad
                             litres per household

2   Good quality &                                          Jamshedpur         Jharkhand      JUSCO
    reliable
3   Improved quality &                                      Bangalore          Karnataka      BWSSB
    reliable alternate
    day supply
4                            New connection within 48       Vijayawada         Andhra         Municipal
                             hours of paying the fee                           Pradesh        Corporation

5   24 x 7 supply                                           Kulgaon-           Maharashtra    Maharashtra
                                                            Badlapur                          Jal Pradikaran

6   24 x 7 supply                                           Nagpur             Maharashtra    Municipal
                                                                                              Corporation
7                            Citizen’s Service Center       Kadapa             Andhra         Municipal
                                                                               Pradesh        Corporation



                          Table 4.2: Choice of cases for further study: urban sanitation
        Additional Service Features        Pro-poor features            City          State           Agency

1    New public toilets built and          Monthly passes        Chandigarh       Punjab &       Municipal
     operated by Sulabh International      given to the urban                     Haryana        Corporation
                                           poor




                                                                                                               104
         Additional Service Features      Pro-poor features         City            State         Agency

2    Built & operated by Sulabh                                 Hyderabad        Andhra        Municipal
     International                                              Vijayawada       Pradesh       Corporation

3    Community toilet operated by         Empowerment of        Tiruchirapalli   Tamil Nadu    Municipal
     SHGs                                 slum women                                           Corporation
4    Rehabilitated public toilets         Livelihood for        Kolkata          West Bengal   Municipal
     Operated by SHGs                     women in charge                                      Corporation
                                          of maintaining
                                          toilets
5    New community toilet blocks          Built with people’s   Pune             Maharashtra   Municipal
     Child-friendly seats                 participation                                        Corporation &
                                          Caretaker’s room                                     SPARC (NGO)
                                          provided inside
                                          complex

6    New Community toilet blocks                                Mumbai           Maharashtra   Municipal
     constructed with 24-hour water                                                            Corporation
     and electricity supply, separate
     sections for men, women and
     children, bathing cubicles and
     urinals and children’s squatting
     platforms; community-operated
7    All slum residents in the city use   44 ODF slums          Kalyani          West Bengal   Municipal
     toilets, built at their own cost                                                          Corporation
8    100% sewerage network, 80%                                 Navi             Maharashtra   Municipal
     coverage in slums and goathan                              Mumbai                         Corporation
     areas; 100% treatment of waste
     water and plans to sell recycled
     water
9    All households and slums                                   Alandur          Tamil Nadu    Municipal
     connected to underground                                                                  Corporation
     drainage system
10   Community toilets refurbished by                           Gwalior          Madhya        Municipal
     the Corporation and handed over                                             Pradesh       Corporation &
     to the NGO to organize and train                                                          Sambhav
     SHGs for operation &                                                                      (NGO)
     maintenance




SELECTED CASES
Community Toilets
        Tiruchirapalli (Trichy): With support from WaterAID, a few NGOs began working with the
         Trichy City Corporation (TCC) to set up over 300 community-managed toilets (CMTs). This
         group also created a federation of the women’s SHGs, which was then trained to manage
         the CMTs.
        Mumbai: As a part of the World Bank supported Slum Sanitation Program (SSP), local NGOs
         began working with the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) to set up
         community-managed public toilets in selected slums in the city.


                                                                                                         105
       Agra: Through the Cross Cutting Agra Program (CAP), the Center for Urban and Rural
        Excellence (CURE), a Delhi-based NGO, began working with the Municipal Corporation of
        Agra and the Agra Nagar Nigam (ANN) to improve sanitation facilities in selected slums in
        the city.
       Gwalior: Through projects funded by various development partners, including UN-HABITAT,
        DFID and ADB, the Gwalior Municipal Corporation (GMC) built toilets across multiple slums
        in the city. Women have been appointed as caretakers for the newly built community toilets.
        GMC is also working with a local NGO to generate awareness on sanitation issues and to
        mobilize slum communities.


Household Toilets
       Kalyani: A social development consultant was hired to organize and train the health unit of
        the Kalyani Municipal Corporation to implement Community Led Total Sanitation (CLTS)
        initiatives in all 52 slums of the city. The aim was to make all city slums open defecation free
        by motivating households to build low cost private toilets without any government
        assistance.
       Pune: The Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) started a massive public toilet building scheme
        in the city, which led to government and NGO initiatives to improve access to household
        toilets in slums.
Water Supply
       Belgaum: The Belgaum City Corporation worked with United Social Welfare Association
        (USWA), a local NGO, to mobilize communities in 10 wards of the city where 24x7 was to
        going to be introduced as part of the World Bank supported Karnataka Urban Water Supply
        Improvement Project (KUWASIP).

METHODOLOGY
The case studies were analyzed using a simple process. First the available literature was reviewed to
understand the problem and the key features of the scheme. The intended impacts were also looked
at. This was followed by site visits to examine the current status and identify key players. Finally,
interviews with community residents, government officials and NGO staff were conducted. The data
from each of these sources was analyzed together to gain a more comprehensive understanding of
the design, implementation, impacts, sustainability and replicability of the initiative.



4.3 SUMMARY OF CASE STUDIES
    1. COMMUNITY TOILETS IN TRICHY

THE PROBLEM

Before the community toilet initiative, open defecation was the common practice in most Trichy
slums. Even in slums were public toilets were available; people were choosing to defecate in the
open due to the poor condition of the facilities. Women, in particular, were choosing to defecate in
the open due to the lack of adequate lighting and privacy in public toilets. Many of non-functioning


                                                                                                     106
or poorly functioning toilets were abandoned by the community. Women and girls also felt unsafe
around these abandoned structures.
The slum communities reported many health issues due to the lack of adequate sanitation facilities,
including high incidences of diarrhea and other water borne diseases. Stagnant waste water around
the toilets and no solid waste management added to the disease burden of the community. This also
had a greater impact on women who were responsible for taking care of sick family members,
particularly the children. There were no community-based organizations in Trichy slums that were
working to address these issues.

THE INITIATIVE

In 2000, the Collector of Trichy asked three local NGOs, SEVAI, SCOPE and Gramalaya to work on
sanitation issues in the city. At that time, the NGOs, in partnership with WaterAID India, had already
been working on sanitation issues in rural regions around the city. By 2001, 25 CMTs had been built
by the NGOs, another 75 by government agencies. Under the World Bank supported Tamil Nadu
Urban Development Program (TNUDP) Phase I, the 3 NGOs also provided residents with training to
manage the newly constructed community toilets. Subsequently, the TCC expanded the number of
CMTs to more than 180.

THE PROCESS

Gramalaya, SCOPE and SEVAI developed a systemic approach that would help in improving the
management of all community toilets.
        Key Roles for Women: As they entered each slum, the NGOs approached local women,
         discussing the initiative, getting ideas and suggestions from them, and finally, creating a SHG
         with at least 15-20 members. The women were involved in developing and running the SHG.
         2 members from the SHG were chosen to lead the Sanitation and Hygiene Education (SHE)
         team. Other SHG representatives became members of the SHE. Women played critical roles
         in each step – from forming the SHG to running the SHE team. The NGOs chose to work with
         the women because they continued to bear a disproportionate burden of poor sanitation
         service in each slum. This was also clear in the way women chose to champion sanitation
         issues as SHG and SHE team leaders and members. .
        Building and maintaining adequate community toilets: After the TCC built or rehabilitated a
         toilet; it also provided other necessary amenities. Toilets were equipped with running water
         and electricity. A caretaker was appointed to manage the facility. The caretakers were SHG
         members appointed for a fixed period (e.g., one day or one week). They were paid for their
         efforts, and usually worked for 6-12 hours shifts. They were also responsible for collecting
         user fees and for maintaining accounts.43 A security guard was hired to protect the
         infrastructure and to enhance safety of users. The prioritization of safety is indicative of
         women’s involvement in the process as this was one of their key issues related to the toilets.
         TCC also appointed a female and male cleaner each for women’s and men’s seats,
         respectively.
        Setting the fees: User charges were fixed by the SHGs and SHE Team members. Initially the
         fee was set at 50p per use. However, to ensure financial viability, the fee has been increased
         to Re 1-2 per use. There are some concessions and variations: children, elderly and single
         women are not charged for urination; bathing and washing clothes costs Rs 2-3. Some CMT


43
  In Dharmanathapuram CMT, women caretakers are paid Rs. 50 per day for an 8-hour shift and the CMT is
operated by women caretakers from 4 am to 11 pm, with a night watchman coming from 11 pm to 4 am.


                                                                                                     107
        management teams have also instituted a monthly card system, where a family pays Rs15-
        30 per month.
       Forming a Federation: The NGOs set up a registered federation of SHGs called Women’s
        Action for Village Empowerment (WAVE). Women who were a part of WAVE meet regularly
        to discuss relevant issues. Women also escalate these issues to relevant government officials
        as needed. Women who are a part of the SHGs and WAVE train new members. Women
        have reported feeling more confident of working within the community and with
        government officials as a result of their work on this project.
       Maintaining accounts: The NGOs helped the SHE group in opening a bank account. The SHE
        team members were also trained in financial record management. The SHE team keeps an
        updated user register and daily collection book. Monthly statements of income and
        expenditures are prepared at the end of every month and these are presented at the
        monthly SHE meetings. Any remaining funds are deposited in the bank account and can be
        used for minor repairs or other agreed upon activities. A majority of these activities are
        managed by women from the community. This allows women to gain necessary financial
        management skills and have a greater voice in deciding where additional funds can be used
        within the community
Increasing awareness and more usage of toilets: The NGOs and the SHGs also carried out extensive
awareness generation activities including, focus group discussions, door-to-door campaigns, cultural
programs and street plays, and regular meetings with community members. They used several
innovative methods to popularize the use of these new community toilets, including using children
as ‘sanitation ambassadors’ and a ‘Lucky Dip’, where 10 out of every 1000 coupons given to users
were awarded prizes. By 2011, through Gramalaya’s efforts, 167 community-managed toilets were
built, and 869 SHGs, and 66 SHE Teams were formed. 67 of the 167 community toilets in Trichy city
are maintained by women from SHGs, 30 are being run by other NGOs, and the remaining are
operated by private contractors.

THE IMPACTS

The positive impacts of the initiative were considerable:
       Relief to women and socially vulnerable groups: The most direct impact of the new
        community toilets was the convenience to users, especially to women, elderly, users with
        special needs, and children. Presence of watchwomen (female security guards) outside
        bathing blocks and toilets added to the women’s sense of safety and privacy while using
        public toilets. Some of the toilets included accessible features, such as ramps and handrails,
        which allowed people with disabilities to have access to the facilities.
       Empowerment of local women: For the women in SHGs, the impact was not being a part of
        the transformation of their neighborhood, but also the accompanying economic, social and
        health advantages. Women were trained in financial management and were responsible for
        maintaining accounts for the toilets. They had access to employment opportunities to
        women, such as toilet managers, caretakers, and security/watchwoman. They had a greater
        say what community development projects can be initiated using remaining funds after all
        the expenses for the toilets were met. Women were also expected to work with government
        officials and with leaders from other communities as a part of the SHG and WAVE.
       Improved hygiene and health: By 2011, 179 slums in Trichy had become ODF. The availability
        of a larger number of adequate toilet facilities with proper waste disposal systems has led to
        an improvement in hygiene practices among slum communities. With more people having




                                                                                                  108
        access to adequate sanitation facilities, incidences of diseases, and consequently, women’s
        burden of providing care to sick family members has also reduced
       Financial returns to SHGs: At least 35% of the 100 community toilets constructed during the
        first phase of this initiative are doing well financially. These are not only able to meet O&M
        costs; they also have additional funds at the end of the month to use towards other
        community development projects.
       Financial returns to TCC: From 2000 to 2005, the TCC was spending around Rs. 95,000 per
        year on O&M of public toilets. As a result of this initiative, where the management of the
        toilet is handed over to the community or to a private contractor, TCC is able to save these
        funds.
There were some negative impacts as well:
       Conflicts within SHGs: Within increasing revenues and profits from operating the
        community-managed toilets, and due to weak democratic procedures within SHGs, some
        leaders began to behave autocratically, negatively affecting the opportunities available for
        other women.
       Opposition from local councilors: Before the community toilets were constructed, local
        councilors protested against this scheme because it required poor residents to pay for
        toilets. However, as more people began to see SHG-managed toilets as financially profitable
        councilors sought to construct and take over CMTs. The councilors also created a set up
        where they appointed their own people as ‘managers’ of the toilets, and then took a share
        of the money collected through user charges. .


Despite these challenges, the Trichy CMTs have demonstrated the willingness of community
residents, and especially of women, to participate in schemes that improve their access to sanitation
services. The experience with SHG-managed toilets also highlights the critical role women play in this
sector.

REPLICATION WITHIN THE CITY

In 2005, the CMT model seemed poised for widespread replication in Trichy city. Today, however, it
is not considered the preferred model to deliver sanitation services for the urban poor. WaterAID
conducted detailed assessment of this model, but TCC has chosen to disregard many of their
recommendations. In addition, three major constraints to replication and sustainability of Trichy’s
CMT model are:
       Falling economic viability: Detailed surveys of CMTs showed that they were barely
        maintaining a surplus of revenue over O&M costs due to rising expenses and reduction in
        the numbers of users. Despite rising costs of electricity (SHGs now pay commercial rates),
        cleaning materials and salaries, the SHE Teams cannot raise the user charges (which have
        gone up from the initial 50 p to Re. 1 for local users and Rs. 2 for outsiders) for fear of losing
        customers.
       Delay in maintenance: Despite Gramalaya and the WAVE Federation writing several letters
        to the Commissioner, City Engineer, and other officials, it takes on average 1 year for TCC
        officials to address problems, such as blocked drains, septic tanks that require emptying and
        out of order pumps and motors. TCC officials claim that they lack funds because, as per
        policy, they are not supposed to spend more than Rs 1 lakh on a toilet and can only renovate
        the toilets once in 3 years. Members of the SHG have taken personal bank loans to keep the
        CMTs running, however, this does not ensure sustainability.



                                                                                                      109
       Political interference: Local councilors, in collusion slum lords interfere in the running of the
        CMTs. According to local NGOs, councilors arrange for public funds to build the toilets and
        but retain the O&M contracts. They also appoint slum lords to collect user charges in
        exchange for a share of the revenues. Women also reported that they were threatened and
        asked to stop operating CMTs.
The current Municipal Commissioner of Trichy intends to repossess all the public toilets in the city,
classifying them into three categories - (1) those that will pay the TCC for various services (electricity
and maintenance); (2) those that will not pay the TCC for services and (3) those whom the TCC will
pay. The commissioner intends to hand over the management of all these toilets to women’s SHGs
on the basis of a memorandum of understanding (MoU) that specifies concessionary terms for
electrical charges. He also intends to initiate other income generation schemes at the toilets, such as
plastic collection.

LESSONS LEARNED

       Empowered women can help expand the initiative: The experience, expertise and
        willingness of the women in Trichy played a critical role in the initial success of the CMTs.
        Women’s role needs to be incorporated at every stage of such projects, including design,
        and O&M. As was seen in this initiative, involving women at design stage, allows certain
        areas of priority, such as safety, hygiene, and child-friendly seats to emerge as central to the
        scheme. This initiative has also proven that the benefits women gain from access to
        adequate sanitation facilities, makes them ideal champions for such projects. In Trichy, the
        women from the WAVE federation have expressed their interest in operating and
        maintaining toilets in the city and also in expanding this initiative to other cities.
       Success depends on a combination of factors: Four key factors contributed to the initial
        success of the initiative: (1) a donor agency willing to support community-based
        management of public toilets in slums; (2) a set of NGOs willing to work with women to
        provide them with the necessary training and to build their capacity; (3) Federation of SHGs
        with the capacity and motivation to take over and manage public toilets in slums; and (4) a
        Municipal Corporation willing to work with NGOs in this initiative.
    Initial community mobilization requires time and support: Apart from signing of a tripartite MoU
    (between the NGO, the SHG and the Municipal Corporation), detailing the roles and
    responsibilities of each stakeholder , it is also import to dedicate time and effort towards
    community mobilization, particularly during the first 3-5 years after the CMTs construction.

    2. COMMUNITY-MANAGED TOILETS IN MUMBAI AND NAVI MUMBAI

THE PROBLEM

Although Mumbai has a large number of public toilets, these are still not enough to meet demand.
Currently, only 25% of Mumbai’s public toilet blocks are being used due to the poor condition of the
facilities. Toilets for the urban poor living in slums and other poverty pockets of Mumbai are much
worse than for higher socio-economic classes. The access to adequate sanitation service is the
lowest for people with disabilities, for women and children living in slums, and for elderly men and
women.

THE INITIATIVE
From 1995-2005, the Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai (MCGM) implemented the World
Bank supported Slum Sanitation Program (SSP). As a part of the initiative, 328 community-managed



                                                                                                      110
toilet blocks with more than 5,100 seats were constructed across various Mumbai slums. The toilet
blocks served over 400,000 people. The SSP included the following strategies:
       Demand-responsive approach: The toilet blocks were constructed based on demand from
        local slum dwellers. This became the basis to involve community residents in management
        of toilets.
       Community contribution: The community residents contributed at least 10% towards
        construction costs of the toilets. SSP was the first initiative under which, community
        residents were asked to contribute towards the capital costs.
       NGOs for community mobilization: MCGM contracted NGOs to inform local communities
        about the benefits of community-managed system, and to motivate them to take on the
        management of public toilets.
       Community management and women’s participation: NGOs, including Society for the
        Promotion of Area Resources (SPARC), set up Community Based Organizations (CBOs) within
        the slums to manage the toilets. These CBOs, largely made up of women’s groups, were
        responsible for collecting user charges and for ensuring that the toilets were cleaned
        regularly, water was made available, and minor repairs were attended to in a timely manner.
        SPARC also partnered with the Water and Sanitation Program (WSP) to encourage women
        participation in this initiative through a women’s empowerment program (Mahila Milan).
       Flexible ‘community’ toilet designs: The men and women from the community chose a
        flexible design for the toilet blocks. This was accepted by the MCGM despite higher costs
        because the residents were willing to contribute 10% towards the higher capital costs.
       User charges: Monthly passes were issued to families at an average of Rs 50 per month, and
        occasional users such as vendors, shopkeepers and passers-by were charged Rs 2-5 per use.
       Sanitation maintenance fund: A sanitation maintenance fund was created from
        community contributions and the money was deposited in an account held jointly by
        the CBO and the MCGM. The MCBM only issued building permits for community
        toilet blocks after 50% of the required funds were collected and deposited into the
        joint account and a technically-sound plan for the toilet block was endorsed by the
        community. Because the CBOs included representatives from women’s groups,
        women from the communities were largely responsible for overseeing the sanitation
        maintenance funds.
       Caretaker’s room: As an incentive, the caretakers were offered a small residential space
        within or near the toilet blocks.

IMPACTS

Besides considerable relief for slum residents, particularly the women and children, the SSP also
provided other benefits.
       Improved services for women: Typically, SSP toilet blocks had 10 toilet cubicles with
        separate sections for men and women. This allowed women more privacy. For every 10
        toilets, a bathing room was also provided, which added to women’s sense of comfort, safety
        and dignity.

       Facilities for children: Most toilet blocks included seats or platforms for children. This
        became a norm during and after the SSP.




                                                                                                     111
   Open and functional for longer hours: Most SSP toilet blocks stay open from 5 am till
    midnight, longer than other municipality-run public toilets. The longer hours allow women
    and children more flexibility in terms of when they can use the facilities, and add to the
    likelihood that they would reach work or school on time.
   Water and lights: In 1990, the MCGM made water supply and electricity provision
    mandatory for all community toilets. SSP toilets are equally equipped with municipal water
    supply and electricity. These toilets also have a ground (or underground) level storage sump,
    and an overhead water tank with a pump.
   Reduction in diseases: Across all the slums visited in Mumbai and Navi Mumbai, residents
    reported a reduction in incidences of gastric diseases as a major benefit of public toilets. This
    has added benefits for women, who are primary caregivers for any family members that are
    unwell.
   Community mobilization and women’s participation: NGOs and MCGM staff mobilized the
    local community and continued to do so in subsequent MCGM interventions. Women, who
    formed a large part of the CBOs, were encouraged to participate in the initiative. With initial
    assistance from local NGOs and development partners, women’s groups were involved in
    the day to day management of the toilets.
   Local Employment: Many toilets provided regular employment to one family and, in some
    cases, hired up to two full-time persons.
   Financial viability: Even though most operators complained about poor cost recovery or non-
    payment by a few members, they also mentioned that the revenue generated through user
    charges was able to cover the O&M costs of the toilet. Toilet blocks constructed near busy
    areas or roads also earned additional income through non-regular users.
   Federation of local CBOs: The CBOs managing the SSP community toilets formed a
    federation called the Shauchalay Vyavasthapak Sanstha Mahasangh. Since its inception, the
    members of the federation have increased from 328 to the current, 553. This is in part due
    to the emphasis on building community toilets on the SSP model. The federation guides
    government and civic agencies on community management in other states and cities and
    also plays an important advocacy role in the sector.
   Mainstreaming of innovations and lessons: Several of the innovations promoted during the
    project period, including design as per local requirements, equal seats for men and women,
    room for a caretaker above the toilet, child-friendly designs, and management of community
    toilets through CBOs, have been adopted into the routine functioning of the Solid Waste
    Management Division of MCGM. The lessons learned from the SSP informed the MCGM’s
    2005 Guidelines on Community Toilets. The Navi Mumbai Municipal Corporation (NMMC),
    which was formed in 1992, was quick to learn from the SSP experience and promote
    community toilets in slums. This initiative added to the SSP model and the NMMC toilet
    blocks included innovative features such as provisions for the elderly and for people with
    disabilities. All NMMC toilet blocks constructed since 2006 include seats for users with
    special needs. 51 such seats are already under operation.
   Concessions for the disabled and elderly: In line with MCGM guidelines, community toilet
    operators do not levy any user charges on people with disabilities. Some CBOs have also
    exempted elderly users from payment.
   Shift in attitudes of local councilors: The capacity and strong commitment demonstrated by
    CBOs contributed to a shift in the attitude of local councilors. At the beginning of this
    initiative, councilors were skeptical of the capacity and commitment of community




                                                                                                 112
       residents. However, after witnessing the success of SSP, councilors are championing
       community-managed toilet blocks.

REPLICATION WITHIN THE CITY

Several challenges are impeding the replication of the SSP model in Mumbai.
      Community mobilization: The NGOs, and later, the CBOs were responsible for community
       mobilization. Initially, these organizations faced multiple hurdles as residents resisted both
       user charges and community contributions. The key concern for community residents was
       they would invest money in the project and it would not be completed. Even though people
       have fewer concerns now, after the initial success of SSP, approaching new slums can be
       challenging and the municipality requires support from NGOs and CBOs for this task.
      No facilities for menstrual hygiene: Despite many innovations, menstrual hygiene has not
       addressed in the design of community toilets. This poses special challenges for women and
       girls who have to find alternate places to dispose used sanitary pads or are forced to leave
       them in the toilet cubicles, which affects the cleanliness of the facilities.
      Inadequate facilities for the physically challenged and elderly: Although the provision of
       facilities for persons with disabilities and for elderly men and women has been recognised as
       a need by the authorities and operators, it has not become an essential part of community
       toilets.
      Late payments and defaults: Most CBOs managing community toilets reported that
       members pay their dues late - often towards the end of month, and at least 2-10% of the
       members do not pay at all. Default rates can be as high as 30-50%, and an equal proportion
       pays late. Some operators also tried quarterly passes, but these have not worked. Due to
       late payments and defaults, and to ensure that all residents pay per use charges, some
       operators are gradually abandoning the monthly pass option.
      No institutional priority in obtaining electricity and water connections: Despite the promises
       from MCGM that connections for community toilets would be given priority, CBOs continue
       to face problems getting access to water and electricity. After the SSP, no priority provision
       of water or electric services was made available for newly-constructed toilet blocks. At this
       time, such initiatives depended on a few individually motivated MCGM staff. :
      Electricity at high and rising commercial rates, leading to payment defaults: Increasing costs
       of water, electricity and cleaning material, and reducing revenue from users are affecting
       the financial viability of community toilets. The main factor behind financial losses is the
       rapidly-rising electricity costs that are charged at commercial rates. CBOs running
       community toilets in poor slums are facing severe problems, where the electric connection
       of some of toilets has been disconnected due to non-payment of bills. This is particularly
       challenging for women who are caught in a double bind, where they either have to use
       unsafe public facilities or are forced to defecate in the open. Lack of electricity also impacts
       availability of water supply and affects overall hygiene and cleanliness of the toilets.
      Poor maintenance is a real threat to sustainability: MCGM has made no budgetary provision
       for the maintenance of community toilets, assuming (as per the SSP condition) that the
       community will pay for all maintenance work. Accordingly, the MCGM has also stopped
       recruiting halalkhors (scavengers) to clean the toilets. Due to higher expenses and lower
       revenue, daily cleaning, routine repairs of broken seats, doors, windows, taps, and electric
       bulbs is not being done. The lack of maintenance of infrastructure and services is leading to
       low usage and rapidly reducing revenues. .




                                                                                                    113
       Misuse and takeover by contractors: Due to financial constraints, several CBOs have
        reportedly handed over the management of their toilet blocks to private contractors. Due to
        misuse of such arrangement by slumlords, the NMMC has adjusted its approach and has
        formally endorsed a model where NGOs are contracted for O&M and all public toilets are
        handed over to private contractors.
       Undeclared profits but residents don’t care: There are cases of local CBOs making an
        undeclared profit from toilet blocks, particularly those located near busy roads, but a recent
        review indicated, the residents did not care so long as they had access to an affordable and
        adequate service.

LESSON LEARNED

More Active Role for Women
Over the years, the achievements of the SSP are gradually fading, in part due to the declining
financial viability of community toilets and the perceived lack of continued support from NGOs. Even
though women are a part of CBOs and seen as the main beneficiaries of this project, they don’t play
an active role in the design and management of toilets.
An alternative institutional set up may increase the potential sustainability and replicability of this
model. One possible option is for the MCGM to work with CBO Federations, which also include
women’s groups, created in Mumbai slums by NGOs such as SPARC and YUVA. These CBOs can
partner with the government agencies to modify the design as per need and scale up the SSP model
in Mumbai.


   3. CITY-WIDE SANITATION IMPROVEMENT IN AGRA
THE PROBLEM
Most of the slums in Agra have poor sanitation and drainage facilities, with only a few functioning
public toilet facilities and most individual toilets discharging into open drains =. The drains, too, are
open and narrow and often blocked due to solid waste deposits. The situation is somewhat better in
areas where local residents can afford to hire private cleaners. A majority of slum residents choose
not to use the existing pay per use public toilets due to financial constraints. Sanitation is thus the
most pressing issue in a majority of Agra slums. Agra Nagar Nigam (ANN), the municipal corporation
of the city, is responsible for solid waste management and wastewater drainage. However, ANN
lacked the resources to develop and implement a city-wide sanitation improvement plan,
particularly one that would address the problem in slums.

THE INITIATIVE

From 2005 to 2007, the Center for Urban and Regional Excellence (CURE), a Delhi-based NGO,
worked with ANN and other local NGO partners to design and implement the Cross-Cutting Agra
Program (CAP). The CAP is a livelihood and slum-upgrading pilot program that focuses on developing
heritage tourism around lesser-known monuments in Agra that are linked to the Taj Mahal and the
Agra Fort. It focuses on 5 slum communities that are clustered around these monuments.

THE PROCESS

       Community mobilization: Local NGOs supported the entry into slums. These NGOs were
        responsible for engaging with the slum communities through rapport-building exercises
        such as small group meetings at street corners during transect walks and discussions with


                                                                                                     114
    community leaders. Eight young volunteers (boys and girls) were selected and trained in
    participatory techniques and, with support from CURE staff, there completed a rapid survey
    of key community concerns. Focus group discussions were held with women and young
    residents to further understand sanitation and livelihood concerns and to develop a road
    map for interventions. These efforts resulted in local leaders forming strong CBOs. Three
    types of groups were created within the communities, and women played a central role in
    each.
        o   Sanitation Groups: These were large groups that included men, women, and youth
            from different parts of the community. Multiple groups were formed in slums where
            the community was divided on the basis of topography or caste and in slums with a
            large population size. .
        o   Livelihood Groups: These groups included only women who were interested in
            income generation activities.
        o   Self Help Groups: These groups were formed to encourage savings and improve
            access to small credit.
   Baseline survey: Using participatory methods, a set of key sanitation indicators was used to
    develop a community baseline.
   Community-level action plans: The Community Sanitation Groups discussed key priorities
    related to solid waste management, toilets and wastewater drainage. Using inclusive and
    innovative planning methods, the Groups also developed Action Plans for each community.
   Interventions: The Action Plans mapped sanitation interventions to key community
    concerns.
   Solid waste management: Many initiatives including clean-up drives, awareness campaigns
    (in the slums and in schools), door-to-door garbage collection, and organic waste
    composting were started. A community sports event was also organized to increase
    demand for newly-cleaned land to be used for recreational purposes.
   Community and household toilets: A major part of the awareness campaign was to inform
    and educate the community about open defecation and toilet use. Activities to promote the
    construction of new community toilets were organized. Through a dialogue with ANN,
    rehabilitation work for existing community toilets was initiated. People were provided with
    access to government subsidies for low-cost household toilets. A Toilet Savings Group was
    set up to raise funds for toilet construction before any government subsidy was actually
    received.
   Wastewater drainage: The major activities to improve drainage included setting up an
    elementary wastewater drainage system in one slum and mobilizing resources for a new
    wastewater treatment system in another.
   Capacity development: Through exchange visits, meetings, training workshops and small
    group discussions, CURE staff, along with other NGO partners, organized capacity building
    activities for i) local communities - focused on disseminating knowledge on sanitation
    behaviors and practices, and on new livelihood skills – and ii) government officials, both
    field-level functionaries and senior officials – focused on improving the planning and
    management of civic services in slums and poor communities.
   Activities with the ANN: The NGO staff worked with ANN to develop a Zero Waste Zone
    within their offices. Around 150 persons from ANN’s sanitary staff participated in a 2-day
    training workshop on improved and effective waste management techniques and public-
    private partnerships in solid waste management. The training was led by Global Micro



                                                                                                 115
       Enterprise Development (GMED) - a USAID-supported program that aims to develop micro
       enterprises on solid waste management issues and also focuses on the implementation of
       the MSW Rules, 2000.

IMPACTS

The immediate impacts of the sanitation component of CAP include not only the physical
infrastructure developed for solid waste management, waste water management and toilets–- but
also the empowerment of the local women, men and youth.
      Improved access to basic services and improved environments: The cleanliness campaigns
       and door-to-door waste collection activities of the CAP have resulted in a cleaner
       environment in slum communities. Residents value this change and are maintaining it. As a
       result of these changes, the residents are more willing to build toilets. The toilets have
       particularly benefited women. .
      Empowered women: Women’s groups (SHGs), youth groups, and children’s groups
       participated in all the awareness campaigns, hygiene promotional activities and were also
       responsible for dealing with the local authorities. Women were trained in the organization
       and management of SHGs and were also managing bank accounts, dealing with clients,
       negotiating with men (within their own families and in the community), and engaging with
       local authorities. More and more women are in positions of responsibility and decision-
       making through the SHG groups in Agra’s slum communities.
      Empowered communities: In three slums, the communities were organized into groups that
       discussed and participated in project implementation. These groups were also responsible
       for finding ways to address problems that had been identified. This involvement has
       increased the residents’ desire to cooperate and participate in project related activities.
       People are more willing to invest in their communities and to work independently and with
       public agencies to improve the quality of their lives.
      Strengthening of local NGOs: Local NGO partners were trained in community mobilization,
       negotiation, and in planning and running awareness campaigns. NGOs were received
       technical skill training. As a result of the skill enhancements, the NGOs were able to engage
       with ANN to both negotiate and facilitate programs that improve water supply and
       sanitation access in Agra’s slums.
      Attitudinal change within the ANN: A lasting impact of the CAP has been ANN’s continued
       positive responses towards the slum dwellers. Ann has engaged with CBOs and civil society
       representatives to create the city’s future development plans. After CAP, ANN was involved
       in two major initiatives, the City Development Strategy (CDS) and the City-wide Slum
       Upgrading Plan (CSUP). These plans were developed by ANN, with support from CURE and
       funding by Cities Alliance. These new initiatives are being used to prepare proposals to
       receive Government of India funding (from the JNNURM and RAY) in order to programs
       continue the working in the slums of Agra. ANN also set up nine task forces to focus on key
       areas of concerns. These task forces work closely with communities and have become the
       drivers of the slum development plans, demonstrating that CAP also led to an increase in
       ANN’s capacity to respond to the needs of the poor.

REPLICATION WITHIN THE CITY

City Development Strategy and Plan: In 2005, after CURE began working with ANN to implement the
CAP, Cities Alliance approved a small grant to prepare the CDS for Agra. The aim was to develop
inclusive and pro-poor development plans for the city. Almost at the same time the Government of


                                                                                                  116
India announced the JNNURM, which required the preparation of a City Development Plan as an
initial step to unlocking substantial development funds. The CDS was accordingly modified to focus
on building institutions, capacities, policies and reforms and also on setting up demonstrable
participatory slum upgrading models (along with CAP).
       Multi-stakeholder governance: The idea was to widen the group of stakeholders and create
        a synergy between various developmental efforts. The leadership, however, always rested
        with the local government. Thus, apart from a Steering Committee at the level of a District
        Magistrate, nine Task Forces were set up within the ANN that included representatives from
        the private sector, NGOs, CBOs and other elected representatives on (1) Finance and
        Taxation; (2) Local Economic Development; (3) Urban Governance; (4) Heritage and Tourism;
        (5) Traffic and Transport; (6) Sewerage and Drainage; (7) Solid Waste Management; (8)
        Water Supply and (9) Urban Poverty. As part of the Technical Support, a Project
        Implementation Unit and e-governance mechanisms were set up.
       Participatory planning for slum upgrading: At the ward-level, platforms were created for
        local government and civil society to engage with slum communities. The aim was to build
        consensus, set priorities, and develop proposals to improve basic services. As a result of this,
        the slum residents had a voice in developing city planning strategies.
Lessons Learned
Using participatory methods, government staff conducted a city-wide slum mapping exercise in all
432 slums of the city. The data was entered on to a GIS-based database called the Community Based
Information System (CBIS). Based on the information, a detailed project report for upgrading
sanitation facilities in the Kuchchpura slum, including the Decentralized Wastewater Treatment
System (DEWATS) was prepared and implemented (see Khosla, 2011b for a detailed description of
this initiative).
CAP also led to greater awareness and increased capacity – for government officials, local field
functionaries and senior officials across multiple agencies including ANN, DUDA, Agra Jal Nigam,
Agra Jal Sansthan, and Agra Development Authority. For the women living in the slums, in particular,
there was an increased participation in decision making processes related to water supply and
sanitation service, which not only addressed some of their key concerns but also allowed them to
become more socially and economically engaged within the community. Other officials and slum
residents from different communities began demanding similar measures for constituencies and
neighborhoods, respectively. It was perhaps this strength, coupled with the effective multi-
stakeholder partnership led by ANN – that led to the larger initiative of city-wide slum upgradation
planning in Agra.

City-wide Slum Upgrading Plan

In 2009, the Cities Alliance approved a 4-year project to develop a city-wide slum upgrading plan
(CSUP) for Agra. This project, based on a proposal from the ANN, enabled the local government
agencies to prepare for JNNURM Funding and to pilot the use of the planning process outlined in the
National Urban Sanitation Policy. The project, which ended in April 2013, was implemented by ANN
and DUDA, with financial and technical assistance from Cities Alliance, World Bank, USAID and the
National Institute of Urban Affairs. The draft CSUP was produced in April 2012 and was described as
a ‘strategy plan by the people that has evolved through organic community processes and
community-local government compact and by creating space for an informed discussion’.
The CSUP created Slum Level Action Plans for all 432 slum settlements in the city. Using participatory
processes and based on several rounds of multi-stakeholder discussions, a detailed plan was
created, specifying actions to be taken in several sub-sectors, budgetary requirements, phasing,
institutional structures and responsibilities. NGOs facilitated the process and in partnership with


                                                                                                    117
local government staff and elected representatives, the local communities developed these plans.
This was directly linked to the CAP and used similar strategies for public participation including:
       Street corner meetings: Meetings between residents living on the same street were
        organized. The aim was to identify and prioritize their needs and concerns.
       Street meetings: Meetings were organized in different parts of the settlement, these
        brought together women, men, youth, religious and cultural groups and especially the
        usually excluded groups of elderly, people with disabilities, and women headed households.
        It was noted that bringing in the views of the poorest and the marginalized was critical.
       Planning with participatory tools: Community resource maps were created to spatially
        locate the problems. Then, transect walks were organized to visit these troubled areas, and
        chapatti diagrams were developed to prioritize problems. Finally, matrixes, seasonality map
        analysis, and other tools were used to analyze reasons for these problems.
       Community planning: The information gathered was discussed in large community meetings
        to identify and agree on common issues, create Neighborhood Groups, and finalize the Slum
        Level Action Plan. The process helped identify community leaders, and create issue and
        interest-based groups, including self-help groups (women alone or mixed), livelihood groups,
        and water supply, sanitation, and infrastructure committees (responsible for the oversight
        and maintenance of these services in the area). The plans discussed included ‘quick-win’
        actions, resource mobilization to fix existing infrastructure, and developing systems for
        better waste management.
       Ward meetings and Ward Plans: Ward-level multi-stakeholder meetings were held to share
        community issue and plans with community members, Ward Councilors, area engineers,
        ANN officials, and officials of various line departments. Representatives of neighborhood
        groups came together to discuss cross-cutting issues such as high schools, health centers and
        transport services. These meetings flagged critical issues such as land ownership pattern,
        access to basic civic services and infrastructure gaps.
       Area Plans: Finally, the plans from spatially-contiguous Wards with common features were
        grouped into 31 Area Plans.




   4. COMMUNITY AND HOUSEHOLD TOILETS FOR THE URBAN POOR IN GWALIOR
THE PROBLEM

In 2003, ADB conducted a survey in Gwalior and women identified lack of adequate household and
community toilets as the main developmental issue for their communities. A mapping exercise in
229 ‘poverty pockets’ of Gwalior (114 notified slums and other squatter settlements) found that 115
public toilets in these poverty pockets were in poor condition and at least 40% of the households did
not have access to toilets and were forced to defecate in the open. Only 12 of the 115 public toilets
had water supply and a large share of the toilets that were operating well were managed by Sulabh
International. Lack of water and poor maintenance were cited as the key reasons for the dismal
conditions of public toilets.

THE INITIATIVE




                                                                                                  118
UN HABITAT’s Water for Asian Cities (WAC) Program was linked to the ADB-funded Urban Water
Supply and Environmental Improvement Project in four cities of Madhya Pradesh (Bhopal, Gwalior,
Indore and Jabalpur). The aim of the program was to improve pro-poor governance in the water
supply and sanitation sector. One component of the WAC Program was the Slum Environmental
Sanitation Improvement (SESI), which sought to address the issue of sanitation in slums. A tripartite
partnership was formed between UN-HABITAT, Water Aid India (WAI) and the Gwalior Municipal
Corporation (GMC) to implement SESI as a pilot. Sambhav, a local NGO, was also engaged. The pilot
covered 16 slums in Gwalior and included approximately 5,000 households that lacked access to
water supply and sanitation infrastructure.
THE PROCESS
In 2005, Sambhav started the process of community mobilization, group formation, capacity
building, and awareness generation through meetings, trainings and exposure visits. The aim was to
work with slum communities until they were ready to participate in the implementation of the
program.
       Community mobilization: Initial meetings were held in the slums to generate awareness
        about the initiative, gain peoples’ acceptance and build trust. Initially, the slum residents
        were suspicious and were not willing to discuss or change their more convenient practice of
        open defecation. Over time and through repeated visits, however, Sambhav staff managed
        to convince the community to participate in the initiative.
       Group formation: Women were first persuaded to come together and form Self Help Groups
        (SHGs) with 15 members each. This was done for both for economic self-reliance and also to
        help with further awareness generation. Gradually, women started to get together and men
        also began to come forward. It took approximately six months to form the first women’s
        SHG (in Laxmanpura). Thereafter, Community Water and Sanitation Committees (CWASCs),
        locally called Nirmal Samitis, were formed and registered under the Society Registration Act
        of 1973. These 10-member groups included people who were committed to changing the
        sanitation situation in the slums.
        Capacity building: Sambhav staff conducted regular training in the slums, ran education
        campaigns in schools and also took community members for exposure visits to Trichy in
        order for them to see how women were managing community toilets in the slums.
       Awareness generation: Sambhav, in collaboration with WAI and GMC, organized and held
        exhibitions, rallies, camps and stakeholder consultations in selected slums to raise
        awareness on water, sanitation and hygiene issues. In addition, 51 elected representatives
        and 60 MC officials from the four cities were taken to Trichy, Namakkal and Bangalore to
        learn about pro-poor initiatives in sanitation practices.
       Infrastructure improvements: Once the communities were ready to move forward,
        discussions were held on what infrastructure was needed, associated costs, and distribution
        of expense and responsibilities. Once the plans were finalized, a Memorandum of
        Understanding (MoU) was signed between the CWASC (Nirmal Samiti) and the GMC.
        Construction included sewerage pipelines, household toilets and community toilets. GMC
        also provided Sanitation Revolving Funds through Sambhav, in order to give loans to
        individual families for the construction of household toilets. These funds were also used to
        help pay the agreed community contributions towards the construction of new sewer lines.
        Where household toilets could not be constructed (e.g., due to space constraints), the GMC
        agreed to construct (or refurbish existing) public toilets and hand them over to the CWASC
        or the SHG for construction supervision and maintenance. Monthly charges were fixed at a
        minimum of Rs. 10 per household for daily users and Rs. 15 for occasional users.




                                                                                                   119
      Role division for construction and maintenance: The GMC made it clear that it would only
       construct or refurbish community toilets and then hand them over to the beneficiaries for
       maintenance –: all O&M and replacement costs were to be borne by the beneficiaries.
By 2008, the sewerage pipelines, individual toilets and community toilets had been constructed and
the community toilets had also been inaugurated and handed over to the Nirmal Samitis to manage.

IMPACTS

      Improved water and sanitation infrastructure: As a part of SESI, substantial improvements
       were made in the water and sanitation infrastructure in 16 slums: 20 community toilets
       (including the one in Laxmanpura), 105 individual toilets (20 using a loan from the Sanitation
       Revolving Fund), 3 school toilets, 15 soak pits, 4 roof rainwater harvesting systems and 3,200
       m of branch sewage lines along with manholes, inspection chambers, and household traps
       were constructed. For the first time since its inception, the GMC had also provided water
       supply to 3 slums.
      Revolving funds: This micro-finance facility was meant to help households who did not have
       the necessary funds to construct toilets. The loan amount was set at Rs. 2000, to be given to
       the individual household by the SHG (who would be then responsible for recovery); a pre-
       requisite was for the household to show intent by producing Rs. 1000 as its own
       contribution, before taking the loan. While the facility was used only by 20 of the 105
       households who built toilets as part of the SESI in Gwalior, it is a promising option for cash-
       strapped families. Although the GMC was to administer these funds, there is little
       information on how they are being used currently. It is likely that the money is with the GMC
       but, without guidance on how it should be used; the funds are not being circulated among
       SHGs and CWASCs as originally envisaged. Or, it could be that the ‘original purpose’ of the
       funds – i.e., to support the costs of building household toilets or laying new sewer lines - was
       considered accomplished and hence the fund has been closed and the money reallocated.
       Using these funds to revive the community toilet, for instance, requires administrative
       approval. And, due to transfers of officials and the movement of elected representatives, the
       institutional memory around the program was depleted, indicating that the funds may have
       been forgotten. Empowered and aware community: A total of 22 SHGs had been formed
       along with 8 Nirmal Samitis, all of whom had been trained under the initiative - and who
       then helped to organize and implement 28 rallies and 12 hygiene camps. In addition, 20
       masons and 20 mechanics also received training (Sambhav, 2014). Engineers and officials
       had ‘organized various capacity building programs to equip the community with the
       necessary tools and skills for implementation, operation, maintenance and management of
       schemes, contracting, supervision of works and account keeping; sewer cleaning, plumbing
       and other engineering skills; operationalizing of billing and collection mechanism’ (GMC and
       UN HABITAT, undated).
      Awareness among officials: A significant impact of this project was that GMC’s the largely
       negative impression of community participation was dispelled. Due to the successful
       construction of the sewer lines in three slums, the GMC engineers began to accept that
       community participation could help in the implementation of infrastructure projects. This
       also generated significant political will for pro-poor investments. At the time of this project,
       the Mayor, Mr. V. N. Shejwalkar, acknowledged that ‘community participation is a must’ and
       a social component must be included in all engineering projects. Many officials also took
       personal interest in the initiative.
      Knowledge sharing among legislators: Apart from exposure visits to see pro-poor initiatives,
       in 2007, a ‘knowledge sharing partnership’ called the Legislators Forum for Human



                                                                                                   120
        Development was set. However, with the change of legislators this has not been continued
        in any effective manner. Large number of publications: The UN-HABITAT has written
        multiple reports and documents related to this initiative. Unfortunately, most of these
        pertain to the initial part of the initiative, and there are virtually no reports on the impacts or
        sustainability of the program. The SESI and the Gender Mainstreaming work have been well-
        publicized but little is recorded about their effectiveness, after being handed over to the
        concerned MCs.
       Open defecation free slums: As a result of this initiative, one slum in Gwalior achieved ‘Open
        Defecation Free’ status by building household toilets wherever it was technically and
        financially feasible, and a community toilet for all the rest. Although even Marimata slum
        achieved this status in Gwalior (as did 14 other slums across the four project cities),
        Laxmanpura was well-covered in the media for winning a National Water Award for Urban
        Sanitation in 2008.

REPLICATION WITHIN THE CITY

       Scaling up to 10 more slums: The 16-slum SESI was a demonstration pilot and was scaled up
        to 10 more slums within Gwalior, taking the total to 26 slums. Sambhav was in charge of
        implementing this project. The outcomes were similar including greater awareness,
        increased community participation and the construction of a large number of household
        toilets and bathing rooms.
       No further work on community toilets: The critical issue of maintaining community toilets,
        however, remained unaddressed. The community toilets that had been the focus of national
        and international attention in 2008 and 2009 are now poorly maintained.
       New tripartite agreement: The poor condition of community toilets in Gwalior slums came to
        light during this study. The new Municipal Commissioner has agreed to help and, at his
        initiative, a new tripartite agreement was signed in May 2013 between Sambhav, the GMC
        and the women’s SHGs. In June 2013, a tender was floated and the contract for the O&M of
        20 slums was awarded to Sambhav. GMC pays SHGs Rs. 5,700 per month for the O&M of
        each of the 20 community toilets. This money is sourced through Sambhav. However,
        following the departure of the Municipal Commissioner, there has been political opposition
        to the arrangement and till date, the agreement and tender have not been operationalized.



    5. COMMUNITY-LED TOTAL SANITATION IN KALYANI

THE PROBLEM

Kalyani is a township 65 km north of Kolkata in West Bengal. The men and women in Kalyani’s slums
l used to defecate in the open (Box 1). Several free household toilets had been built in the slums but
these were constructed badly, at inconvenient locations, and had no water supply. As a result, the
residents were not using these toilets and were continuing to defecate in the open. Even though,
due to the government subsidies, new household toilets were being constructed free of charge, they
were poorly maintained. Open defecation continued, leading to health problems among slum
dwellers.

THE INITIATIVE




                                                                                                       121
In 2005, the Change Management Unit (CMU) of the Kolkata Urban Services Program (KUSP)
suggested that Kalyani pilot the community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach to address the
rampant open defecation in the slums. The Kalyani Municipal Council (KMC) submitted a proposal to
the Health Unit of the CMU to bring Dr. Kamal Kar, a noted Social and Participatory Development
Consultant and the proponent of the CLTS, to undertake an 8-month pilot in five slums of Kalyani.

THE PROCESS

      Initial support from the KMC: Prior to the pilot, KMC’s Board of Councilors met and decided
       to:
            o Give full support to pilot the CLTS approach in five of the most backward slums in
                 Kalyani
            o Completely stop subsidized construction of household toilets
            o Provide extra support to open defecation free slums.
      Forming the team: KMC asked Dr. Kasturi Bakshi, Municipal Health Officer of KMC, to
       coordinate the pilot, and engaged two sociologists as assistants.
      Participatory approach: Dr. Kar led the team that tested the approach, first in one slum and
       then in the remaining four. The team engaged men and women from each slum through
       larger group discussions, small group meetings and in individual interview. Using
       participatory tools, they slowly created awareness regarding issues of open defecation,
       associated diseases, and coping costs of poor sanitation. They also talked about the costs of
       building toilets versus health related expenditures.
          Facilitated community sanitation profile appraisal and analysis: through the following,
               o   Transect walk: walking through the slums to assess the situation
               o   Defecation area mapping: Each community analyzed the sanitation profile of the
                   slum on a social map that was prepared on the ground. All homes were denoted
                   by cards, which had the names of the head of households written on them. Each
                   household indicated the area used by their family for open defecation.
               o   Fecal-oral contamination analysis: The team explained to the community how
                   open defecation could lead to the contamination of food and water.
               o   Feces calculation: The team shared with the community how much feces was
                   produced by a single person in a day and by all the individuals in the community
                   every day. This was used to estimate the level of contamination in the local
                   environment.
               o   Calculation of household medical expenses: The amount of money spent on
                   medical expenses per month per family was calculated, including doctor’s fees,
                   expenditure on medicines and other treatment for water-borne diseases.
               o   ‘Handing over the stick’ by facilitators to the community: At the point where the
                   triggering ‘ignited’ community response, the community was told that this issues
                   was their problem and it was up to them to address it without any outside help.
                   .
          Addressing community perceptions: The analysis revealed that local people were fully
           aware of the ill effects of open defecation but there were four critical knowledge gaps:
           they did not know (1) ‘how open defecation led to diseases and various health-related
           problems’, (2) the concept of a sanitary toilet – that would ensure that the oral-faecal
           route of disease transmission was broken; (3) that sanitary toilets can be constructed for



                                                                                                 122
               as little as Rs. 250 (given that KUSP used the estimate of Rs. 9,900 per toilet) and (4) that
               medical expenditure could only be reduced if everybody used sanitary toilets.
              Selecting ‘Natural Leaders’: The team focused on picking up ‘natural leaders’ – local
               women and men who were able to motivate others to build toilets on their own. As
               these ‘natural leaders’ began to reinforce the messages from the team, the community
               began to become convinced and started constructing toilets.
              Follow up: In order to ensure that all the questions and doubts of the community
               members were addressed, follow-up work was done in slums where the initial triggering
               had taken place. In some slums, many people decided to start constructing low cost
               toilets immediately after the triggering, while in others, the community selected a few
               volunteers to first build toilets.
              Continued triggering: With the help of Natural Leaders who had also been trained, the
               team continued ‘triggering’ activity in other neighboring slums. A notable result was that
               the Natural Leaders from one slum where the work had been progressing well began
               working independently in five other communities. IMPACTS
          Initial impact: In May 2006, four slums were declared open defecation free (ODF). A
           workshop was held in Kalyani Municipality on the same date to present results and review
           progress. Not all the ODF slums were from the five communities initially selected for the
           pilot. Instead, slums where the triggering activity had achieved the best results eventually
           achieved ODF status. Households that had constructed their own toilets did so without any
           payment or subsidy from the government or the donor-supported KUSP. Household
           members used their own funds for all the hardware used in the toilets, including pans, p-
           traps, pipes, and material for the superstructure. The key impact of this initiative was the
           behavior change within the community, evidenced by the increasing number of people using
           toilets as opposed to defecating in the open.
          Growing numbers of toilets: By July 2006, slum dwellers had used their own resources to
           build 866 household toilets and three more slums had been declared ODF. The CLTS process
           had also been initiated in 10 more slums. .

REPLICATION WITHIN THE CITY

Expanding the team: As the triggering progressed from 5 to 10 slums, the core members realized
that they needed to expand their in order to achieve their goal of making all 52 of Kalyani’s slums
open defecation free. They added Community Development Workers under the Swarna Jayanti
Sahari Rojgar Yojna (SJSRY) and more Natural Leaders from the communities. A third of the new
members added were women. The women were first trained in CLTS methods and then became
trainers and facilitators in other slums.44 In order to allow the Natural Leaders to learn more about
CLTS, they were also taken on an exposure visit to Maharashtra where a similar initiative had been
started.
Addressing problems: The team faced several problems on the ground. In some slums, other NGOs
had already built free toilets and the residents were not willing to pay for toilets anymore. In some
cases, the local politicians had promised residents that they would receive money to build the toilets
and, as a result, the residents were not willing to pay.
Resistance to change: The women were more easily convinced than men regarding the merits of
household toilets and the problems related to open defecation.45 Local political leaders in the slums,

44
     Dr. Shibani Goswami, personal communication, 8 May 2013.
45
     Dr. Kasturi Bakshi, personal communication, 7 May 2013.


                                                                                                        123
who felt threatened by the community’s initiative and participation, continuously raised objections
and tried to derail the triggering process. But each of these was addressed and overcome by the
team. When the Natural Leaders faced any issues, they reported it to the team leader during weekly
review meetings and either the team leader or the Municipal Councilors intervened to ensure that
the leaders were able to complete their work without problems.
Rewarding the achievers: The core team persuaded KMC to reward the communities’ initiative after
realizing that project money was being saved and individuals were contributing their own resources
to construct toilets. Thus, the first slum to be declared ODF was given three solar lamps as an
incentive (Anon, 2008; Kar, 2006) to continue their work. Competitions for the cleanest ward, slum,
school and class, were also conducted and the winners were awarded with prizes.
Monitoring achievements: As a part of this initiative, a unique type of was initiated. The
photographs of ward councilors were posted on KMC’s notice board and next to these, colored cards
indicated the status of the their wards – green for wards where at least one slum had achieved ODF
status; yellow for wards where the triggering had been initiated; and red where no work had been
started. Councilors updated this information during monthly review meetings. In addition, there
was community monitoring system managed by the team, including household health workers
(HHWs), selected Natural Leaders, and persons responsible for the Municipal Ward. The CMU was
responsible for monitoring the overall progress in all the slums.
Achieving the objective: In December 2008, two years after the start of the pilot, all 52 slums of
Kalyani municipality were declared open defecation free. This status was confirmed not only by the
Ward Councilors but also through community monitoring. Identifying natural leaders and building
capacity of community residents to build, operate and maintain toilets is also a significant
achievement of this approach.
Some residual challenges need to be addressed before this approach can be replicated or scaled up:
            o    Institutional capacity building: The community facilitation process was driven by an
                 individual. As these champions left the project, the community involvement, and as
                 a result, the initiative started to falter.
            o    Single-pit toilets not connected to septic tanks or sewage lines: Single-pit latrines
                 were constructed. The family dug a simple pit, purchased a pan for Rs 250, and built
                 a superstructure using materials such as cloth, plastic sheets, etc. It is expected that
                 such a pit would fill up in 3-5 years, which leads to important questions of how the
                 sludge will be managed in order for the toilets to remain functional. The choice of
                 technology and also the ‘closure’ of the initiative reflect that the objective was only
                 to stop open defecation. Although it would be expensive, connecting toilets to
                 sewer lines or septic tanks is important to ensure safe sanitation access in the long
                 term.

    6. HOUSEHOLD TOILETS IN THE SLUMS OF PUNE

THE PROBLEM

In the 1990s, the public toilets in Pune city were typical of the rest of India - few in number, broken
down, dirty and smelly. While men could defecate in the open, women, adolescent girls and children
faced many problems. The situation was worse for pregnant or menstruating women, elderly
women, and for women with disabilities.

THE INITIATIVE



                                                                                                      124
In 1999, the Municipal Commissioner of the Pune Municipal Corporation (PMC) began a multi-
stakeholder initiative to demolish and rebuild public toilets in the city. NGOs constructed new toilets
and, within four months, handed there over to communities to manage. The community residents
also appointed a caretaker who lived in a room above the toilet. The PMC’s construction drive is still
on-going, and has also sparked the interest of local NGOs including Shelter Associates, and other
public agencies such as the Slum Rehabilitation Authority. Both organizations began separate and
distinct initiatives to build houses with private toilets for slum dwellers.

IMPACTS

       More public toilets: There have been seven successive public toilet building phases from
        1990 to 2012, with regular annual budgets of around Rs. 20 crores per year. As a result,
        more than 15,000 individual and community toilets have been built in Pune.
       Relief to slum dwellers: At this time, almost all Pune slums have public toilets. While, all
        community residents use these facilities, women across all slums have expressed their relief
        at having access to toilets. Even though the situation has improved, access to toilets in non-
        notified slums is still poor.
       Badly maintained public toilets: Despite the large numbers of public toilets in slums, very
        few are maintained well. Most toilets are barely usable, and women complained that due to
        the lack of adequate lighting, they could only use the toilets during daylight hours. The
        caretakers are not doing any maintenance work.
       Dwindling income of caretakers: With more users building individual toilets, the total
        number of caretakers has decreased. The income generated from pay per use toilets is not
        sufficient for the caretakers and they often choose to have a second job, leaving a family
        member in charge of the toilets.
       Smelly despite water and caretakers: All public toilets in Pune have municipal water supply
        for at least 3-5 hours per day and many also have caretakers; however, the toilets are still
        dirty, indicating that the water supply was inadequate and the caretakers were unable to
        maintain the facilities due to the large number of users.
       Increasing awareness – more household toilets: Slum dwellers are aware of the advantages
        of having access to adequate water supply and sanitation services. Women, in particular,
        expressed the need for better toilet facilities.
       Increasing awareness – responsive Councilors: For both household and public toilets, the
        municipal councilors had taken responsibility for the maintenance and operation of the
        facilities. The slum residents call their councilors for any issues with their toilets. The
        councilors then contact PMC and ask the staff to fix the problem within 24 hours. This is also
        a political strategy by councilors to gain votes and earn goodwill.
       Open defecation still rampant: More than 10 years after PMC’s initiative began, open
        defecation is still common. In non-notified slums, at least 40% of residents still defecate in
        the open.

REPLICATION

New initiatives of Shelter Associates

Shelter Associates was involved in the initial round of toilet provision in Pune slums but did not
participate in the subsequent rounds of the initiative. Instead, the NGO developed its own initiative,
based on community mobilization and participation.


                                                                                                   125
        Building toilets in slum houses: Shelter Associates works with local communities, mobilizing
         them, creating awareness, and motivating residents to build household toilets using small
         loans. Shelter Associates generated the money for these loans from various donors.46
        Building housing societies for slum rehabilitation: After devastating floods in Pune, Shelter
         Associates began working with affected slum communities and helped them plan and design
         a housing community. They also interceded with the PMC on land allocation issues on behalf
         of the slum dwellers. Women took the lead in this initiative. They included several innovative
         features– such as registering the land in the name of the women, ensuring adequate space
         in the design to allow light into the building, and gaps between houses to allow vehicles to
         pass. However, the construction for this project has not started, and it remains caught in
         bureaucratic and political tangles.

New initiatives of the Slum Rehabilitation Authority

PMC’s initiative to build household toilets led the SRA to improve and streamline its own work in
providing toilets for slum communities using various existing government schemes.
        Self-funding scheme for slum rehabilitation: SRA created a self-funding scheme,
         incorporating several lessons learned from other successful initiatives (including that of
         Shelter Associates). Realizing that that the poor could not afford new housing without
         subsidies or bank loans, SRA engaged private builders to build multistoried apartment
         buildings for the slum dwellers free-of-cost and. The private builders were told that once the
         residents had all moved, they could use the slum land for commercial purposes. The scheme
         appears to be a ‘win-win-win’ as the slum dwellers get a new house with all the amenities
         (water, electricity and a toilet) free of cost, the real estate developer makes a profit on the
         initial investment (including buying the land and temporary housing for the slum dwellers)
         from the sale of commercial properties, and the government eliminates slums without
         spending its own money.
        Rehabilitation of slum households: The SRA of PMC used the RAY and BSUP programs of the
         BSUP to rehabilitate slums into new apartments with built-in toilets. This option has many
         positives– slum land becomes available for new urban construction at prime locations, slum
         households get access to better housing with water supply, electricity and sanitation
         services, environmental cleanliness improves as slums are removed and so on. But progress
         has been slow for various reasons, including political vested interests, poor design of new
         housing (e.g., light, ventilation, space between buildings) as well as poor maintenance, apart
         from problems in interpreting and reconciling the provisions of RAY and BSUP to implement
         these on a large scale and quickly.


        Advantages of this initiative over the RAY and BSUP: This initiative specified that the
         registration of the apartment be in the name of the owners, and preferably the women, to
         ensure that they have security of tenure. It led to the saving of valuable urban space and
         allowed for the re-design of city spaces so that roads could be widened for ambulances and
         fire trucks to come into the new housing complexes.
        Slow progress: Despite the positive features of this initiative, the progress on the ground has
         been slow: only 10-12 buildings have been constructed and handed over (and none with the
         innovative features discussed above). The main reasons for slow progress are:

46
  Apart from Pune, Shelter continues to work in the nearby town of Sangli, using their own approach based on
close interactions with the slum communities to create household toilets.


                                                                                                        126
            o    SRA provisions that restrict the scheme from in situ redevelopment of slums that
                 have been built on private land before 1 January 1995;
            o    Political interference on account of the 10-15% of the families in every slum is
                 unable to produce the documents necessary to benefit from the scheme.


    7. 24x7 WATER SUPPLY IN BELGAUM

THE PROBLEM

Belgaum City Corporation (BCC) faces an acute water shortage, and this lack of water was
disproportionately felt in the slums of the city that were spread across all its 58 wards. Most of
Belgaum’s slum residents work in the informal sector and the lack of water directly affected their
earnings. People, and particularly women, complained that they lose at least 2-3 days of work per
week as they waited or searched for water.

THE INITIATIVE

In 2004, Belgaum, Hubli-Dharwad and Gulbarga were chosen as the sites for the World Bank-
supported Karnataka Urban Water Sector Improvement Project (KUWASIP). This project sought to
pilot 24x7 water supply in 10 demonstration zones in Belgaum. As part of the implementation
arrangements, in 2005, the Belgaum City Corporation (BCC) appointed a Social Intermediation and
Communication Specialist (SICS) and also contracted an NGO called United Social Welfare
Association (USWA) to carry out community development activities in the demonstration wards. The
NGO was also responsible for conducting a baseline survey. Initially, the NGOs contract period was
two years, but this was extended to four years, until March 2010.

THE PROCESS

       Forming the team: USWA formed a 12-member community development team headed by
        two women. The team also included eight Ward Community Facilitators, three of whom
        were women.
       Forming community-based organizations: Following the three-month baseline survey, USWA
        began work in the 10 selected Wards, including 12 slums. The first steps included meeting
        local leaders and forming CBOs, which then appointed ward-level leaders. Among the 10
        ward leaders, at least six were women.
       Initial opposition: Initially, the community development team met with considerable
        resistance not only from the local slum dwellers, but also from some local NGOs protesting
        against privatization of water, claiming that the PPP was turning water into a business and
        would eventually over-charge customers. The Head of USWA met with the local NGOs and
        argued successfully that the initiative should be given a chance.
       Crafting strategies: The team sat the SICS at BCC and analyzed the situation. Together, the
        formed a plan to engage local leaders and political leaders. Then next step was to form CBOs
        and assign Ward Leaders who could assist these organizations. They also initiated a
        community mobilization and awareness generation program.
       Building capacity: The community development team organized two-day residential
        workshops where the roles and responsibilities of various stakeholders were discussed.




                                                                                                 127
       Ongoing support was provided to the teams for the first two years of the project through six-
       monthly refresher training and monthly review meetings.
      Creating awareness: Based on the realization that behavior change was critical for the
       success of the project, awareness campaigns were a major part of the community
       development work. In addition to workshops and group discussions, the community
       development team also carried out random house visits, audio-visual programs and street
       plays (jathas). Events were planned to provide information on project impacts on health
       issues. Handbills, wall posters and brochures were printed for distribution following
       meetings with the local community.
       The awareness programs provided information on:
           o   Project provisions
           o   The pro-poor policy and its benefits
           o   Tariff recovery and long term benefits
           o   Capital cost recovery
           o   Shifting of water meters and connections
           o   Cleanliness, health and hygiene
      The Health and Hygiene campaign: USWA engaged the Health & Hygiene Education Officer,
       of the local Civil Hospital to manage awareness campaigns in slum and non-slum areas. The
       key message was the positive impacts of continuous water supply on health of all residents,
       especially women and children.
      Building trust and gaining confidence: Team members helped resolve individual concerns
       and problems within the community, including leakages, low water pressure, meter
       problems and billing issues.
      Broadening the initiative: Three key innovations were added (1) the involvement of schools
       and college students (2) workshops for ward-level committees and other associations; and
       (3) A Women’s Development Program to create new skills and promote livelihood activities
       for the local women. These helped to increase the number of volunteers, reduce political
       opposition, and to convince the women that the project was prepared keeping in mind their
       key concerns related to livelihood.

Impacts

      24x7 metered household supply of good quality water: More than 3,500 individual metered
       household connections (2057 Below Poverty Line (BPL) households and 1524 Above Poverty
       Line (APL) households) were installed.
      Regular monthly charge payments: By March 2010, 89% of households had no payment
       dues. Meters are read between the 1st and 5th of every month, billing is done between 6th
       and the 10th and all bills are paid by the 25th of the month.

The major impacts benefiting women and children were related to household incomes, health and
school attendance.
      Increased household incomes: With piped water supplies on household premises, women no
       longer needed to walk to collect water or stay up at night. They were able to spend more
       hours on income-generating activities. On average, a sample of women surveyed by USWA
       recorded a 60% increase in their incomes. The Women’s Development Program also brought
       in additional income to many slum households.




                                                                                                   128
       Reduction in incidence of water-borne diseases: According to data from the local health
        center, from 2007 to 2010, there was a considerable reduction in the incidence of water-
        borne diseases in the 10 demonstration wards of Belgaum.
       Improved school attendance: With no more obligations to wait for or collect water, children,
        and particularly young girls, were able to attend school more regularly.


LESSONS LEARNED

       NGO involvement is critical: This initiative indicates that NGOs play a critical role in
        facilitating community development. Government staff is not equipped to play this role.
       Capacity building of teams is vital: The strength and commitment of the team is vital to the
        success of the community development initiative. The Community Facilitators acknowledged
        that because of the training they received and due to the support from the SICS they were
        able to resolve the day-to-day issues in their work areas.
       Start awareness activities before technical activities: It is important to start community
        development activities before the technical activities, such as replacing existing
        infrastructure and laying of pipelines. Increased awareness about the project can address
        initial concerns of the community residents and local leaders.

REPLICATION WITHIN THE CITY

Following the success of the pilot project in the 10 demonstration wards of the city, the BCC passed
Resolution number UDD 81/PRJ/2008 in 2008 to extend the scheme to all Wards in the city. Tata
Consulting Engineers Ltd. have been chosen through a competitive bidding process to oversee the
technical work and Veolia Water has been given an extension of their contract to continue operation
and maintenance activities in the 10 demonstration wards in the city. UWSA’s contract has not been
renewed nor has the NGO been asked to continue its work.
USWA has been retained to work on an ADB-funded Water Supply and Sanitation project two cities
neighboring Belgaum - Nippani and Gokak. UWSA began work in these two cities after the technical
work had already been initiated. This led to multiple challenges of dispelling community mistrust and
creating awareness about the advantages improved access to WSS after the project had already
commenced.




                                                                                                     129
KEY FINDINGS FROM CASE STUDIES
This section discusses the key findings across all case studies, focusing on lessons related to gender
and social inclusion. It briefly discusses the thematic lessons across water supply and sanitation,
before discussing general findings from these cases.

WATER SUPPLY

Only one example of innovations in water supply were looked it as a part of this study. In part, this
reflects the political priority given to water for urban poor since 2005. More and more water supply
interventions have been mainstreamed into existing programs and schemes. For example, donor-
funded improvements in water supply infrastructure were implemented in Gwalior, and in Pune the
municipal council increasingly provides household level supply. However, these improvements mask
the challenges urban poor still face in accessing adequate water supply, which was evidenced by
some of the other, sanitation focused cases. Access to water supply also played a critical role in the
success of sanitation initiatives. For example, in Gwalior, some of the public toilets became unusable
due to the lack of water supply, indicating that to improved sanitation services in any low income
community, water supply issues also need to be addressed.

The Belgaum case study demonstrated that 24x7 piped and metered water supply can be
implemented in urban Indian conditions, and that slum dwellers can be motivated to participate in
and support such an initiative. The main lessons learned for other, similar initiatives are that (1)
NGO-led facilitation is critical, (2) these activities have to start before the technical work of digging
and laying pipelines, and (3) institutional capacity building, awareness generation and community
mobilization are vital to success of such an initiative.


Sanitation
The case studies encompassed both individual toilets and community facilities.
Individual Toilets: Individual toilets were seen as the best possible option for all residents,
particularly to address gender and social exclusion issues. Having toilets within households allowed
women to avoid harassment, keep the facilities well maintained and also saved their time, money
and effort.
Community-managed Toilets: The case studies indicated that even if all slum households have or use
individual toilets , there would be a need for community toilets – for tenants (whose landlords do
not give them access to household toilets), passersby (auto rickshaw drivers, couriers and delivery
men, bus drivers and conductors, etc.) and visitors (e.g., for marriage functions or festivals). Building
adequate community toilets requires looking at gender-differentiated needs. Toilets need to be built
in safe locations, have adequate lighting, and people should be able to lock the doors and windows.
Other features that increase the accessibility of the toilets, such as handrails and platforms, should
also be available. In order for community toilets to be usable, adequate water supply also needs to
available. Budget overlays and responsibilities for management, operations and maintenance of
toilets need to be clearly delineated
Even though there are important findings related to the water supply and sanitation sector emerging
from each of these case studies, there were several common findings, particularly related to gender
and social exclusions and institutional arrangements.


                                                                                                       130
   Sanitation is a key issue for poor women: These case studies clearly indicated that women
    are most affected by lack of sanitation facilities and, thus, serve as champions of any
    initiatives that are focused on improving access to toilets. These case studies also highlighted
    that women’s sanitation issues are not simply that of access – they tie into land ownership,
    employment access, school and college attendance, and voice & participation.
   Improved household level water supply benefits women significantly: It was clearly
    indicated in Belgaum that, while 24x7 water supply benefits all community member, poor
    women and children are most benefited. Women don’t have to wake up at different times
    during the night to collect water, they don’t have to walk to distant water sources, or miss
    work in order to collect adequate water for their families. Because women don’t have to
    walk to public standpoints, they can also avoid facing harassment. Children lose fewer school
    days. Women and children are less vulnerable to diseases and, women and girls also lose
    fewer days taking care of sick family members.
   Women can be Agents of Change but need support: Women are consistently seen as the
    main beneficiaries and key stakeholders. This implies that women continue to play a central
    role in the water supply and sanitation sector. However, while this highlights the importance
    of acknowledging gender, it also emphasizes the deficiencies in these initiatives. Women are
    seen as the main beneficiaries across all case studies, however, only in a few cases do they
    play a more active role in decision-making processes. Roadblocks to women’s participation
    are also addressed only in a few cases, for example in Pune where women’s lack of land
    ownership is seen as a hindrance to building household toilets and is addressed as a part of
    the project. Allowing women to become a part of various stages of the project rather than
    treating them simply as beneficiaries may lead to increased community participation and
    sustainability, while also addressing some critical social and economic issues.
    Almost all the case studies indicate that slum women are willing to come forward to take
    responsibility for the initiative within their local communities and even in the city (e.g.,
    Trichy and Gwalior). They have faltered only when faced with political and financial stress
    due to the local government withdrawing support. Thus, women need a deeper role and
    increased support and this can eventually improve the success of the schemes.
    Individual ‘champions’ drove the initiatives: In almost all cases, there was a visionary
    bureaucrat or politician who supported the initiative from within the MC. In Trichy it was the
    Municipal Commissioner; in Mumbai, the Officer on Special Duty and the then Municipal
    Commissioner of Thane; in Gwalior, the Mayor and the Municipal Commissioner; in Kalyani,
    the then Chairman of the Board of Municipal Councilors; and in Pune, the then Municipal
    Commissioner were the drivers of the projects. In almost all these cases, the initiative died
    out when these ‘champions’ left the city or changed positions. This implies that while initial
    acceptance and success can be generated by one individual political or bureaucrat, the
    institutionalization of such innovations is important for sustainability. A well-functioning
    local agency that can support these schemes without political intervention is essential to
    their success.
    In only two cases – Agra and Pune - were capacity building activities for public agencies seen
    as an important part of the project. It is also interesting to note that the sanitation work in
    Agra was eventually mainstreamed into the ANN’s functions, which allowed for it to
    continue beyond the life of the initiative.



                                                                                                131
   No successful examples of scale up: Most of these initiatives were meant to be
    demonstration pilots – but the subsequent scaling up that was envisaged never took place.
    In Trichy and Gwalior, for instance, the initial MoU between the MC, the women’s group and
    the NGO was path-breaking at the time, but these were time-bound (e.g., 1 year), were not
    renewed– creating financial problems for women’s groups, who, as a result, were unable to
    maintain the community toilets. In Mumbai, the drive to support CBOs, listen to and address
    their problems and provide regular maintenance of the community toilets has ended with
    the construction or rehabilitation of the toilets and handing them over to CBOs or
    contractors for operation and maintenance. This is also linked to the lack of institutional
    capacity building. No local body is able to carry forward these initiatives without political,
    bureaucratic or NGO support, which ultimately will lead to failures.
   Little to no focus on operation and maintenance of infrastructure, particularly community
    toilets: Maintenance of the community toilet has been the major problem in sustaining the
    initiative once the funding had ended, the project closed and the NGO had withdrawn.
    Maintenance has been affected by a fall in the financial viability of the community toilet:
    increases in the costs of running the community toilet, problems in increasing user charges
    and falling revenues as a result of the increasing construction of household toilets. While
    initially these community toilets were financially viable because the MC provided
    concessions in electricity and water charges, these were time-bound and the initial MoUs
    signed with the MC were not renewed. The condition of the community toilets was further
    affected by problems in getting timely support from the MC to handle major repairs that are
    beyond the scope of the women’s groups managing the community toilets. In addition,
    vested political interests were keen that community-managed initiatives did not succeed,
    although the aims were different in Trichy and Gwalior. While in Trichy local politicians
    sought to take the MC contracts for these toilets away from the women’s groups, in Gwalior,
    they sought to ensure poor maintenance in the hope that either the MC would demolish
    these ‘eyesores’ and re-assign the prime land on which these toilets were located to other
    uses or that they could encroach upon the prime land for their own use.
    The lack of effective oversight and support from the MC to sustain the initiative has thus
    been a major hurdle to sustaining such initiatives, however promising.


   ULBs saw asset creating as the key to successful ‘problem-solving’: Although a lot had been
    written about pro-poor governance, including community participation and involvement,
    gender mainstreaming and regular maintenance, most of the initiatives have been viewed as
    ‘successes’ by ULBs once the construction is over. In Gwalior, for instance, the GMC saw
    ‘success’ as involving the slum community in overseeing the construction of new sewer lines
    and community toilets – it clearly laid out that subsequent operation and maintenance of
    community toilets was to be done by the community without the help of the GMC. Similarly,
    in Kalyani, the major objective was to build household toilets and stop open defecation –
    and once all the 52 slums were declared ‘ODF’, the initiative was considered a success and
    closed. In Trichy, the women’s groups are struggling to get the necessary support from the
    MC for major repairs and maintenance.
   An outside agency was needed to ‘kick-start’ initiatives: New initiatives did not emerge
    ‘organically’ from the normal functioning of any government department. Although ULBs
    have access to government funds, most of the initiatives required an outside agency - such


                                                                                                 132
         as a development partner (e.g., WaterAid, World Bank), individual (Dr. Kamal Kar), or NGO
         (e.g., CURE, Gramalaya, Sambhav and UWSA) to initiate the scheme and external funding to
         ensure that it moved forward. In Trichy, WaterAid provided the funds for the initial impetus;
         in Mumbai, the SESI came out of a World Bank-supported program; in Agra, CURE pushed
         the project forward using outside funds; in Gwalior, UN-HABITAT initiated the project; in
         Kalyani, the DFID-supported KUSP provided the funds to engage Dr. Kamal Kar; and in
         Belgaum, the funds to hire UWSA were sourced through the World Bank-supported
         Karnataka Urban Water Supply Improvement Project47.
        Facilitation to ensure community involvement was critical: All the government officials
         involved acknowledged that the success of the initiatives depended on the strong and
         positive involvement of the community. Except for Kalyani, where community mobilization
         was done by the Municipal Health officer and her team, NGOs facilitated the mobilization
         and involvement of the community. The case studies also indicated that when the NGOs
         disengaged from the work, community involvement declined (e.g., Trichy, Mumbai, and
         Gwalior).
         Facilitation with local communities took time and effort: Each case study provides clear
         evidence of the time and effort required to build a rapport, trust and mutual understanding
         with local communities. It can take up to six months of repeated visits, long discussions and
         problem-solving to overcome the initial distrust and resistance from slum communities. The
         time required for community mobilization is usually not factored into project
         implementation and can affect the success of the work.



WAYS FORWARD


             a. INTRODUCTION
The key findings from the literature review, focus group discussions, field survey and case studies
suggest several ways to address the issue of gender and social inclusion in urban water supply and
sanitation in India. These steps can be divided across various levels of government agencies, e.g.,
national, state and urban local body (ULB), and across multiple actors, including public agencies,
private actors, NGOs, and development partners. This chapter summarizes the main findings and
linking them to remedial actions.

             b. SPECIFIC ACTIONS FOR GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION
ACTIONS SUGGESTED FROM THE FINDINGS
Specific actions to address the key findings from the field survey, focus group discussions and case
studies are presented in Tables 5.1 and 5.2.




47
  Pune was an exception, where the municipal council started the toilet construction drive using its own
funds.


                                                                                                           133
                          Table 5.1: Key findings and suggested action: Water supply
                        KEY FINDING                                           SUGGESTED ACTION
FIELD SURVEY AND FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS

General satisfaction with PWPs: Public water supply has         Greater awareness among politicians on the
improved in the slums, in part, due to higher political         potential benefits of improving water supply to
priority assigned to water problems (e.g., in Pune)             slums, with examples of cases from other cities
                                                                Cross visits by legislators and councillors to
                                                                learn from innovative strategies implemented
                                                                in other areas.

Low expectations of users: People are satisfied with 3-6        Technical review to improve pressure, hours of
hours of supply, low water pressure, uncertain quality and      supply and reduce supply disruptions.
seasons variations.

Insecure water supply often, change in timings without          Advance warning of water supply disruptions
warning (as in Gwalior) leading to crowding, fights and         as in the case of Pune, and ensuring that supply
disturbances at available public standpoints (i.e., hand        is restored within 24 hours
pumps) and the use of unsafe alternatives (e.g., wells,
                                                                Provision of alternate water supply e.g.,
streams)
                                                                through tankers in case of unavoidable
                                                                disruptions48 or at least public hand pump
                                                                providing potable water
Social discrimination at public water points, even though       Separate public water points for smaller
this was not a major problem in the slums included for this     clusters of households within slums
study, it could be a reality in many other communities.
                                                                Household piped water supply is the best
                                                                option which can address issues of gender and
                                                                social inclusion

CASE STUDIES
Improved household level water supply (24x7) benefits           Include benefits for gender and social inclusion
women significantly: including eliminating the hardship and     in documentation of 24x7 benefits in addition
harassment of women (e.g., waking up at night to collect        to the usual, ULB-level benefits of improving
water supplied at uncertain and irregular hours, walking to     access to water, reducing the need for water
distant sources, begging for water from hotels and              storage, bringing down overall water
neighbours and falling ill due to using and drinking            consumption, and minimizing risks of water
contaminated water and incurring costs of medicines and         contamination.
treatment and losing wages due to illness), increasing the
                                                                Include benefits of 24x7 in training programs
time available for productive employment , and giving
children time to attend school more regularly, and              of all government water supply engineers, PRIs
decreasing their vulnerability to disease.                      and civil servants




                           Table 5.2: Key findings and suggested action: Sanitation



48
  The National Rural Drinking Water Program (NRDWP) has mandated that ‘water security’ requires the
provision of an alternative source of supply, which in rural areas could be traditional water sources. In urban
areas, the equivalent would be supply through tankers in areas where water supply is disrupted either for
routine maintenance or due to problems (e.g., pipeline bursts).


                                                                                                             134
                     KEY FINDING                                            SUGGESTED ACTION

FIELD SURVEY AND FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSIONS

General dissatisfaction with public toilets which are      Improvements in public toilet design to provide
crowded and dirty, without adequate water supply           adequate water storage (for high usage), security and
or provisions for washing hands                            access for all users, especially children, the
Poor quality of public toilets forces people to            differently abled and the elderly. Safety of toilets
defecate in the open: For example, in Gwalior, men         needs to be a priority in the design.
and women are exposed to new threats (e.g., being          Reservation of toilet seats for special categories,
bitten by insects, dogs, scorpions and snakes) and         e.g., children, elderly and differently abled
women also face harassment while defecating in the
open and while walking to and from the site. Those         Providing opportunities to build household toilets is
who take care for the differently-abled, chronically ill   important, either in the new government-provided
and elderly spend twice the time for such tasks.           slum housing or by constructing toilets in existing
Using (even high quality) public toilets pose              houses
problems for women and special groups: women
and girls would still face the problem of harassment
and violence while walking to and from public toilets.
Pregnant, chronically ill and elderly women face
additional problems accessing public toilets which
also do not have any special facilities for the
differently-abled. There are no available facilities for
disposing used sanitary pads and cloth.
Lack of social discrimination at public toilets, even      Household toilets are the best option which can
though this could be a reality in many other slums         address almost all gender and social inclusion issues
Political interest is a critical factor as in Pune, who    Greater awareness among politicians on the
have ensured a large number of functioning public          potential benefits of improving sanitation to slums,
toilets, that have caretakers, and also a system to get    especially health, safety, dignity of women
repairs done promptly                                      Cross visits by legislators and councillors to learn
                                                           from innovative strategies implemented in other
                                                           areas.

MDGs will still record high access to urban public         National, state and city governments need to assess
toilets, despite all the problems, as they meet the        public toilets in terms of ‘service delivery’ to get a
MDG definition of ‘access to infrastructure’.              correct picture of functionality.
Hurdles in satisfying the demand for household             Streamline and synergize provisions in existing
toilets from growing numbers of slum dwellers              government programs (e.g., BSUP, ILCS and RAY)
                                                           Provide advice and support to ULB officers in charge
                                                           of implementing these GOI programs

CASE STUDIES
Sustainability requires more than a catalytic support      Institutional change is essential to sustained
or initiative: All major initiatives reviewed have         improvements: These initiatives need to be
support from an outside agency - such as a donor           mainstreamed as part of the regular working of the
(e.g., WaterAid, World Bank) or support agency (e..,       city government or utility.
WaterAid) or individual (Dr. Kamal Kar), an NGO (e.g.,
                                                           Institutional capacity building is vital in order to
CURE, Gramalaya, UWSA) or a visionary bureaucrat
(e.g.,. Pune or Trichy Municipal Commissioner). As         achieve sustainability.
individuals get transferred or organizations leave, the
initiative falters.
Community-led total sanitation programs can be             The success of Kalyani needs to be highlighted in
successful in urban slums as in Kalyani, but require       training programs for public agencies and

                                                                                                                  135
dedicated support and action                            development partners.

Community involvement is a must: but this requires      Awareness generation among ULB councillors and
time and effort to build a rapport, trust, mutual       staff on the need for community involvement – and
understanding and confidence in each other.             facilitation through NGOs or even government staff
Critical role of facilitation: In most cases, NGOs      (e.g., in Kalyani Municipal Corporation) – for
played the role of a facilitator. After the NGOs have   initiatives to succeed and sustain
stopped working, the initiatives have declined (e.g.,   Simplified contracting procedures within ULBs (e.g.,
Trichy, Mumbai).                                        empanelling NGOs or using Quality Based contracts)
                                                        to ensure that good NGOs are contracted and
                                                        supported for facilitating community participation

Women can be Agents of Change but need support:         Women need support from sustained support from
women are willing to come forward to take               public agencies, if they are to operate and manage
responsibility for the initiative within their local    public WSS infrastructure.
communities (e.g., Trichy and Gwalior). But they
                                                        Annual presentations to the ULB Councillors and
have faltered when the ULB has failed to support
them financially and politically.                       staff are necessary to report progress, generate
                                                        awareness and ensure effective support (including
                                                        course corrections to address new issues)




OTHER SUGGESTIONS
In November 2013, as a part of this work, national consultations with experts were held. As a result,
a discussion group was set up to think of innovative ways to address the challenges uncovered
during this study. The suggestions from experts are presented below:
   Listing concrete actions to address Gender and Social Inclusion issues that are in the form a list
    of Do's and Don'ts for managers of government, donor-supported and NGO initiatives.
   Producing Training Modules on GSI in UWSS programs for ULB staff (especially engineers) and
    WSS project staff
   Creating a pool of certified resource persons who can guide utilities more effectively on GSI
    issues. These resource persons can also be used during projects to provide guidance and advice.
   Indicators to monitor the extent to which GSI issues are being address in UWSS projects.
   Including GSI issues in existing Service Level Benchmarking processes to provide a certification of
    ULBs based on how they address these issues, especially for the urban poor. This should include
    ranking ULBs with associated incentives similar to City Sanitation Ratings.
   Creating awareness generation material on GSI issues in UWSS highlighting pitfalls and good
    practice. These could be a series of small publications such as articles in media, local language
    publications, including pamphlets for distribution to anganwadi and ASHA workers, local schools,
    etc.
   Designing a campaign to sensitize ULB officials and councilors through seminars and workshops.
    These could be planned and implemented in coordination with government training institutes
    and through interested NGOs.
   Facilitating changes in GOI policies concerning UWSS, though national-level consultations and
    discussion groups, including representatives from government, NGOs and donor agencies.



                                                                                                            136
      Undertaking more rigorous assessments of GSI issues in urban India, especially in slums and in
       smaller towns. This can not only help better understand the issues, but also strengthen advocacy
       for remedial action.

IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
Based on the suggestions from experts and on the findings from this study, the next three sections
discuss ways to, first provide sustainable community-managed toilets, next for a gender and social
inclusion action plan at the ULB level, and finally, a state-level initiatives to address gender and social
inclusion issues in UWSS.




               c. INITATIVES FOR PUBLIC AND COMMUNITY TOILETS
Given that the lack of adequate public and community toilets emerged as a major problem for urban
poor women, specific initiatives are needed to address this issue. A critical part of any such initiative
is buy in by public agencies, available funding, either from the government or through development
partners, and support from local NGOs and community groups. A useful starting point is by dividing
public toilets into three categories, with separate management arrangements:49
          Revenue-earning public toilets: These can be built in busy areas including markets, railway
           stations, bus stands, along main roads and large residential colonies. The management
           contracts could be awarded to private agencies such as, Sulabh International and Exnora
           International. These agencies will be responsible for managing the toilets and would earn
           revenue from these facilities. They could be contracted under various contract types,
           including Build-Operate-Transfer. Specific clauses in contract can indicate the service
           delivery levels expected and the remedial actions that can be taken by the responsible public
           agencies if these are not achieved. Similarly, an incentive structure can also be set up for
           private agencies and meet and surpass service level indicators.
          Revenue neutral community toilets: These would include toilets in large slums or those
           adjoining main roads that have high number of users. These can be managed by women’s
           groups, but without any charge or government subsidy. Within this model, the responsible
           public agency will have to carry out major repair and maintenance work. The public agency
           could also contract or enter into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with one or more
           Federations of women’s SHGs to manage such toilets using the funds collected from user
           charges. In addition, the public agency could provide subsidized or free electricity and water
           supply for these toilets.
Subsidized community toilets: These would include toilets build in smaller slums, where user
charges may not be adequate to cover regular maintenance or payments for caretakers. In such
cases, the government agencies could enter into a contract or MoU with a Federation of women’s
SHGs specifying the details of the financial and the O&M support that would be provided to them to
manage, operate and maintain the toilets. The case studies indicated that NGOs can play a critical
role in the success of UWSS initiatives. Thus, a three-way MoU could be signed such that an NGO
with technical expertise could support community groups and women’s SHGs in designing,



49
     Mr. Dandapani, Municipal Commissioner, Trichy Municipal Corporation. Personal communication. Sep 2012.


                                                                                                       137
constructing, managing, maintaining and operating toilets for a specific number of years. Funding for
the initiative could come from government agencies or through other development partners.
This arrangement was exemplified in Trichy where a group of NGOs, a federation of SHGs, a funding
organization, and a motivated municipal corporation came together to manage community toilets.
This four-part arrangement suggests an institutional structure that could be effective and replicable
across other slums.

            d. A GENDER AND SOCIAL INCLUSION ACTION PLAN
Issues of gender and social inclusion in UWSS require to be addressed more holistically, particularly
at the ULB level. In this regard, a Gender and Social Include plan was developed as a part of this
work.

PRIOR CONSIDERATIONS
The following conditions are considered important considerations for the planning and
implementation of gender-informed UWSS programs.
       Most gender mainstreaming guidelines apply only to shared provision: There is extensive
        literature on gender mainstreaming in urban water supply and sanitation projects (e.g., UN
        Habitat 2005, 2006a, 2006b, 2009, 2010; Sida 2006, AusAid 2005). The major slant of these
        recent studies has been to increase women’ participation in decision-making concerning all
        aspects of the project cycle, from design to implementation to monitoring and evaluation.
        This perspective implicitly assumes that WSS are being accessed from shared sources, i.e.,
        hand pumps and public stand pipes in the case of water supply and public toilets and
        community toilets in the case of sanitation. The literature also has a greater slant towards
        water supply as compared to sanitation. If the service level that the utility or ULB aims for is
        household provision, the community participation required may be more intense.
       Perspectives differ across the project cycle: There can be vast differences in the
        perspectives of government officials who deal with the project from concept, design,
        planning to implementation and evaluation. This is not only because of the regular transfer
        of key staff, but also because of the range of capacities of staff, from secretary-level
        bureaucrats, to finance staff, engineers, and councilors. In most cases, multiple government
        agencies with unclear roles and responsibilities are involved in the program, which creates
        additional challenges. There is a need, therefore, for excellent and constant communication,
        to ensure that all project staff is briefed thoroughly at every stage of the work. This is
        especially necessary as the UWSS programs move from planning to implementation stage.
       Policy change takes time: Supportive policy change is necessary for effective
        implementation, but many ESA-supported projects do not take into account the time and
        effort needed to work with the bureaucrats and politicians (e.g., James, 2008; WB, 2011). As
        the project draws to a close, the team is busy with end-of-project evaluations and
        presentations and after the ‘policy recommendations’ are written and presented to senior
        bureaucrats, it is assumed that these will somehow turn into policy. In practice, policy
        change takes dedicated time and effort and there are multiple steps before such policies are
        passed by Cabinets, Legislative Assemblies and Parliaments Projects could, therefore,
        dedicate some more time and resources to this process for more effective outcomes.




                                                                                                     138
       The Social Inclusion Plan is in addition to other project guidelines: These do not duplicate,
        as far as possible, regular project activities for different parts of the project cycle, but only
        refer to specific activities for gender and social inclusion.

KEY STEPS
Ten key steps have been identified to address gender and social inclusion issues in project design:
   Understand the problem: This includes asking questions such as who are affected by the lack of
    WSS services and where are they located (notified/illegal slums, low-income tenements,
    geographically dispersed/concentrated, transient/permanent). Other participatory exercises
    such as assessments (based on the QPA, or any other appropriate methodology), GIS-based
    spatial slum mapping can be used to better understand the problem.
   Collect and track disaggregated data: At this time, gender and disability disaggregated data is
    not collected. Creating a common shared database that includes information disaggregated by
    socio-economic categories that can be accessed by various public agencies would be useful.
   Sensitize and inform decision-makers: It is necessary to present findings to senior politicians
    and bureaucrats, and sensitize them to GSI related problems in the UWSS sector. It is also
    important to, then, highlight to them the role they can play to help address the problem.
   Involve all stakeholders: In order to understand the problems and address them, all
    stakeholders, including media persons, academia, NGO staff, engineers, officials, politicians, and
    community members in various stages of the project.
   Facilitate joint decision-making: Whether within the ULB, Utility or State-government – joint
    decision-making is important, and women in particular, need to have a strong voice in UWSS
    initiatives.
   Sensitize utility staff: By providing Change Management Training, and special training on Gender
    Sensitization and Social Exclusion/Inclusion, utility staff can be sensitized to GSI issues. This will
    help in mainstreaming GSI issues and institutionalizing responses.
   Pilot & institutionalize joint visits by officials: Officials from all departments of the concerned
    public agency (utility or ULB) should conduct joint site visits.
   Commission external social inclusion audits: These audits can be held by empanelled academic
    institutions, using a well-planned methodology. The findings from such studies can be published
    and publicized by the media
   Ensure representation of socially-excluded groups in decision making bodies: Women and
    those from other socially-excluded groups should be included in decision-making bodies.

Encourage transparency: Transparency should be encouraged in all project areas, especially
decision-making.

FRAMEWORK FOR INTERVENTIONS
A suggested set of steps for using these Principles of Social Inclusion in a simple project cycle
framework of (1) Design (2) Planning, (3) Implementation and (4) Monitoring & Evaluation, is first
summarized (Figure 5.1) and then detailed in this section. Note that while it is recommended that
the suggested actions are carried out during these phases, this is not mandatory and some actions
can be carried over into other phases if necessary.



                                                                                                      139
                     Figure 5.1: Project cycle framework for interventions for gender and social inclusion


                                                     DESIGN PHASE
                                        Do background work on GSI (Look at best
                                        practices, organizational structures,
                                        consultations)
                                        Do a GSI scan of existing policies &
                                        programs
                                        Build a strong case for priority for GSI


                                                          Hand over
                                                            Phase



                                                   PLANNING PHASE
                                 Sensitize politicians and bureaucrats
                                 Create a strong institutional base for the work
                                 Understand GSI issues
                                 Hold consultations with all stakeholders
                                 Solicit suggestions for GSI
                                 Carry out GSI audits
                                 Ensure equality in decision-making
                                 Design capacity building initiatives
                                 Take pro-active steps to encourage transparency
                                 Embed a journalist
                                 Engineer informal linkages with other relevant
                                 Departments




                 IMPLEMENTATION PHASE                                    MONITORING & EVALUATION PHASE
Build capacity                                                    Use disaggregated indicators of social inclusion
                                                                  Hold special sessions with all socially excluded groups
Promote linkages to cheap credit for building household           Undertake participatory assessments of status with all
toilets                                                           socially excluded groups
Design innovative public toilets                                  Ensure disaggregated findings are presented to decision-
Ensure strong grievance redress mechanisms                        makers
Report on all social inclusion parameters at review               Ensure that findings are widely disseminated




                                                                                                                             140
DESIGN PHASE
The design of the project plays a critical role in its ability to address GSI issues during
implementation stage.
       Ensure adequate budgetary outlay for gender and social inclusion: Budgetary outlay for the
        Gender and Social Inclusion Plan (GSIP is necessary first step. Defining of the budget requires
        a good understanding of project activities and their GSI-related implications.
       Build a strong case for gender and social inclusion activities: Creating institutional will to
        address GSI issues in this sector is important. This can start with a review of past work on
        gender and social inclusion (see below) and of the policy and program environment (see
        below), with particular focus on city- specific and state-specific issues and initiatives. This
        review can be the basis for planning specific GSI activities within the project.
       Impact evaluation related to gender and social inclusion: Details can be added to the
        information collected from the literature review by conducting a detailed impact evaluation
        of projects that have addressed gender and social inclusion issues in this sector (including
        the MP UWSEIP and Karnataka UWASIP). The evaluation would help in understanding
        challenges and opportunities in designing and implementing GSI informed projects.
       Scan the Policy and Program environment: A review of existing policies and programs that
        support – and hinder - gender and social inclusion initiatives is vital. In addition, there is a
        need for clear analysis of what other initiatives are required and can be implemented as a
        part of a UWSS project.

‘HAND-OVER’ PHASE

       Link the Design and Planning Phases: Since the design of most projects is done by one group
        of development professionals and the actual planning and implementation is done by a
        PMU. After the project is signed and commissioned, there is often a difference in
        interpretation between the two teams involved in design and implementation stage. In
        order to avoid such problems and to ease the transition, it would be useful to have a hand-
        over period when the PMU staff work closely with the design team.

PLANNING PHASE

       Sensitize politicians and officials: It is necessary to obtain the political and bureaucratic
        understanding and support for the project. Regular briefings are necessary over the entire
        project cycle, so the policy makers are engaged in the project.
       Create a strong institutional base for the project: Forming a state-level empowered
        committee chaired by the Chief Secretary and including all senior Secretaries of relevant
        Departments , as done in the ADB-supported MP Urban Water Supply and Environmental
        Improvement Project is one way to bring the government agencies fully on board. In
        addition, forming a city-level Steering Committee that includes senior bureaucrats and
        politicians and also includes representatives from NGOs and CBOs will ensure city-specific
        support. Finally, a PMU with a full-time IAS officer, and gender and social inclusion experts
        will help ensure that GSI issues are addressed within the project.




                                                                                                      141
        Study field reality: Commission studies to capture the ground reality regarding GSI in the
         project sites. Using field survey methodology, collecting both qualitative and quantitative
         data and slum mapping to look at the spatial representation of these issues can help identify
         the effort necessary for improvement.
        Hold consultations: It is important to engage with all stakeholders, especially NGOs and
         academics working on gender and social inclusion issues. While part of this can be done
         during the field study, separate consultations to get suggestions for improvement from a
         wider range of stakeholders would be particularly useful in drawing up concrete Community
         Action Plans.
        Carry out gender and social inclusion audits: An auditing process of all policies and
         programs from the GSI perspective should be piloted and thereafter institutionalized.
        Ensure equality in decision-making: Ensure equal representation of women and other
         socially excluded groups in decision-making bodies, including in the ULB/Utility as far as
         possible. This action, however, has to be supported by providing training opportunities to
         build capacity for all project-related ULB/Utility staff.
        Engineer informal linkages with other departments: These may not be formally associated
         with the project, but may have jurisdiction or programs that affect social inclusion. Often
         such initiatives can fail due to poor coordination between government departments. If these
         issues are proactively addressed during the planning stage of the project, it may become
         easier to address GSI issues more comprehensively and sustainably.
        Design capacity building: Ensure that training and information sharing on GSI issues are
         included as a part of capacity building programs (materials, methods and messages) for staff
         of responsible public agency.
        Take pro-active steps to promote transparency: By ensuring that the information related to
         the project is shared widely and transparently with other stakeholder, either through review
         meetings, on websites, or in the local media is essential.

IMPLEMENTATION PHASE

        Capacity building: This is the most critical aspect of changing the way GSI issues are being
         addressed within UWSS projects. In addition to sensitization and training on GSI issues,
         there should be change management training for all utility officials.50 These trainings,
         workshops and exposure visit need to be planned during the design phase. .
        Promote linkages to cheap credit for building household toilets: Government does not
         provide household toilets. The lack of financing and land ownership issues are the key
         challenges that people face when trying to build household toilets. Women
         disproportionately face these issues. . Access to cheap credit that does not require extensive
         paper work or asset ownership will allow more women to build household toilets. In
         addition, micro-finance institutions (MFIs) can also be persuaded to provide sanitation loans.



50
  Although Change Management was started with the pilot Tamil Nadu Rural Water Supply Project (TNRWSP)
of the Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage (TWAD) Board, this is most recently been tried successfully in
the on-going World Bank-funded TN IAM WARM Project.


                                                                                                       142
       Design innovative public toilets: As the examples from Navi Mumbai and Mumbai Municipal
        Corporations have shown, public toilets can be innovative and user-friendly and can cater to
        the demands of a wide variety of stakeholders. To this end, locality-specific designs have to
        be created – which can be done either on a sole-source commission or through a design
        competition. The toilets should be located in areas of high demand – including slums,
        markets, bus stands, train stations, office buildings, schools, colleges, and other public areas.
        In addition, adequate institutional arrangement to ensure sustained quality of service
        delivery should be provided.
       Ensure strong grievance redress mechanisms in the project: There should be an adequate
        grievance redress mechanism built into the project that is either outsourced or managed in-
        house. It should be designed based on international best-practice and should be evaluated
        regularly to ensure that it works as designed.
       Report on all social inclusion parameters at review meetings: All project review meetings
        should bring out GSI issues, in order to constantly sensitize project staff to the special
        concerns of these groups. In addition, Action Taken Reports (ATR) on these issues should be
        tabled at the next meeting.

MONITORING & EVALUATION PHASE

These refer to both regular monitoring of project activities, as well as to the evaluations carried out
periodically over the project period.
       Use disaggregated indicators of social inclusion: Use gender and disability disaggregated
        indicators that clearly show the status of socially excluded groups in project related
        activities. This is a long process that requires periodic data gathering, and analysis. This
        requires substantial prior planning and need to be initiated in the design phase.
       Hold special sessions with all socially excluded groups: Regular focus group discussions and
        interviews should be held with socially excluded group and with women. Gathering feedback
        will help in identifying GSI issues within the project. Subsequently, efforts need to be made
        to ensure that this information is presented to decision-makers and that action is taken to
        address these issues within a reasonable period of time.
       Ensure that findings are widely disseminated: Given the power of public scrutiny, it is
        imperative that disaggregated findings from the monitoring and evaluation exercises are
        presented to the general public on the project website and are also shared through the
        media. This would create greater awareness regarding these issues.
The ways to address Gender and Social Inclusion issues that are identified through these steps could
be incorporated into existing pro-poor government programs such as the BSUP and RAY that are
being implemented by the Ministry of Housing and Poverty Alleviation (MHUPA).
Fully implemented, the Social Inclusion Plan should:
       Increase awareness among decision-makers, utility staff, academia, media and target
        groups
       Highlight social inclusion issues in UWSS in the public domain – thus encouraging more
        government attention and action (e.g., GOI schemes, local academic institutions and ESAs)




                                                                                                       143
       Create an institutional platform for joint action across government departments and
        institutions – for more effective grassroots impact
    In order for this plan to work effectively, it requires:
       Policy-driven external factors such as ULB SLB ratings, support from ESAs, etc.;
       Political support by aware and motivated Councilors, Mayors or other elected
        representatives who have been sensitized to the size of the problem, the means to address
        it and the potential benefits of addressing it (in terms of political patronage and votes); and
       Personal motivation of utility or ULB staff is also important to ensure that the initiative is
        sustainable.
Better progress on providing access to adequate water supply and sanitation services for women
and the socially excluded groups could be achieved if there was an explicit policy and programming
focus that mandated taking their needs into consideration when planning and implementing water
supply and sanitation program and projects. A more ‘actionable’ approach may be to simply ensure
that all pro-poor policies have a special focus on gender and social exclusion issues.



            e. MULTI-CITY GOVERNMENT-LED INITIATIVE
Despite programs such as BSUP, UIDSSMT, RAY, etc. and large financial allocations by GOI, UWSS
services to the urban poor are not improving as fast as they should. Further, existing institutional
structures at state and city government levels are not able to implement UWSS program that also
address GSI issues. There are multiple reasons that affect this, including lack of capacity and/or
motivation, a lack of integration between responsible departments and a lack of indicators to
measure progress.
Given that governments have the funding, mandate and staff to undertake initiatives to address
gender and social inclusion concerns in urban water supply and sanitation projects, a multi-city
government-led initiative could be the best way of identifying ways to change policies and programs
to address these concerns.

INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS
One possible approach could be a time-bound state-level pilot project, funded by a single donor or
consortium of donors, and led by civil servants, to deliver GSI approaches in UWSS in all slums of
some cities in a few selected states.
Two possible institutional arrangements are (1) a special purpose vehicle (SPV) set up by the state
government and led by civil servants –for example, as seen in the World Bank supported rural water
supply and sanitation projects in Maharashtra (Jalswarajya), Kerala (Jalanidhi) and Karnataka
(Jalnirmal) and in the Government of Gujarat promoted WASMO; and (2) a unit of an existing
structure such as the State Water and Sanitation Mission (currently only covering rural schemes) or
the recently launched Urban Livelihood Mission.
Since an exclusive focus on GSI may be seen as too narrow an approach, these issues could be part
of a larger objective, such as full implementation of City Sanitation Plan, the National Urban
Sanitation Policy, or urban livelihoods programs.




                                                                                                         144
EXPECTED OUTPUTS
Some concrete outputs expected from the pilot initiative are:
       Demonstration of integration of existing national-level schemes (BSUP, RAY etc.) to facilitate
        finance (if needed) for adding toilets to existing slum housing and improved design of new
        slum housing
       Updated spatial data on GSI and UWSS in the city
       Monitoring system with GSI indicators to clearly show problems and progress in tackling
        these issues
       Alternate designs for public or community toilets incorporating all issues (child-friendly, safe,
        Menstrual Health Management, etc.)
       Demonstration of methods of involving PRIs, NGOs and CBOs within the planning guidelines
        of the NUSP (e.g., Ward-level planning)
       Demonstration of the integrated working of different departments within the ULB to
        facilitate the use of innovative technological ideas (e.g., to make water available in elevated
        areas; tackle low-pressure problems; e.g.) - where problems may not just be technical but
        procedural (e.g., conformity with CPHEEO Guidelines, cost norms as per Audit Department).
        This could be in the form of a Task Force created from within various departments of the
        ULB to carry out these activities.

SCALING UP
If the external review indicates that the pilot has been effective, it could be scaled-up to other cities
in the state and the SPV could be converted into a permanent part of the state-level institutional
structure (For example, the PMUs of Jalswarjya and Jalanidhi are now part of the State Water and
Sanitation Missions).

CAUTIONS
It is important to keep in mind that this new plan comes with some unique challenge:
       GSI issues have been treated as a box to check for most ULBs, state agencies and
        development partners. Thus, awareness generation, capacity building and sensitization are
        key ingredients of any GSI-related strategy. In addition, having clear measurable indicators
        is critical to wide acceptability of any GSI plan.

       A stand-alone SPV to address GSI may 'externalize' the issue rather than mainstream it.
        Moreover, a stand-alone SPV for GSI can do very little on its own, and its efficacy would
        largely depend on the responsiveness of the concerned service provider. Creating a unit
        within existing Missions can bureaucratize the effort, and reduce it to tokenism, without the
        fresh thinking required to address these issues in a sustainable and institutional basis.

       Multiple programs (e.g., NULM, RAY, BSUP) have previously been launched and each
        requires its own institutional structure. Most states and cities struggle with these
        requirements and proposing yet another structure could create further difficulties.




                                                                                                      145
            f. CONCLUDING OBSERVATIONS
The findings of the study are clear and pressing – while water supply in slums has improved,
residents continue to face insecurity and there is no quality monitoring; the quality of service from
public toilets is inadequate; the initiatives that have been launched are dependent on political
support; the lack of institutionalization also leads to lack of sustainability; the literature continues to
underestimate WSS problems particularly in urban areas; and women, girls and socially excluded
groups are bearing a disproportionate burden of gaps in service.

Concerns related to gender and social inclusion can be addressed either through small initiatives
targeting specific issues or through larger initiatives that take a more holistic look at these issues.
The critical issue that determines the effectiveness and sustainability of any program are the
institutional arrangements put in place to support the initiative – which includes building capacity,
generating awareness, encouraging participation from all key stakeholders and political and
bureaucratic support.

With institutional capacity, community participation, political commitment and a supportive
bureaucracy, and the combined efforts of the private sector and the NGO sector, the focus on
gender and social inclusion in urban water supply and sanitation could be strengthened in Indian
cities, and efforts can be made to address a challenge that is expected to grow with increasing
urbanization.




                                                                                                       146
REFERENCES
Ackumey, M. M., Gyapong, M., Pappoe, M., Kwakye-Maclean, C., Weiss, M. G., 2012. Illness meanings and
       experiences for pre-ulcer and ulcer conditions of Buruli ulcer in the Ga-West and Ga-South
       Municipalities of Ghana. BMC Public Health,12 (264)
ADB, 2002. Beyond Boundaries Extending Services To The Urban Poor. Manila: Asian Development Bank. [pdf]
        Available    at     <www.adb.org/documents/books/beyond_boundaries/beyond_boundaries.pdf>
        [Accessed on 21 December 2011]
ADB, 2008. From the ground up: case studies in community empowerment. Manila: Asian Development Bank.
        [pdf] Available at <www.adb.org/documents/Books/Ground-Up-Community-Empowerment/ Ground-
        Up-Community-Empowerment.pdf> [Accessed on 23 December 2011]
ADB, 2010. Every Drop Counts: Learning From Good Practices In Eight Asian Cities. Manila: Asian Development
        Bank. [pdf] Available at <www.adb.org/documents/reports/every-drop-counts/every-drop-
        counts.pdf> Accessed on 27 December 2011]
Allen, A., Hoffman, P., and Griffiths, H., 2010. Moving down the ladder: governance and sanitation that works
          for the urban poor, In Verhagen, J., da Silva Wells, C., Krukkert, I., McIntyre, P., Ryan, P., (eds.)
          Sanitation Services for the Urban Poor: Partnerships and Governance. The Hague, the Netherlands:
          IRC International Water and Sanitation center
Anand, K., Shah, B., Yadav, K., Singh, R., Mathur, P., Paul, E., Kapoor, S. K., 2007. Are the urban poor vulnerable
        to non-communicable diseases? A survey of risk factors for non-communicable diseases in urban
        slums of Faridabad. The National Medical Journal of India. 20(3).
ASCI, 2011. Draft City Sanitation Plan for Belgaum City, Karnataka. [pdf] Hyderabad: Administrative Staff
         College of India. Available at
         http://urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/CSP/Draft_CSP%5CBelgaum_CSP.pdf [Accessed on 27 May
         2012]
ASCI, 2012. Draft City Sanitation Plan for Hubli-Dharwad City, Karnataka. [pdf] Hyderabad: Administrative Staff
         College of India. Available at
         http://urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/CSP/Draft_CSP%5CHubli_Dharwad_CSP.pdf [Accessed on 27
         May 2012]
AusAID, 2000. Tip sheet on Water Supply and Sanitation prepared for the Organisation for Economic
        Cooperation and Development (OECD) Development Assistance Committee (DAC) Network on Gender
        Equality, Paris: OECD Available at http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/45/1896488.pdf
Baken, R-J., 2010. The political and administrative context of slum improvement: two contrasting Indian cases,
        In Verhagen, J., da Silva Wells, C., Krukkert, I., McIntyre, P., Ryan, P., (eds.) Sanitation Services for the
        Urban Poor: Partnerships and Governance. The Hague, the Netherlands: IRC International Water and
        Sanitation center
Bellera, C.A. and Julien, M., 2010. Normal approximations to the distribution of the Wilcoxon statistics:
          accurate to what N? Graphical insights. Joural of Statistics Education, 18(2). Available at
          http://www.amstat.org/publications/jse/v18n2/bellera.pdf. [Accessed 30 January 2014]
Biggs, S., Gurung, S.M. and Messerschmidt, D., 2004. An exploratory study of gender, social inclusion and
          empowerment through development groups and group-based organizations in Nepal: Building on the
          positive. Version 2. Report submitted to the Gender and Social Exclusion Assessment Study,
          Kathmandu: National Planning Commission, World Bank and DFID Nepal. [pdf] Available at
          http://190.144.167.140/prga/descargas/IAWFTP/papers/BuildingonthePositive.pdf [Accessed on 27
          January 2012]
Bouselly, L., Gupta, S., and Ghosh, D., 2006. Water and urban poor. Working Paper 06-11. New Delhi: National
         Institute of Public Finance and Policy.




                                                                                                                 147
Burra, S., Patel, S. and Kerr, T., 2003. Community-designed, built and managed toilet blocks in Indian cities.
          Environment & Urbanization 15 (2), pp. 11-32. Available at
          http://eau.sagepub.com/content/15/2/11.full.pdf+html [Accessed 30 May 30 2012].
Buvnic, M., 2005. Social Exclusion in Latin America,in Buvinic, M., Deutsch, D., eds. Social Inclusion and
         Economic Development in Latin America. New York: Inter-American Development Bank.
Chambers, R., 2003. Participation and numbers, PLA Notes, 47, August.
Chary, V. S., Narender, A., and Rao, K. R., 2003. Serving the Poor with Sanitation: The Sulabh Approach. Osaka:
         Third World Water Forum. [pdf] Available at
         <www.adb.org/documents/books/water_for_all_series/Indian-sanitation/Indian-sanitation.pdf>
         [Accessed on 23 December 2011]
CSD, 2004. Local Government Action on Water, Sanitation and Human Settlements: Case Summaries. Bangkok:
        Commission on Sustainable Development, United Nations Department Of Economic And Social
        Affairs. [pdf] Available at <http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/csd/csd12/Background5.pdf> [Accessed
        on 28 December 2011]
CSE, 2012a. Excreta Matters: How urban India is soaking up water, polluting rivers and drowning in its own
        waste. State of India’s Environment: A Citizens Report. Volume 1, New De lhi: center for Science and
        Environment.
CSE, 2012a. Excreta Matters: How urban India is soaking up water, polluting rivers and drowning in its own
        waste. State of India’s Environment: A Citizens Report. Volume 2, New Delhi: center for Science and
        Environment.
Curtis, V., Cardosi, J., Scott, B., 2003. The Handwashing Handbook: A guide for developing a hygiene promotion
          program to increase handwashing with soap. The Global Public-Private Partnership for Handwashing,
          Washington D.C.: The World Bank
Dayal, R., van Wijk, C., and Mukherjee, N., 1999. Methodology for Participatory Assessments: with
         Communities, Institutions and Policy Makers, Washington: Water and Sanitation Program and Delft,
         the Netherlands: International Resource center for Water and Sanitation
de Haan, A., and Maxwell. S., Eds. 1998. Poverty and Social Exclusion in North and South, IDS Bulletin 29 (1).
Deshingkar, P., and James. A. J., 2001. PRA: Some Concerns from the Field, in IFAD, ANGOC and IIRR, Enhancing
        Ownership and Sustainability: A resource book on participation , Rome: International Fund for
        Agricultural Development, Manila: Asian NGO Coalition for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
        and International Institute for Rural Reconstruction.
Eales, K., 2010. Partnerships for sanitation for the urban poor: is it time to shift paradigm? In Verhagen, J., da
          Silva Wells, C., Krukkert, I., McIntyre, P., Ryan, P., (eds.) Sanitation Services for the Urban Poor:
          Partnerships and Governance. The Hague, the Netherlands: IRC International Water and Sanitation
          center
Edappagath, A., 2001. Gender sensitive legislative legislation and policies in India. Bangkok: UNESCAP. [pdf[
       Available at http://www.unescap.org/esid/gad/Events/EGMICT2001/edappagath.pdf, [Accessed on
       28 February 2012]
Evans, B., 2007. Understanding the urban poor’s vulnerabilities in sanitation and water supply. Financi ng
         Shelter, Water and Sanitation. In The Rockefeller Foundation, Global Urban Summit, Bellagio, Italy, 1-
         6 July 2007. New York: center for Sustainable Urban Development, Columbia University. [pdf]
         Available at
         <http://indiasanitationportal.org/sites/default/files/Financing_Shelter,_Water_&_Sanitation.pdf>
         [Accessed on 28 January 2012]
FAO, 1998. Socioeconomic and Gender Analysis Program Sector Guide: Irrigation, Rome: Food and Agriculture
        Organization Available at http://www.fao.org/sd/seaga/4_en.htm
Fernandez, M., 2010. Breaking the silence: menstrual hygiene management in rural India. Presentation at the
       World Water Week, Stockholm, Sweden, 2010. [pdf] Available at




                                                                                                                 148
         http://www.worldwaterweek.org/documents/WWW_PDF/2010/monday/K11/4_Fernandez_Breaking
         _Silence.pdf [Accessed on 28 February 2012]
Field, E., 2005. Property rights and investment in urban slums. Journal of the European Economic Association.
           April-May.
Figueiredo, J.B., and de Haan, A., Eds. 1998. Social Exclusion: An ILO Perspective. Geneva: International Labour
         Organisation.
FINISH, 2011. Training of Master Trainers Workshop. Chennai: Financial Inclusion Improves Sanitation and
         Health (FINISH) Society.
FINISH, 2012. www.finishsociety.com. Accessed on 15 February 2012.
Gender and Water Alliance, 2003. Gender Water and Development Report 2003: Perspectives on Policies in
        the Water Sector, Loughborough: Water, Engineering and Development center. Available at
        http://www.genderandwateralliance.org/reports/GWA%20Annual%20Report.pdf
GOI, 2010a. Some characteristics of urban slums 2008-09. Report 534 of the 65th round of the National Sample
        Survey. New Delhi: Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation.
GOI, 2010b. Housing Conditions and Amenities 2008-09. Report 535 of the 65th round of the National Sample
        Survey. New Delhi: Ministry of Statistics and Program Implementation.
GOI, 2011a, Enhanced quality of life through sustained sanitation. Paper presented at the SACOSAN, 4-7 April
        2011, Colombo, Sri Lanka. New Delhi: Government of India.
GOI, 2011b. Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission: An Overview. New Delhi: Ministry of Urban
        Employment and Poverty Alleviation and Ministry of Urban Development [pdf]. Available at
        <http://jnnurm.nic.in/wp-content/uploads/2011/01/PMSpeechOverviewE.pdf> [Accessed on 12
        February 2012]
GOI, 2011c. Census of India 2011. Provisional Results [online] Available at http://censusindia.gov.in/2011-prov-
        results/paper2/data_files/India2/Table_2_PR_Cities_1Lakh_and_Above.pdf [Accessed on 26 May
        2012]
GOI, 2011d. Census of India 2001. Results [online] Available at
        http://censusindia.gov.in/Tables_Published/Admin_Units/Admin_links/slum1_m_plus.html [Accessed
        on 26 May 2012]
GoMP, 2010. Quarterly Progress Report. Madhya Pradesh Urban Water Supply and Environment Improvement
       Project. Bhopal: Urban Administration and Development Department, Government of Madhya
       Pradesh. [pdf] Available at <http://www.projectuday.nic.in/SiteDoc/QRPDec09.pdf> [Accessed on 28
       March 2012]
Gore, C., and Figueiredo, J., eds., 1997. Social Exclusion and Anti-Poverty Policy. Geneva: International Institute
         of Labour Studies.
Government of Jharkhand, n.d. Health of the Urban Poor in Jharkhand: Key results from the National Family
       Health Survey 2005-6. [pdf] Ranchi: Department of Health and Family Welfare, Government of
       Jharkhand. Available at http://www.uhrc.in/downloads/Jharkhand_wall_chart.pdf [Accessed on 27
       May 2012]
Government of Karnataka, n.d. Case Study 24X7 Water Supply In 3 Cities Of Karnataka: Water Supply [pdf]
       Available at < http://idd.kar.nic.in/docs/CS_Karnataka.pdf>, [Accessed on 20 December 2011]
Gramalaya and WAI, 2006. Sanitation for the poor urban slum dwellers: Tiruchirapalli city shows the way. In
       WaterAid India, Sanitation for All–Still A Long Way To Go: Learnings & Approaches, Compilation for
       the Second South Asian Conference on Sanitation, Pakistan, September 2006. New Delhi: WaterAid
       India. [pdf] Available at
       <www.wateriad.org/documents/plugin_documents/sanitation_for_all__still_a_long_way_to_go.pdf >
       [Accessed on 23 December 2011]




                                                                                                               149
Gross, B., Wijk, C. van, and Mukherjee, N., 2001. Linking Sustainability with Demand, Gender and Poverty: A
         study in Community-Managed Water Supply Projects in 15 Countries. Washington: Water and
         Sanitation Program and Deft, the Netherlands: IRC International Water and Sanitation center
GTZ, 2010. Report of the city-level consultation workshop on the preparation of City Sanitation Plans for
        selected JNNURM and UIDSSMT cities. 15-16 April 2010, Bangalore. [pdf] Available at
        <http://www.indiawaterportal.org/sites/indiawaterportal.org/files/Workshop%20report_Consultatio
        n%20workshop%20on%20city%20sanitation%20plans_GTZ-ASEM_2010.pdf> [ Accessed on 12
        February 2012]
Haan, A., 1997. Poverty and Social Exclusion: A Comparison of Debates on Deprivation. Working Paper No. 2,
         Poverty Research Unit, Brighton: Sussex University.
Hobson, J. “Sustainable sanitation: experiences in Pune with municipal -NGO-community partnership.”
        Environment and Urbanization 12, no.2 (2000): 53 – 62. Accessed October 22, 2009.
        http://eau.sagepub.com/content/12/2/53.full.pdf+html.
HPEC, 2011. Report of the High Powered Expert Committee on Indian Urban Infrastructure and Services. New
        Delhi: Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. Available at
        http://www.urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/FinalReport_hpec.pdf [Accessed on 24 May 2012]
IIHS, 2011. Urban India 2011: Evidence. India Urban Conference, 3 November 2011. New Delhi: Indian Institute
         for Human Settlements. [pdf] Available at
         http://www.citiesalliance.org/sites/citiesalliance.org/files/IUC%20Booklet%20on%20Indian%20cities.
         pdf [Accessed on 26 May 12]
Jack, M., and Morris, I., 2005. The community-led infrastructure finance facility (CLIFF). Article written for the
         International Association of Local and Regional Development Funds in Emerging Markets. Coventry,
         UK: Homeless International, In
James, A. J. 2001. ‘Enhancing the “Assessment” in Participatory Assessments’, in IFAD, ANGOC and IIRR,
        Enhancing Ownership and Sustainability: A resource book on participation , International Fund for
        Agricultural Development (IFAD), Asian NGO Coalition for Agrarian Reform and Rural Development
        (ANGOC) and International Institute for Rural Reconstruction (IIRR).
James, A. J. 2003d. ‘PIMEDD Self-Assessment System For Public Health Functions in Urban Local Bodies In
        India: Report of a Pilot Assessment in Tamil Nadu, submitted to the World Bank, New Delhi.
James, A. J. and Kaushik, R., 2000. System for Integrated Monitoring Assessment and Learning (SIMAL) for the
        Rajasthan District Poverty Initiatives Project (DPIP), report submitted to the World Bank, New Delhi.
James, A. J. and Kaushik, R., 2002. Piloting Quantified Participatory Assessments in the Rajasthan District
        Poverty Initiatives Project (DPIP), report submitted to the World Bank, New Delhi.
James, A. J., 2000. ‘MPA: A New Methodology for Participatory Assessment’ Waterlines, October 2000.
James, A. J., 2002. ‘Quantified Participatory Assessments for the Water Resources Audit of the Andhra Pradesh
        Rural Livelihoods Project: Kalyandurg Mandal in Anantapur District’, report submitted to DFID India.
James, A. J., 2003a. ‘Quantified Participatory Assessment: Capturing Qualitative Information in Large -Scale
        Development Projects’. Unpublished.
James, A. J., 2003b. ‘Quantified Participatory Assessment of the Impacts of the Western India Rain fed Farming
        Project’, IFFDC project area, report submitted to Atkins, UK.
James, A. J., 2003c. ‘Quantified Participatory Assessment of the Impacts of the Western India Rain fed Farming
        Project’, GVT project area, report submitted to Atkins, UK.
James, A. J., 2011. India: Lessons for rural water supply: assessing progress towards sustainable service
        delivery. The Hague: IRC International Water and Sanitation center and New Delhi: ICRA
        Management Consulting Services.
James, A. J., and Snehalata, M., 2002a. ‘Quantified Participat ory Assessments for the Water Resources Audit of
        the Andhra Pradesh Rural Livelihoods Project: Dhone Mandal in Kurnool District’, report submitted to
        DFID India.



                                                                                                               150
James, A. J., and Snehalata, M., 2002b. ‘Women, Water And Livelihoods: Engagement With Policy In Andhra
        Pradesh’, in Women's Empowerment Policy & natural resources - What progress? , Report of a
        Conference organised by the Planning Commission, Government of India, and the Overseas
        Development Group, University of East Anglia, UK, & funded by the Department for International
        Development, Government of UK, New Delhi, 31 May 2001.
James, A. J., Khadka, R., Moffatt, M., and Otte, C., 2003. “From MPA to NPA in Rural Nepal”, unpublished, IRC
        International Water and Sanitation center, Delft, Netherlands.
James, A. J., Khadka, R., Shahi, D., and Appave, J., 2003c. ‘ Evaluating the impact of NEWAH's gender and
        poverty approach using the NEWAH Participatory Assessment: A Report of the Assessment of 15
        Communities in 5 Development Regions, submitted to Nepal Water for Health (NEWAH), Kathmandu,
        Nepal.
James, A. J., Moffatt, M., and Khadka, R,. 2003a. ‘Evolving the NEWAH Participatory Assessment (NPA)’, A Case
        Study Prepared for the IRC International Water and Sanitation center, Delft, Netherlands
James, A. J., Postma, L., and Otte, C., 2003 “A Qualitative Information System for Large-Scale Development
        Projects”, unpublished, IRC International Water and Sanitation center, Delft, Netherlands.
James, A. J., Saraswathi, R., and Nayar, V., 2012. Quantified Participatory Assessment of the behaviour of
        project officials in villages: impact of the change management training in the TN IAM WARM Project.
        Chennai: Tamil Nadu Integrated Agricultural Modernization and Waterbodies Restoration and
        Management Project.
James, A. J., Snehalatha, M., and Ramachandrudu, M.V., 2013. Community perceptions of service delivery:
        research insights from water supply in rural Andhra Pradesh, Working Paper, Hyderabad: WASH Cost
        India.
James, A. J., Vineet Pangtey, Pratibha Singh, and Keith Virgo, 2002. “Bringing People’s Perceptions to Project
        Management Desktops: A Quantified Participatory Assessment of the Doon Valley Project”, Impact
        Assessment and Project Appraisal.
Jawaid, A., n.d. World Bank Assisted Karnataka Urban Water Sector Improvement Project (KUWASIP) KUIDFC.
         [pdf] Available at <http://www.pppinindia.com/cpp_pdf_files/jawaid_akhtar_hyd.pdf> [Accessed on
         20 December 2011]
Jordan, B. 1996. A Theory of Poverty and Social Exclusion. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kumar and Aggarwal, 2008. ‘Level of poverty and employment pattern in slums: a case of Gwalior in central
       India’ [pdf] Indian Journal of Labour Economics. 51 (2) Available at
       http://www.isleijle.org/ijle/IssuePdf/533f7d53-57e7-4a25-b1dc-6391156f4933.pdf [Accessed 28 Jan
       2014]
Lockwood, H., and Smits, S., 2011. Supporting Rural Water Supply: Moving towards a service delivery
       approach. [pdf] Rugby: Practical Action Publishing Ltd. Available at
       <http://www.waterservicesthatlast.org/Resources/Multi-country-synthesis> [Accessed on 13 Feb 12]
MCW, 2007. Working Group Report on Empowerment of Women for the Eleventh Five Year Plan. New Delhi:
       Ministry of Women and Child Development, Government of India.
MGI, 2010. India’s Urban Awakening: Building Cities, Sustaining Economic Growth. Mum bai: McKinsey Global
        Institute [pdf] Available at
        http://www.urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/MGI_india_urbanization_fullreport.pdf [Accessed on 16
        February 2012]
MHUPA, 2007. Report of the Five Year Plan (2007 – 12) Working Group on Urban Housing with Focus on Slums,
       New Delhi: Ministry of Housing and Urban Poverty Alleviation, Government of India XII. Available at
       http://mhupa.gov.in/ministry/housing/11thplanChapter-VIII.pdf [Accessed on 26 May 2012]
MLE, 2010. Annual Report to the People on Employment. New Delhi: Ministry of Labour and Employment,
        Government of India.




                                                                                                             151
Moffatt, Michelle, Laxmi Paudyal and A. J. James. (2002). ‘Linking demand, gender a nd poverty for
         sustainability’, Paper presented at the 28th WEDC Conference on Sustainable Environmental
         Sanitation & Water Services, Kolkata, India.
Moriarty, P., Batchelor, C., Fonseca, C., Klutse, A., Naafs, A., Nyarko, K., Pezon, C., Potter, A, Reddy, R. and
        Snehalatha, M., 2010. Ladders for assessing and costing water service delivery. WASH Cost Working
        Paper No. 2, The Hague: IRC International Water and Sanitation center. Available at
        http://washresources.wordpress.com/2011/11/29/ladders-for-assessing-and-costing-water-service-
        delivery/ [Accessed on 27 January 2012]
MoUD & ADB, 2007. Benchmarking and Data Book Of Water Utilities In India. New Delhi: Ministry of Urban
      Development Government of India and Manila: Asian Development Bank. [pdf] Available at
      <www.adb.org/documents/reports/Benchmarking-Data-Book_Utilities_in_India/2007-Indian-Water-
      Utilities-Data-Book.pdf [Accessed on 20 December 2011]
MoUD, 2008a. National Urban Sanitation Policy. [pdf] New Delhi: Ministry of Urban Development, Government
       of India. [pdf] Available at < http://urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/NUSP.pdf> [Accessed on 13
       February 2012]
MoUD, 2008b. Compendium of Good Initiatives, National Urban Awards 2008. New Delhi: Ministry of Urban
       Development, Government of India. [pdf] Available at <http://www.waterawards.in/compendium-
       2008.pdf> [Accessed on 22 December 2011]
MoUD, 2009. Compendium of Good Initiatives, National Urban Awards 2009. New Delhi: Ministry of Urban
       Development, Government of India. [pdf] Available at <
       http://www.urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/compendium_2009.pdf> [Accessed on 24 December
       2011]
MoUD, 2009. Urban Infrastructure Development Scheme for Small and Medium Towns: Overview and Salient
       Features. New Delhi: Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. [pdf] Available at
       http://urbanindia.nic.in/program/ud/uidssmt_pdf/overview.pdf. [Accessed on 12 February 2012]
MoUD, 2010. Service Level Benchmarking Handbook: Improving Service Outcomes 2008-09 [pdf] New Delhi:
       Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India. Available at
       <http://www.urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/slb/Databook/databook.pdf> [Accessed on 13 Feb 12]
MoUD, 2012. Service Level Benchmarking Performance data. [online] New Delhi: Ministry of Urban
       Development, Government of India.
       <http://www.urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/slb/Indicators_ColourCoding.pdf> [Accessed on 12
       February 2012]
Nayar., V., and James, A. J., 2010. Policy insights on user charges from a rural water supply project: a counter-
         intuitive view from South India. International Journal of Water Resources Development, 26(3), pp. 403
         — 421.
Planning Commission, 2011. Report of the Working Group on Urban Poverty, Slums and Service Delivery
        System. New Delhi: Government of India.
Potter, A., Klutse, A., Snehalatha, M., Batchelor, C., Uandela, A., Naafs, A., Fonseca, C., and Moriarty, P., (2011)
         Assessing Sanitation Service Levels. WASHCost Working Paper 3, 2nd edition, The Hague: IRC
         International Water and Sanitation center.
Pragmatix Research & Advisory Services, 2007. Quantified participatory assessment of the impact of change
        management training to engineers. [Report] Chennai: Tamil Nadu Water Supply and Drainage Board.
        Unpublished.
PROOF, 2010. Documentation of Best Practice, [pdf] Bangalore: Public Records of Operation and Finance.
        Available at <http://indiagovernance.gov.in/bestpractices.php?id=326> [Accessed on 12 Feb 2012]
Rodgers, G., Gore, C. and Figueiredo, J., Eds. 1995. Social Exclusion: Rhetoric, Reality, Responses. Geneva:
        International Institute for Labour Studies.




                                                                                                                152
Rop, R., 2010. Gender in Water and Sanitation. Working Paper. [pdf] Nairobi: WSP. Available at
          http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP-gender-water-sanitation.pdf
          [Accessed on 11 June 2012]
SDC, 2005. Gender and Water: Mainstreaming Gender Equality in water, hygiene and sanitation interventions.
        [pdf] Geneva: Swiss Development Corporation. Available at
        http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/48/6/44896491.pdf [Accessed on 27 January 2012]
Sida. n.d. Handbook for Mainstreaming a Gender Perspective in the Water Resources Management Sector,
         Stockholm: Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency [Available at
         http://www.sida.se/Sida/articles/7500-7599/7515/plan.pdf]
Sijbesma, C., Diaz, C., Fonseca, C., and Pezon, C., 2010. Financing sanitation in poor urban areas, In Verhagen,
        J., da Silva Wells, C., Krukkert, I., McIntyre, P., Ryan, P., (eds.) Sanitation Services for the Urban Poor:
        Partnerships and Governance. The Hague, the Netherlands: IRC International Water and Sanitation
        center
TCPO, 2012. Census of India 2011: Provisional Population Totals – Data Highlights (Urban). (pdf) New Delhi:
        Town and Country Planning Organization, Ministry of Urban Development, Government of India.
        Available at <http://www.indiasanitationportal.org/sites/default/files/Censuspro_report_2011.pdf>
        [Accessed on 12 February 2012]
Times of India (2014) ‘Census, NSSO differ on slum population figures’, New Delhi edition. 5 Jan uary 2014,
         [online]. Available at http://articles.timesofindia.indiatimes.com/2014-01-
         05/india/45881429_1_nsso-slums-census-office
Thorat, S., n.d. Caste, Social Exclusion and Poverty linkages – Concept, Measurement and Empirical Evidence.
         [online] available at <http://www.empowerpoor.org/downloads/castepovertypaper.pdf> [Accessed
         on 14 Feb 12]
UN HABITAT (2006) Poverty Mapping: A Situation Analysis of Poverty Pockets in Gwalior, [pdf] Bhopal: Water
       for Cities Program. Available at
       http://www.unhabitat.org/pmss/listItemDetails.aspx?publicationID=2393.
UN Habitat, 2005. Navigating gender in development of water and sanitation in urban areas: a rapid gender
        assessment of the cities of Bhopal, Gwalior, Indore and Jabalpure in Madhya Pradesh, India. New
        Delhi & Bhopal: United Nations Human Settlements Program and Mahila Chetna Manch.
UN Habitat, 2006a. Strategy and action plan: mainstreaming gender in water and sanitation for cities. Water
        for Asian Cities Program, Bhopal: United Nations Human Settlements Program, Government of
        Madhya Pradesh and Mahila Chetna Manch.
UN Habitat, 2006b. Framework for gender mainstreaming: water and sanitation for cities. Nairobi & Bhopal:
        United Nations Human Settlements Program and and Mahila Chetna Manch.
UN Habitat, 201009. Gender equality for smarter cities: challenges and progress. Nairobi: United Nations
        Human Settlements Program.
UN, 2006. Gender, Water and Sanitation Case Studies on Best Practices. New York: United Nations. Available at
        < www.un.org/esa/sustdev/sdissues/water/casestudies_bestpractices.pdf> [Accessed on 27
        December 2011]
UNDP, 2003. Mainstreaming Gender in Water Management: A Practical Journey to Sustainability. New York:
       United Nations Development Program. Available at http://www.undp.org/water/genderguide/
UNDP, 2006. Resource Guide: Mainstreaming Gender in Water Management. New York: United Nations. [pdf]
       Available at
       <http://www.beta.undp.org/content/dam/aplaws/publication/en/publications/environment-
       energy/www-ee-library/water-governance/resource-guide-mainstreaming-gender-in-water-
       management/IWRMGenderResourceGuide-English-200610.pdf > [Accessed on 22 December 2011]
USAID, n.d. Enabling Water Services Delivery For The Urban Poor In Asia: Best Practices Review And Workshop.
        [pdf] Available at < http://www.usaid.eco-asia.org/files/reports/rp_urban_poor.pdf> [Accessed on 22
        December 2011]



                                                                                                                 153
WAI, 2006a. Sanitation for All–Still A Long Way To Go: Learnings & Approaches, Compilation for the Second
        South Asian Conference on Sanitation, Pakistan, September 2006. New Delhi: WaterAid India. [pdf]
        Available at
        <www.wateriad.org/documents/plugin_documents/sanitation_for_all__still_a_long_way_to_go.pdf >
        [Accessed on 23 December 2011]
WAI, 2006b. India Country Case Study: Water for All? Implementation of ADB’s Water Policy In India: A Review.
        New Delhi: WaterAid India. [pdf] Available at
        <www.wateriad.org/documents/plugin_documents/adbbook_1.pdf > [Accessed on 21 December
        2011]
WAI, 2010. Breaking barriers: water and sanitation for people living with HIV and AIDS. [online] New Delhi:
        WaterAid India. Available at
        <http://www.wateraidamerica.org/what_we_do/where_we_work/india/breaking_barriers_water_an
        d_sanitation_for_people_living_with_hiv/aids.aspx> [Accessed on 15 February 2012]
Wallerstein, N., 2006. What is the Evidence of Empowerment to Improve Health?, Copenhagen: WHO Regional
        Office for Europe, Health Evidence Network report, [pdf] Available at
        <http://www.euro.who.int/Document/E88086.pdf> [Accessed 01 February 2006]
WASH Forum, 2010. Urban Pro Poor Workshop Consultation On Water And Sanitation Challenges And The
       Urban Poor. New Delhi: Water, Sanitation and Hygiene Forum. [pdf] Available at
       <http://www.indiawaterportal.org/sites/indiawaterportal.org/files/Water_and_sanitation_challenges
       _and_the_urban_poor%20_Report_of_consultation_India_Wash_Forum_2010.pdf> [Accessed on 21
       December 2011]
WaterAid and Gramalaya, 2008. Tiruchirapalli shows the way: community-municipal corporation-NGO
       partnership for city-wide pro-poor slums’ infrastructure development. [pdf] New Delhi: WaterAid
       India. Available at
       http://www.wateraid.org/documents/plugin_documents/tiruchirappalli_shows_the_way.pdf
       [Accessed on 27 May 2012]
WB, 2006. Gender Action Plan, Washington: World Bank
WB, 2007a. ‘Water, Sanitation and Gender’. Gender and Development Briefing Notes. Gender and
       Development Group. World Bank. Washington DC. [pdf] Available at
       http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGENDER/Resources/Water_March07.pdf [Accessed 27
       January 2012]
WB, 2007b. People with disabilities in India: from communities to outcome. New Delhi: World Bank. [pdf]
       Available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INDIAEXTN/Resources/295583-
       1171456325808/DISABILITYREPORTFINALNOV2007.pdf. [Accessed on 28 February 2012]
WB, 2011. India: A cluster assessment of forestry and watershed development activities, Project Performance
       Assessment Report Number 61065, Independent Evaluation Group, Washington: World Bank
WEDO, 2003. Untapped Connections: Gender, Water and Poverty: Key Issues, Government Commitments and
       Actions for Sustainable Development, New York: Women’s Environment and Development
       Organization. Available at http://www.wedo.org/sus_dev/untapped1.htm
WHO/Unicef, 2010. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water: 2010 Update. Geneva: World Health
      Organization and Unicef
WHO/Unicef, 2011. Drinking water equity, safety and sustainability: JMP thematic report on drinking water
      2011. Geneva: World Health Organization and Unicef
WSP, 2000. Water for India's Poor: who pays the price for broken promises. New Delhi: Water and Sanitation
        Program – South Asia [pdf] Available at
        http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/2122007110846_whopaystheprice.pdf
        [Accessed on 15 Feb 2012]
WSP, 2004. South Asia Nagari: City-wide Universal Sanitation: Challenges and Strategies. New Delhi: Water and
        Sanitation Program South Asia. [pdf] Available at




                                                                                                          154
        <http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/Nagari-16_Press.pdf > [Accessed on 24
        December 2011]
WSP, 2008. Technology Options for Urban Sanitation in India. New Delhi: Water and Sanitation Program South
        Asia. [pdf] Available at< http://urbanindia.nic.in/program/uwss/slb/Urban_Sanitation.pdf> [Accessed
        on 23 December 2011]
WSP, 2009a, Global Experiences On Expanding Services To The Urban Poor: Accompanying Volume To The
        Guidance Notes On ‘Improving Water Supply And Sanitation Services For The Urban Poor In India’.
        New Delhi: Water and Sanitation Program South Asia. [pdf] Available at
        <http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org.files/publications/SA_GUIDANCENOTES_globaleg.pdf>
        [Accessed on 23 December 2011]
WSP, 2009b, Improving Water Supply aAnd Sanitation Services For The Urban Poor In India. New Delhi: Water
        and Sanitation Program South Asia. [pdf] Available at
        <http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/files/SA_GUIDANCENOTES.pdf> [Accessed on 23 December
        2011]
WSP, 2010a. The Karnataka Urban Water Sector Improvement Project: 24x7 Water Supply is Achievable
       Workshop. New Delhi: Water and Sanitation Program South Asia. [pdf] Available at
       <http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP_Karnataka-water-supply.pdf>
       [Accessed on 23 December 2011]
WSP, 2010b. Gender in water and sanitation. Washington: Water and Sanitation Program. [pdf] Available at
        <http://www.wsp.org/wsp/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/WSP-gender-water-sanitation.pdf>
        [Accessed on 22 December 2011]




                                                                                                          155
ANNEXURE 1: Quantified Participatory Assessment

1. INTRODUCTION
Several methods have been developed in the recent past to address this issue of generating
numbers from participatory activities.51 The Methodology for Participatory Assessment (MPA)52 was
developed in the late 1990s to assess the sustainability of 88 water supply and sanitation projects in
15 countries and used participatory tools to bring out information and then translated this into
numbers using a scoring system.53 The MPA continues to be used as a ‘comparative evaluation tool
in large domestic water projects and programs’.54
The Quantified Participatory Assessment (QPA) was developed from the MPA and used in India in a
variety of development projects since 1999 (James, 2003a).55 Apart from the expansion from the
water and sanitation sector to other sectors, notably watershed development, poverty alleviation,
rural livelihoods and water resources, the QPA added several other features to the MPA, including
peer review of scores, documentation of reasons for scores, use of an MS ACCESS database to store
and analyse information, several rounds of stakeholder meetings and a detailed action planning
report.
The QPA was also the basis of the modification of the MPA in Nepal to the NEWAH Participatory
Assessment (NPA) by the Gender and Poverty (GAP) Unit of the national NGO, Nepal Water and
Health (NEWAH), in Kathmandu, Nepal.56 The NPA adapted the MPA to suit the geographical, socio-
economic and ethnic reality of Nepal, modified the scoring systems to include benchmarks in a
flexible 0 – 100 scale, developed additional tools to elicit information on health, hygiene and
sanitation issues, and collected additional qualitative information using case studies (James et al.,
2003a, 2003b, 2003c).
Qualitative Information Appraisal (QIA) is a generic methodology, developed from the experiences
with the MPA, QPA and NPA, which goes beyond the constraints of the term ‘Assessment’. The QIA
is designed for use in both one-time assessments for baseline, mid-term and overall project impact
assessments, as well as for continuous monitoring as part of a project’s regular monitoring and
evaluation system.
The present study was, however, the first time that the methodology was used in an urban context.


2. APPLICATIONS
The QPA has been applied in several applications within India and outside (see Table below).


51
   See, for instance, Chambers (2003).
52
   The MPA was developed by Christine van Wijk (van Wijk, 2003) for a Participatory Learning and Action (PLA)
project that was a multi-disciplinary and multi-country assessment exercise looking at the factors underlying
the sustainability of water supply and sanitation projects (Dayal et al., 1999, Gross et al., 2001).
53
   The scoring system is detailed in James (2000 and 2001) and in Dayal et al. (1999).
54
   Wijk, 2001, p. 2. The revised MPA is described in Mukherjee and van Wijk (2003) while experiences with
using the MPA are in van Wijk and Postma (2003), Postma at al., (2003), van Wijk et al., (2002), Paudyal et al.
(2002).
55
   This work was done by AJ James who did the statistical analysis of the MPA data for the initial PLA study
coordinated by Rekha Dayal of the Water and Sanitation Program. See also, James (2002, 2003b, 2003c,
2003d), James and Kaushik (2002), James et al., (2002), James and Snehalata (2002a and 2002b).
56
   For an account of the pilot MPA and the problems experienced in the field see Paudyal et al. (2002). See
James et al., (2003a and 2003b) for a description of the creation of the NPA, and James et al., (2003c) for the
details of one application in Nepal.


                                                                                                           156
Funding source     Location          Project               Focus Area        Sample size     Year
Water &          Global       Participatory Learning   Impact assessment   88 projects; 15   1997-
Sanitation                    and Action (PLA)         of RWSS projects    countries         9
Program (World                global study of the
Bank)                         World Bank’s Water
                              &Sanitation Program




                                                                                              157
Funding source      Location            Project             Focus Area         Sample size      Year
European          India         Doon Valley             Social &             16 villages        1999-
Community                       Integrated Watershed    environmental                           2000
                                Management Project      impact
DFID India        India         APRLP                   Water Resources      106 habitations    2001-
                                                                                                2
DFID India        India         WIRFP                   Rural Livelihoods    45 villages        2002-
                                                                                                3
World Bank        India         Rajasthan District      Project Processes    14 villages, 2     2001-
                                Poverty Initiatives                          districts          2
                                Project
World Bank        India         Analytical and          Performance of       26 ULBs            2002-
                                Advisory Activity       Essential Public                        3
                                (AAA) on Urban Public   Health Functions
                                Health in Tamil Nadu
Asian             Nepal         Community-based         Water Supply,        5 regions          2003
Development                     Water Supply and        Sanitation &
Bank                            Sanitation project      Hygiene
                                preparation
Asian             Sri Lanka &   Evaluation of ADB-      Water Supply,        Sri Lanka 104      2005
Development       Vietnam       funded national         Sanitation &         sub-projects
Bank                            Water Supply and        Hygiene              Vietnam WSS20
                                Sanitation projects                          villages; 350
                                                                             households
UNICEF            India         Independent             Water Supply,        117 villages       2004
                                Evaluation of the       Sanitation &
                                Child’s Environment     Hygiene
                                Program (CEP)
Nepal Water for   Nepal         GAP Evaluation          Water Supply,        15 villages        2003-
Health                                                  Sanitation &                            4
(NEWAH)                                                 Hygiene
Tamil Nadu        India         Change Management       Water Supply,        200 habitations    2005-
Water and                       Pilots Evaluation       Sanitation &                            6
Drainage Board                                          Hygiene
Uttaranchal       India         Baseline survey         Rural Livelihoods    140 villages       2007
Livelihood
Project in the
Himalayas
(ULIPH)
PATH              India         SureStart               Strength of          50 organizations   2009-
                                (community-level        partnerships among   (rural NGOs)       10
                                rural health program)   NGOs
Unicef            India         Impact of Quality       Education            18 schools         2007
                                Package on Education
                                Quality
Uttaranchal       India         Mid Term Evaluation     Rural Livelihoods    140 villages       2008
Livelihood
Project in the
Himalayas
(ULIPH)
World Bank        India         Tamil Nadu              Community-level      40 villages        2012
                                Integrated              Assessment of the



                                                                                                 158
   Funding source     Location             Project               Focus Area         Sample size      Year
                                    Agricultural             Impact of Change
                                    Modernization and        Management
                                    Water bodies             among Rural
                                    Restoration and          Development
                                    Modernization (TN        Officials
                                    IAM WARM) Project
  WASTE, the        Costa Rica,     PSO Learning             Organizational      5 international    2012
  Netherlands       Holland,        Trajectory               Development (of     NGOs
                    Benin,                                   NGOs)
                    Philippines
  Unicef            Afghanistan     National WASH            WASH                33 provinces and   2012
  Afghanistan                       Vulnerability and Risk                       districts;66
                                    Assessment                                   villages



  3. KEY COMPONENTS OF THE METHOD
  From past experience in applying this methodology (in India, Nepal, Sri Lanka and Vietnam), the
  following arrangements have been found to be optimal:

 I.     Inception Meeting
        A brief meeting (one-day) to clarify the issues to be assessed, the background information
        available and the logistical arrangements.

II.     Methodology and Planning Workshop
        This is a vital part of the assessment, where the assessment team discuss and finalise the issues
        to be assessed, the indicators to be used, the ordinal scales, and thus the QPA field formats.
        This usually has role plays, mock interviews and field testing to make sure the assessment team
        practise and develop their PRA and facilitation skills, which is one of the key determinants of
        the success of the QPA field assessment. This workshop can take from 10 – 14 days depending
        on the complexity of the issues to be addressed.
        Field testing: Although this is usually carried out at the end of the Methodology and Planning
        Workshop activity, it deserves a special mention. Two rounds of field testing are needed, the
        first to identify the problems to be rectified in the field formats, and the second to make sure
        the revised formats are suitable for the survey. Given the size of the assessment team being
        trained (36 field staff + 3 field coordinators+ 1 field supervisor+2 Research Associates), usually
        2 villages are needed for each round of field testing – making a total of 4 villages. None of
        these villages should be part of the actual survey.

III.    Field Assessment
        Informing villages about the assessment: Prior information is usually needed for the meetings
        and focus group discussions – except where it is apprehended that villages may be ‘dressed up’
        for the assessment. If so, the village is informed only a day or two in advance.
        Village assessment schedule: In accordance with ‘good practice’ in participatory assessments,
        the assessment usually starts with a meeting with village officials (headman, patwari, VAO,
        etc.), elders, teachers and key informants – to inform them about the purpose of the
        assessment, to get basic information about the village, and to plan the various group
        discussions. Thereafter, a transect walk and social mapping is carried out (to check ‘unserved
        households’, etc.), also a water system review. Subsequently, either in the afternoon or
        evening, Group Discussions can be held with those who have received training from the



                                                                                                      159
      project/TWAD Board, women’s groups, etc. Finally, a village meeting is held to inform them
      about the basic findings of the assessment. Compliance with international ‘good practice’ is
      vital for the validity of the participatory assessment.
      Assessment time: Assessments take1 – 4 days per village, depending on the complexity of the
      field formats. The minimum time is 1 day per village. It is best to have the team debriefing and
      data entry the very next day, so that field teams remember details of discussions and verify the
      scores. Entering data in the latter part of the same day will minimize errors and avoid the
      fatigue (and hence errors) of mass data entry at the end of the assessment. This gives a
      maximum rate of 3 villages per week (with 1 day off), at which rate, 10 2-person teams can
      cover 100 villages in 20 days.
      Field teams: While field teams have been between 4 – 6 people per village, the ideal
      combination is a 4-member field teams which can split into two 2-member teams in the field.
      The minimum, however, is 2-persons per team. Gender balanced teams are highly desirable.
      To complete 100 villages in 2 weeks, at the rate of 3 villages per week per team will require 18
      teams, or 36 field staff.
      Field coordinators: Field-level coordination is essential for quality control, especially to check
      the nature of facilitation during Group Discussions and to ensure validation of information
      provided in the Group Discussions. They are also useful for trouble-shooting field-level
      problems, including logistics. In addition to the field supervisor, a minimum of 3 Field
      Coordinators would be necessary for a 100-village assessment.
      Focus group discussions: Each Group Discussions takes between 1-2 hours, and more than 2
      hours tests participants’ patience and could yield biased responses. These have basically to
      give participants the ‘freedom and space’ to present their own views, feelings and must adhere
      to good practice of facilitation (e.g., no leading questions, no prompting, opportunities for all
      participants to express their views, etc.).

IV.   Database, Data Cleaning and Analysis
      Database: An ACCESS database is usually created for data entry, so that the computer format
      matches the paper format exactly and thus minimizes data entry errors.
      Data cleaning: Even after careful data entry, there is need to ‘clean’ the data, usually in a joint
      meeting with the field teams, lasting up to 5 days, depending on the number of villages
      surveyed and the number of issues covered in the field formats. Basically, this involves
      scanning the scores and reasons for scores entered in the database, identifying data gaps (e.g.,
      Reason for Score not filled out), and doing some basic calculations (e.g., COUNT, MAX, MIN) to
      check possible data entry errors. Having the field team at this point is useful for quick cross-
      verification.
      Data analysis: This basically involves generating frequency histograms and user-friendly graphs
      to present the findings as clearly and intelligibly as possible.




                                                                                                      160
ANNEXURE 2: List of slums visited in Gwalior and Pune

PUNE

                                                       Area        Date of              No of
       Zonal Office     Slum Name   Survey Number                               Age                Population
                                                    (hectares)   Notification         households
 1   Aundh            Bopodi                 43/3        0.002    4 Dec 1984     28           45         225




                                                                                                        161
                                                               Area         Date of               No of
     Zonal Office     Slum Name         Survey Number                                     Age                Population
                                                            (hectares)    Notification          households
 2   Aundh          Bopodi                        25/7/2       0.03.79    12 Mar 1987      25          150         750
 3   Aundh          Bopodi                        25/7/2           0.04       16-Jan-86    26          150         750
 4   Aundh          Bopodi                       7/1/7/2           0.84       31-Oct-84    28          350       1,750
 5   Aundh          Bopodi                    39/1/2/3/4       2.32.19      8 Oct 1987     25          900       4,500
 6   Aundh          Indira                         79/80        1.93.3       24-Mar-94     18          667       3,455
 7   Aundh          Kasturba                           56       0.6132        31-Oct-84    28          500       2,500
 8   Aundh          Sanjay nagar                        4          2.09     2 Sep 1995     17          625       3,125
 9   Aundh          Sugandhi                       20/21         0.211       28-Mar-96     16           30         150
10   Bhwani peth    balaji mandir                     378       0.2777      24-May-90      22          200       1,000
11   Bhwani peth    balaji mandir                     379       0.3109      4 Dec 1984     28          200       1,000
12   Bhwani peth    Bhawani Peth                      512          0.29   12 Aug 1983      29           96         405
13   Bhwani peth    Ganesh peth                       313       0.4727        31-Oct-84    28           35         175
14   Bhwani peth    ganeshpeth                        237       0.0018        21-Jun-84    28          124         620
15   Bhwani peth    Ghorpade peth                     337       0.1672     11 Oct 1983     29           64         236
16   Bhwani peth    Ghorpade peth                     180       0.1671      4 Sep 1987     25           85         425
17   Bhwani peth    ghorpadepeth                      674       0.1192       24-Aug-89     23          200       1,000
18   Bhwani peth    ghorpadepeth                      538          6.12       21-Jun-84    28        2,975      13,957
19   Bhwani peth    Gurunanak           plot no 377 /378         1.475        31-Oct-84    28          101         634
20   Bhwani peth    Guruwar peth                      223       0.0739        31-Oct-84    28           32         160
21   Bhwani peth    nanapeth                        1009        0.3121       27-Apr-00     12           94         450
22   Bhwani peth    Nanapeth                        1039        0.0284      4 Dec 1984     28          149         627
23   Bhwani peth    nanapeth                        1038        1.5715       23-Feb-84     28          518       2,590
24   Bibwewadi      Gultekdi                          547          0.25       31-Oct-84    28          116         600
25   Bibwewadi      Kondva                            601          0.48      24-Mar-88     24          205       1,025
26   Bibwewadi      Kondva kh                          4a    0.088069     10 Dec 2000      12           62         200
27   Bibwewadi      Kondva kh                          4a          0.09   10 Dec 2000      12           43         215
28   Bibwewadi      Kondva kh                      601/1      0.48526       1 Nov 2001     11          205       1,025
29   Dhanakwadi     Dhanakwadi                     4-17,2     0.12234                      20            9          45
30   Dhole patil    Balaji nagar                       71          72.5       23-Jul-92    20          516       2,580
31   Dhole patil    barningghat                  271/272        0.3255      24-Mar-88      24           60         415
32   Dhole patil    gadital                      plot 898    0.426249        14-Sep-89     23           53         265
33   Dhole patil    gadital                   p 899/899f     0.445658        14-Sep-89     23           53         265
34   Dhole patil    Mangalwar peth               214/215      0.08537         29-Jul-93    19           35         175
35   Dhole patil    Mangalwar peth          plot 4/ab205        0.2859     4 Dec 1984      28           62         310
36   Dhole patil    Mangalwar peth                plot 28       0.3344       19-Oct-00     12           73         365
37   Dhole patil    Mangalwar peth                            0.30307        12-Apr-84     28           90         450
38   Dhole patil    mundwa                             1           0.93   12 Aug 1983      29          157         630
39   Dhole patil    panmala                          450        0.2952      5 Jan 1980     32          207         810
40   Ghole road     bhaburda                plot no 36/3     0.161874      12 Jul 2000     12           54         270
41   Ghole road     bhyywadi                  plot no 56     0.182108       18-Dec-81      31           23         103
42   Ghole road     chafekar                    canawal       0.56102        31-Oct-84     28          124         620
43   Ghole road     Fergusson college    plot no 576/10         0.0631       19-Sep-96     16           11          55
44   Ghole road     Hanuman                  plot no 396        0.4.84     7 May 1984      28           21         105
45   Ghole road     janwadi                          100           0.70       28-Jul-83    29          194         970
46   Ghole road     patkar plot               plot no 67     0.581229        18-Sep-80     32          356       1,780
47   Ghole road     shivajinagar                102/1/2        0.28.36       5 Jul 1992    20          122         610
48   Ghole road     shivajinagar                     101       2.18.31       30-Jan-86     26        1,372       6,860
49   Ghole road     vir chafekar                     211           1.22      17-Feb-00     12          510       2,550
50   Hadapsar       ghorpdi                       48/3/2           0.48       23-Jul-92    20          198         990
51   Hadapsar       Hadapsar                  s s no 252        0.2549        28-Jul-83    29          200       1,000
52   Hadapsar       Hadapsar                         315        1.7046       23-Feb-84     28          599       2,995
53   Hadapsar       Hadapsar                         106         0.282      8 Oct 1978     34          608       3,040
54   Hadapsar       hadapsir                         226           0.40     1 Jun 2000     12           52         260
55   Hadapsar       hadapsir                         110        19.836      16-Aug-73      39          800       5,000



                                                                                                                  162
                                                             Area         Date of               No of
      Zonal Office      Slum Name     Survey Number                                     Age                Population
                                                          (hectares)    Notification          households
 56   Hadapsar        shankarmath                  152        0.8715        27-Jul-00    12          350       1,750
 57   Hadapsar        shirkewsti                   124         1.195     7 May 1984      28        1,136       5,680
 58   Karve road      kelewadi                      44        2.67.6       21-Jun-84     28          933       4,665
 59   Karve road      kothrud                   49/1/2       0.90.00       31-Oct-84     28           45         225
 60   Karve road      ramanbag                     123       2.51.60      4 Jun 1995     17          125         625
 61   Karve road      Erandvane            42a/1a/2a             0.15     1 Jun 2000     12           34         170
 62   Karve road      Erandvane              291to294         0.2223      4 Sep 1987     25           73         366
 63   Karve road      Erandvane             plot no 14       0.98.80      16-Aug-73      39          215       1,075
 64   Karve road      Erandvane                   44/1      18.46.19       27-Apr-00     12        5,000      25,000
 65   Kasba Peth      Kasba peth         s.s.no.914,b      0.012358        23-Feb-84     28            2          10
 66   Kasba Peth      Kasba peth         s.s.no.912,e      0.006967        23-Feb-84     28            4          20
 67   Kasba Peth      Kasba peth         s.s.no.892,b         0.0913       23-Feb-84     28           20         100
 68   Kasba Peth      Kasba peth            s.s.no.936      0.04570        22-Dec-83     29           21         105
 69   Kasba Peth      sadashivpeth          s s no 209        0.2054      17-May-84      28           45         225
 70   Kasba Peth      shukarwarpeth        s.s.no1088          0.057     7 May 1984      28           75         375
 71   Kasba Peth      shukarwarpeth       s.s.no.1077         0.2873       23-Feb-84     28          354       1,770
 72   Sahakar nagar   anandnagar                    77      0.26875        16-Apr-92     20          212       1,060
 73   Sahakar Nagar   Laxminagar                    93        0.7439        28-Jul-83    29          213       1,065
 74   Sahakar Nagar   mogal                      76/81        0.0736       22-Sep-94     18           35         175
 75   Sahakar Nagar   Parvati                     3634       0.03.15       21-Jun-84     28            8          50
 76   Sahakar Nagar   Parvati                       92     1.037411     12 Aug 1983      29          200       1,000
 77   Sahakar Nagar   Parvati                       39           0.48     17-May-84      28          350       1,750
 78   Sahakar nagar   Parvati                       39     0.482726      12 Jun 1979     33          350       1,750
 79   Sahakar nagar   Parvati                    38/3a           0.65    12 Oct 1981     31          600       3,000
 80   Sahakar Nagar   tawrecolony                   47        0.7.18       31-Oct-84     28           22         110
 81   Sangamvadi      fulenagar                  20/90           1.10       28-Jul-83    29          793       3,090
 82   Sangamvadi      visranthwadi               113,9       0.11.48      3 Feb 1989     23           54         364
 83   Sangamvadi      Yerawada             s s no3145       0.06522       23-Aug-84      28           15          45
 84   Sangamvadi      Yerawada                    33,b        0.4.88       31-Oct-84     28           17         100
 85   Sangamvadi      Yerawada                      8b     0.221704        22-Dec-83     29          137         436
 86   Sangamvadi      Yerawada              106/2828        0.48561      11 Oct 1983     29          232       1,022
 87   Sangamvadi      Yerawada                     8/a,       0.5713    12 Aug 1983      29          187       1,030
 88   Sangamvadi      Yerawada                      2,a          0.98     29-Mar-90      22          652       2,966
 89   Sangamvadi      Yerawada                  10/a/1       4.29.21    12 Aug 1983      29        1,029       5,145
 90   Tilakroad       janta                     97/1/1      47.4181        22-Dec-83     29       13,000      65,000
 91   Tilakroad       Parvati                      133        0.1460       27-Apr-00     12           46         230
 92   Tilakroad       Parvati                      117         0.162       23-Feb-84     28           60         800
 93   Tilakroad       Parvati                      133     3.036138        22-Dec-83     29          935       4,675
 94   Tilakroad       Parvati                      132        0.8007      16-Aug-73      39        1,000       5,000
 95   Tilakroad       Parvati               plot n.527         3.120    12 Aug 1983      29        2,008      10,040
 96   Yerawada        gandhinagar                  103        1.4054      23-Nov-78      34          862       5,172
 97   Yerawada        nagpurchal                   191      31.25.25        28-Jul-83    29          862       5,172
 98   Yerawada        Vadgaon sheri              27/28        0.4123     11 Oct 1983     29           97         388
 99   Yerawada        Yerawada                103/124         0.62.7       30-Jan-86     26          654       3,924
100   Yerawada        Yerawada             2a/3k/3a2           2.026      16-Aug-73      39        2,282      11,140




                                                                                                                163
GWALIOR

   War                                                BPL   % of    N-E    E-S    S-W    W-N
          Slum                               BPL
    d                        House   Popul            by     BPL    Dist   Dist   Dist   Dist
                 Slum Name
   Num    Num                holds   ation   Fami    Samb   Fami
                                                                    KM     KM     KM     KM
   ber    ber                                 lies    hav    lies




                                                                                         164
    War                                    House    Popul          BPL   % of   N-E    E-S    S-W    W-N
          Slum   Slum Name                                   BPL
     d                                     holds    ation          by    BPL    Dist   Dist   Dist   Dist
1    1     1     Banshipura (cantoment)      226     1,356     0            0   0.40   0.30   0.20   0.30
2    1     7     Ramaji Ka Pura              774     6,192   302   302     39   0.25   0.48   0.29   0.46
                 Janaktal (Kushwah             35      175    10    10     29   0.00   0.08   0.00   0.13
3    1     13
                 Mohalla)
4    2     2     Suriya Pura                 287     1,722     0           0    0.30   0.20   0.30   0.20
5    2     3     Sunar Ki Bagiya             202     1,065    18    70    35    2.40   0.20   0.30   1.00
6    2     4     Rampuri Mohalla             176     1,056    15    50    28    0.14   0.14   0.14   0.14
7    3     1     Shivnagar                   220     1,320     5    90    41    0.07   0.08   0.09   1.40
8    3     3     Futi Barik                  128       768     0           0    0.30   0.20   0.30   0.30
9    4     2     Indira Colony               516     3,096   400   400    78    0.60   0.55   0.26   2.23
1                                            345     1,725   100   100    29    0.16   0.26   0.23   0.29
     4     3     Mirjapur
0
1                                            416     2,496   125   125    30    0.22   0.43   0.90   0.25
     4     4     Ghatampur
1
1                                            472     3,304   100   100    21    0.47   0.61   0.63   0.56
     4     5     Mevati Mohalla
2
1                                           2,000   10,000    16    50     3    2.17   2.55   1.47   6.25
     4     6     Chandra Nagar
3
1                                            200     1,200   101   101    51    0.20   0.30   0.30   0.20
     5     2     Golandaj
4
1                                            300     1,500    20    40    13    0.10   0.15   0.15   0.10
     6     2     Mangleshwar Road
5
1                                            300     1,200    26   150    50    0.20   0.30   0.15   0.15
     6     3     Jagnapura No 1
6
1                                             65      384     23    23    35    0.20   0.19   0.16   0.17
     6     4     Macchi Addi
7
1                                             42      260     18    18    43    0.20   0.20   0.18   0.19
     6     5     Madankui
8
1                                            130      790     28    28    22    0.30   0.30   0.29   0.15
     6     6     Haweli Pichbada
9
2                                             46      276     35    35    76    0.30   0.00   0.00   0.32
     7     1     Madan Pura
0
2                                            298     2,173    54    54    18    0.83   0.05   0.40   0.89
     7     5     Lut Pura
1
2                                             50      310     45    45    90    0.44   0.16   0.70   1.25
     7     6     Jagna Ka pura
2
2                                           1,987   11,970    45   250    13    1.67   1.78   0.00   1.50
     8     4     Gadai Pura
3
2                                            446     2,987    65   200    45    2.70   0.60   0.95   1.30
     9     2     Rajamandi
4
2                                             50      300      8     8    16    0.20   0.15   0.15   0.20
    10     1     Tameshwar Mohalla
5
2                                             55      330     10    10    18    0.20   0.25   0.20   0.20
    10     4     Soda Ka Kua
6
2                                            280     1,350    30    50    18    0.25   0.27   0.26   0.24
    10     5     Rajamandi
7
2                                            150      900     35    50    33    0.32   0.32   0.31   0.33
    10     6     Jahageer Katra
8
2                                             70      420     19    19    27    0.15   0.20   0.15   0.20
    10     7     Kanoon Goyan
9
3                                             35      210      4    30    86    0.20   0.21   0.19   0.19
    10     8     Jama Maszid Chook Bazar
0
3                                             40      240     18    18    45    0.20   0.20   0.30   0.30
    10     9     Kashi Naresh Ki Gali
1
3   11     1     Gosh Pura No. 1            1,100    6,600    24   150    14    0.60   0.74   0.45   0.30



                                                                                                     165
    War                                     House   Popul         BPL   % of   N-E    E-S    S-W    W-N
          Slum   Slum Name                                  BPL
     d                                      holds   ation         by    BPL    Dist   Dist   Dist   Dist
2
3                                             120     510    15    15     13   0.25   0.26   0.21   0.20
    13     1     Pacchee Pada
3
3                Khidki Mohalla /             298   1,490    16    50     17   0.30   0.25   0.07   0.27
    13     3
4                Byayamshala
3                                             305   1,525    17    50     16   0.18   0.25   0.28   0.11
    14     1     Ramtapura
5
3                                             771   3,855    26   150     19   2.93   2.34   1.97   3.00
    14     2     Gudri
6
3                                             725   3,625    72   150     21   0.34   0.23   0.28   0.24
    14     3     Noorganj
7
3                                             450   3,500    40   150     33   0.33   0.32   0.41   0.39
    17     1     Aramil (Harizan Basti)
8
3                                              23     138     1     1      4   0.11   0.11   0.11   0.11
    17     2     3 V colony (Lal Quarter)
9
4                                             150     700     6     6      4   0.17   0.20   0.19   0.18
    18     2     New Colony No.1
0
4                                             325   2,275     2     2      1   0.30   0.28   0.29   0.32
    18     4     New Colony No.2
1
4                                             387   1,933    12   110     28   0.14   0.22   0.11   0.21
    20     1     Mehal Gaon
2
4                                             400   3,500   250   250     63   0.20   0.30   0.20   0.10
    21     2     Bheem Nagar
3
4                                             200   1,000    29    50     25   0.50   0.05   0.05   0.01
    22     1     Siddhashwar Nagar
4
4                                             250   1,000    71    50     20   0.20   0.05   0.30   0.05
    22     2     Basti Godam
5




                                                                                                    166
    War                                      House   Popul          BPL    % of   N-E    E-S    S-W    W-N
          Slum   Slum Name                                    BPL
     d                                       holds   ation          by     BPL    Dist   Dist   Dist   Dist
4                                              500    2,000   120    200     40   0.30   0.50   0.40   0.30
    23     2     Ghosipura (Nadipar Morar)
6
4                Harizan Basti (Opposite
    23     3
7                Shamshanghat Basti)            25     200      9    20     80    0.02   0.40   0.20   0.10
4                                              100     500     48    50     50    0.02   0.20   0.15   0.30
    23     4     Shree Nagar Colony
8
4                                              400    2,000    25   100     25    0.05   0.05   0.50   0.50
    23     5     Ndee Par Tal
9
5                                               55     342      5    15     27    0.13   0.13   0.13   0.13
    24     2     Santi Nagar
0
5                                              250    1,500    14    40     16    0.20   0.40   0.20   0.20
    25     1     Rachana Nagar
1
5                                              375    2,450    17    20      5    0.55   0.37   0.30   0.65
    27     2     Tyagi Nagar
2
5                                              156     936     12    40     26    0.50   0.50   0.30   0.50
    27     4     Ghass Mandi Murar
3
5                                               65     825      4    10     15    0.20   0.25   0.30   0.25
    27     6     Peetal karkhana
4
5                                              147     900    140    20     14    0.65   0.60   0.50   0.40
    28     1     Ram Nagar
5
5                                              105     975     11    20     19    0.75   0.70   0.50   0.60
    29     4     Dongarpur
6
5                                              100     470     15    15     15    0.16   0.20   0.18   0.26
    29     6     Vikey Fectory
7
5                                              105     904     12    15     14    0.20   0.25   0.15   0.27
    29     9     Cotey KI Saray
8
5                                               56     400      6    10     18    0.25   0.20   0.15   0.28
    29     10    Badee Mareaya
9
6                                              125     825     17    40     32    0.11   0.09   0.20   0.19
    29     13    Kafule Nagar
0
6                                              185     680     11    15      8    0.73   0.46   0.32   0.28
    29     15    Kothi Gaon
1
6                                              270    1,250    36    70     26    0.19   0.18   0.16   0.19
    30     2     Laxman Pura
2
6                                              212    1,272    11    50     24    0.09   0.09   0.09   0.10
    32     5     Pyanwali Gali
3
6                                               96     576     28    50     52    0.50   0.38   0.45   0.40
    34     3     Rassiwala Mohalla
4
6                                              315    2,205    75   100     32    0.50   0.50   1.00   0.50
    35     1     Subey Ki Goth
5
6                                              600    9,228    37   400     67    1.00   1.50   1.20   0.75
    37     1     Rani Pura Ofo Ki Bagiya
6
6                                              106     742     11    80     75    0.20   0.40   0.40   0.30
    37     2     Nirdhan Nagar
7
6                                              250    2,240    16    50     20    0.26   0.25   0.17   0.18
    39     1     Labhed Pura
8
6                                              800    7,460    20   300     38    0.20   0.30   0.15   0.25
    39     2     Mudiya Phad
9
7                                              105    1,100    24    40     38    0.20   0.20   0.15   0.15
    40     1     Jatavpura
0
7                                              650   11,452   813   813    ####   1.00   1.00   0.16   0.14
    45     2     Sanjay Nagar
1
7                                              555    4,440   180   180     32    1.20   0.75   1.50   2.00
    45     5     NimmaJi Ki Kho
2
7   45     7     Santi Nagar                   170    1,020    11    20     12    0.03   0.05   0.06   0.04



                                                                                                       167
    War                                        House    Popul         BPL   % of   N-E    E-S    S-W    W-N
          Slum   Slum Name                                      BPL
     d                                         holds    ation         by    BPL    Dist   Dist   Dist   Dist
3
7                Swaran Rekha Nala Jeevaji       165      800    15    50     30   0.30   0.30   0.25   0.25
    46     3
4                Ganj
7                                                100      600    15    40     40   0.25   0.22   0.25   0.20
    46     4     Jatar Gali Swarn Rekha Nala
5
7                                                 50      270    19    40     80   0.25   0.25   0.30   0.20
    47     3     Gadi Wala Mohalla
6
7                Kambal Kendra Harijan           200    1,000    20    20     10   0.20   0.20   0.22   0.16
    48     1
7                Basti
7                                                158      690     5    30     19   0.50   0.75   1.00   0.50
    48     2     Dholee Bua Ka Pul
8
7                                                650    3,900   123   250     38   0.32   0.31   0.32   0.32
    48     3     Gol Phadiya
9
8                                                350    1,400    37   200     57   2.50   2.00   2.50   2.00
    48     6     Raja Gais Godam
0
8                                                300    1,800    17   150     50   0.04   0.04   0.08   0.08
    48     8     Amra Pahad
1
8                                               1,110   6,660    38   400     36   1.50   0.10   0.50   1.20
    53     1     Sikandra Campu
2
8                                                319    1,823    20   150     47   0.50   0.20   0.40   0.30
    53     3     Hathi Khana
3
8                                                300    1,600    26   200     67   0.50   0.40   1.50   0.40
    53     4     Emli Naka
4
8                                                834    5,147   163   400     48   0.50   0.80   0.30   0.40
    54     1     Nadriya Wali Mata
5
8                                                700    3,750   210   600     86   1.00   1.50   1.00   1.50
    54     2     Gudhi Upar
6
8                                                253    1,293    20   150     59   0.30   0.50   0.10   0.20
    54     5     Payga
7
8                                                247    2,300    13    70     28   0.80   0.60   0.80   0.60
    55     1     Aapaganj
8
8                                                166    1,800    13    80     48   1.00   0.80   0.80   0.80
    55     2     JamburKhana
9
9                                                108      650     7    30     28   1.50   0.12   0.20   0.30
    56     1     LakkdhKhana
0
9                                                174      870    14    70     40   0.02   0.20   0.15   0.50
    56     2     Haidarganj
1
9                                                103      617    10    60     58   0.07   0.04   0.08   0.08
    56     3     Musimo Ka Mohalla
2
9                                                 85      933    15    40     47   0.50   0.80   0.70   0.90
    56     4     Nayapura
3
9                                                139      833    34    80     58   0.50   0.50   0.25   1.00
    56     5     Devnagar
4
9                                                283    1,498    21    90     32   0.50   0.25   0.25   0.50
    56     9     Pan Patte Ki Goth
5
9                                                120      723    10    60     50   0.50   0.25   0.25   0.25
    56     10    Karwari Mohalla
6
9                                                 88      540    12    40     45   0.09   0.05   0.04   0.03
    56     11    Engle Ki Goth
7
9                                                 76      450    14    40     53   0.10   0.05   0.10   0.05
    58     3     Harigan Basti
8
9                                               1,505   9,400   546   600     40   0.10   0.50   0.10   0.40
    60     1     Awad Pura
9
1                                                668    4,000   212   500     75   0.15   0.40   0.20   0.35
    60     2     Khajanchi Baba
0



                                                                                                        168
    War                      House    Popul           BPL     % of   N-E    E-S    S-W    W-N
          Slum   Slum Name                     BPL
     d                       holds    ation           by      BPL    Dist   Dist   Dist   Dist
0
                             60,787   2,06,9   5,63   10,83   3,52   47.3   40.3   37.4   50.55
TOTALS                                    65      3       3      2      6      4      5




                                                                                          169
